Latin American Perspectives
http://lap.sagepub.com/
An Ambivalent Legacy: Cardoso and Land Reform
Gabriel Ondetti Latin American Perspectives 2007 34: 9 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X07306235
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/34/5/9
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/34/5/9.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
An Ambivalent Legacy
Cardoso and Land Reform
by Gabriel Ondetti
Few policies implemented during the presidency of Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil provoked as much disagreement as land reform. While officials claimed to be under- taking a virtual revolution in the countryside, activists derided the program as little more than a palliative. Assessment of its extent and character drawing on a variety of sources indicates that many of the criticisms are on the mark. Only a small percentage of the land- less population benefited, and those who did often lacked even minimal infrastructure or support services. At the same time, Cardoso settled more landless than all of his predeces- sors combined. His reform pales next to the major reforms in Latin American history, but it was one of the most ambitious programs carried out under democratic conditions that was not later reversed by a coup d’état. Cardoso’s progress in this area was partly a result of two aspects of the political context at the start of his government: his own personal image as a progressive reformer and the growing strength of the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural Workers—MST). However, chance events also played a key role. Particularly important were two massacres of land reform protestors that occurred early in his first term, thrusting the land issue onto the political agenda at an opportune moment.
Keywords:	Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Land reform, Latin America, MST
During his eight years as president of Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso rarely lacked glowing terms to describe his government’s land reform program. On one occasion, for example, he referred to it as the largest “in history” by a democratically elected government—not only in Brazil but anywhere (Cardoso, 1999). The changes he was bringing about in rural land tenure, he boasted in a dif- ferent speech, were nothing short of “revolutionary” (Folha de São Paulo, January 6, 2002). Cardoso’s description of his program contrasted sharply, to say the least, with the account offered by land reform activists and other opposition groups. For the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural Workers—MST), the main organization leading the grassroots struggle for land reform, the president’s claims were laughable. Even if the official settlement figures were reliable, which MST leaders strenuously insisted was not the case, the program would be sadly insufficient, considering the magnitude of the land problem. For Bishop Tomás Balduíno, head of the Catholic Church’s Commissão Pastoral da Terra (Pastoral Commission on Land—CPT), Cardoso’s reform was a merely “compensatory” measure intended only to stanch social protest (Folha de São Paulo, January 6, 2002).
Gabriel Ondetti is an assistant professor of political science at Missouri State University. He is the author of Land, Protest and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil (Penn State University Press, forthcoming).
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 156, Vol. 34 No. 5, September 2007 9-25 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X07306235 © 2007 Latin American Perspectives
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
9
10	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
With such sharply contradictory claims presented by the main actors in the land drama, it has been difficult to arrive at a reliable assessment of the Cardoso land reform program.1 Nevertheless, a steady trickle of new academic studies, government reports, and press investigations in recent years has given us the wherewithal to formulate a somewhat richer, if by no means definitive, evaluation. This is one of three tasks I undertake in this article. First, I assess the extent and character of Cardoso’s land reform program, employing this growing stock of information. Second, I place this program in a broader per- spective, comparing it with both the land reform efforts of earlier Brazilian governments and past reforms in other Latin American countries. Finally, I try to resolve the apparent contradiction that Cardoso, despite presiding over a center-right government with a state-shrinking economic program, ended up becoming easily the most successful president in Brazilian history in terms of land redistribution.
The balance sheet for Cardoso’s land reform is mixed. Many of criticisms of the program are on the mark. Settlement production fell far short of the gov- ernment’s public claims, and the number of families actually settled amounts to only a very small percentage of all families involved in agriculture. Those that did receive land, moreover, often got little or nothing else. Many of the “beneficiaries” lacked such essential commodities as electricity, clean water, agricultural credit, and dependable roads. In numerous cases, settlements did not even have their internal and external boundaries demarcated. Arguably, however, the most realistic standard by which to judge Cardoso’s reform, since it takes into consideration the political constraints on reformism, is in relation to what other governments have done. In this regard, the program fares some- what better. Cardoso clearly settled more landless families than any Brazilian president before him—more, in fact, than all of the rest combined. The program pales in comparison with Latin America’s major land reforms, but only three democratically elected Latin American governments have implemented more extensive ones. Moreover, two of those were overthrown in military coups, attesting to the tremendous difficulty of carrying out a major land reform under democratic conditions.
From a political standpoint, probably the most curious aspect of Cardoso’s legacy in this area lies in the progress he achieved relative to previous Brazilian presidents. A number of characteristics of Cardoso’s government, including its legislative dependence on conservative parties and its commitment to limited government, secure property rights, and other elements of the “Washington Consensus,” appeared to militate against significant advances in the land reform policy area. Yet, in terms of settling landless families, Cardoso actually outperformed the next most productive president by a very wide margin. How are we to explain this?
Although Cardoso’s coalition and economic program did not bode well for land reform, two other aspects of the political context at the beginning of his government were more favorable. One was Cardoso’s personal image as a pro- gressive, modernizing leader. Although he showed few signs of commitment to land reform early on, the expectations of progressive change created by his election made him vulnerable to pressure in this area, particularly given the lack of other social initiatives. The other was the growing strength of the land- less workers’ movement, which was determined to put land reform back on the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	11
political agenda. To a large extent, the acceleration of reform can be understood as a product of the convergence of these two factors. It would be misleading, however, to portray Cardoso’s land reform as an inevitable result of the politi- cal context. Chance events also played a substantial role. Particularly critical were two shocking incidents of violence against landless protestors early in his presidency, which thrust the land issue onto the political front burner at an especially opportune moment.
In the section that follows I provide a synthetic overview of land reform and the struggle for land in Brazil, emphasizing the Cardoso period. Then I proceed to a more detailed description of the Cardoso reform program. The third section sets this performance in comparative perspective. Finally, in the fourth section I try to explain Cardoso’s land reform in political terms.
LAND REFORM AND THE STRUGGLE FOR LAND IN BRAZIL
Brazil is one of the most unequal countries in the world in terms of rural land distribution, with a Gini coefficient of 0.843 (Hoffman, 1998). Land concentration has a high cost in terms of rural welfare and has been associated with an array of other problems, including high food prices, urban overcrowding, and a rel- atively small consumer market for domestic industry. Although this reality dates back to colonial times, land reform became a major national issue only in the late 1950s, initially as a consequence of peasant mobilization in the poor Northeast. President João Goulart’s attempt to push forward land reform helped trigger the military coup of 1964 and usher in two decades of authoritarian rule. After briefly flirting with a land reform of its own, the military leadership focused its agricultural policies on technological modernization and frontier expansion. In many areas, inequality in land distribution deepened.
When Brazil returned to civilian rule in 1985, land reform was a rising issue. President José Sarney announced an ambitious plan to settle 1.4 million landless families in five years. At about the same time, the MST was taking its initial steps as an organization.2 Growing out of Catholic activist networks in the smallholder regions of southern Brazil, the MST was officially founded in January 1984 and held its first congress the following year. Although nominally an independent national organization, it was still mainly a Southern entity and strongly dependent on church support. Sarney’s national plan for agrarian reform generated excitement among rural workers but never really got off the ground. The newly formed União Democrática Ruralista (Democratic Rural Union—UDR), an alliance of large landowners, pressured Sarney to back down. A conservative with little appetite for conflict, Sarney easily caved in. UDR fundraising and lobbying efforts also helped anti-land-reform activists achieve an important victory in the constituent assembly of 1987–1988. The new consti- tution limited expropriation mainly to large farms not meeting minimum stan- dards of productivity.3 By the end of his term in 1989 Sarney had settled 89,950 families, less than 7 percent of his stated goal (INCRA, n.d.: 6).
Land reform slowed further under Fernando Collor, the most conservative of Brazil’s postmilitary presidents. Expropriations by the Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agraria (National Institute for Colonization and
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
12	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Agrarian Reform—INCRA) ground to a virtual halt. Repression against land- less mobilization grew. Collor’s removal from office in late 1992 was thus considered a major victory by land reform activists. His replacement, the for- mer vice president Itamar Franco, formed a less conservative coalition and became the first president to meet with the MST leadership. Although his sup- port was instrumental in the approval of important land reform legislation, Franco’s settlement efforts were disappointing. Between 1990 and 1994, the government settled 60,188 families, with Collor accounting for almost two-thirds (INCRA, n.d.: 6).
Victories were few and far between, but the MST continued to gain strength during the Sarney and Collor/Franco periods, expanding geographically, con- solidating its internal organization, and achieving greater autonomy from the church (Ondetti, in press). By the end of 1994 it was established in 21 of Brazil’s 26 states. A promising development was its campaign in the Pontal do Paranapanema, a region of São Paulo state known to have many illegitimate large landholdings potentially vulnerable to reform. Land occupations, the staple of the MST’s tactical repertoire, stagnated during the early Collor years but showed signs of reviving under Franco.
Nevertheless, land reform was not a major issue during the 1994 presidential election campaign. Fernando Henrique Cardoso did talk about the need to tackle Brazil’s profound social inequality, but land reform was not a prominent theme. His campaign literature outlined a plan to settle 280,000 families, but this proposal did not receive much attention from either the candidate himself or the media. Given the alliance that his centrist Partido da Social Democracia Brasileira (Party of Brazilian Social Democracy—PSDB) had established with the powerful Partido do Frente Liberal (Liberal Front party—PFL) and the Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (Brazilian Labor party—PTB), both conservative parties with strong ties to large landowners, this did not seem surprising. Cardoso’s economic program, emphasizing a reduced role for the state, also did not seem to augur well for land reform. If elected, the MST predicted, Cardoso would “bury” land reform (Jornal Sem Terra, July 1994). When the media did dis- cuss the land issue, it was usually in reference to the bold plan proposed by Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, candidate of the left-wing Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ party—PT), to settle 800,000 families in four years.
Land reform also seemed largely forgotten during the early months of Cardoso’s presidency. Media attention focused mainly on the economic situa- tion and the government’s proposed neoliberal reforms. Minister of Agriculture José Andrade Vieira, a banker, landowner, and president of the PTB, said in January 1995 that he would not have the resources to make good on Cardoso’s settlement goal for that year. In April, to make matters worse, a landowner and PTB leader who had helped lead the struggle against Sarney’s PNRA was appointed president of the INCRA. By mid-year the government had spent only 3.2 percent of its land reform budget for the year, according to media reports (Folha de São Paulo, September 6, 1995). The MST’s dire prediction seemed to be coming true.
MST leaders were therefore surprised by the force with which land reform reemerged as a national issue a few months later. This change began in late 1995 and was consolidated the following year. By mid-1996 land reform was easily one of Brazil’s hottest media issues. For example, Veja, Brazil’s largest
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	13
newsweekly, published more pieces on the land issue in 1996 than in the pre- vious five years combined (Ondetti, in press: Chap. 5). In the second half of the year, the struggle for land became the central theme of one of the most suc- cessful telenovelas in Brazilian history, The King of Cattle. Powerful organiza- tions in civil society began to pressure Cardoso for more aggressive action in this area, and land reform become one the central issues on which the PT, on the defensive since its defeat at the polls, sought to criticize the government.
A number of factors, including an MST offensive in São Paulo in late 1995, contributed to this change. However, the key cause was not protest itself but the repression directed against it. Two incidents of land-related violence in Amazonia played a central role. On August 11, 1995, a conflict between police and land occupiers in the rural town of Corumbiara, Rondônia, left 13 dead, 11 of them occupiers. Then, on April 17, 1996, a larger massacre occurred in the desolate mining town of Eldorado do Carajás, in southeastern Pará. Police opened fire on 1,200 MST protestors blocking a highway, leaving 19 dead. As with Corumbiara, there was evidence that some of the victims had been exe- cuted. Unfortunately for the authorities, a television news crew was on hand and captured much of the incident on film. Images of the Eldorado massacre were soon being shown on television news programs all over Brazil and abroad, including CNN.
The publicity surrounding these incidents, combined with pressure from civil society, forced the government to respond. Cardoso switched INCRA presidents in September 1995, replacing PTB boss Brasílio Araújo Neto with a close personal adviser. A week after Eldorado, he bowed to a long-time demand of land reform activists and removed the INCRA from the grip of the traditionally conservative Ministry of Agriculture, creating a new ministry to house it. Raul Jungmann, a former Communist Party of Brazil activist and head of the federal environmental agency, was appointed minister. Cardoso reaffirmed his commitment to land reform and pledged his government’s sup- port for a number of pieces of legislation intended to facilitate it and quell land-related conflict in the countryside.
Despite the president’s apparent embrace of the land reform cause, rela- tions with the MST grew more tense after Eldorado. On the government side, Jungmann claimed to be implementing the settlement plan outlined during the election campaign, along with a series of support programs involving agri- cultural credit, housing, infrastructure, technical assistance and education. In 1998, he established a World Bank–funded “land bank” to provide subsidized credit to poor farmers seeking to purchase land. The government touted its land reform in television advertisements, and Jungmann traveled widely to promote it. By the end of Cardoso’s first term, the president claimed to have granted land to more than 287,000 families, more than all his predecessors combined. Official documents also pointed with pride to initiatives such as an agricultural extension program and a settlement education program, as well as to a reform of the tax on unproductive rural properties.
Land reform activists took a dimmer view of the program. The MST, the PT, and the CPT said that the government was inflating its figures by settling families in frontier areas, where land is poor and there is little infrastructure, by legalizing existing squatter communities, and by introducing new families into old settlements (PT, 1999). They criticized the land bank as a ploy to undermine
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
14	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
the movement’s recruitment of rural workers. They also denounced the reform of the land tax as a fraud, pointing out that it had failed to generate any increase in revenue. Cardoso’s program, they said, was a “virtual” land reform aimed at hoodwinking a public truly desirous of change.
Meanwhile, demands for land reform intensified. Land occupations grew rapidly, especially in 1996, and new actors, including rural unions and new “landless” organizations, entered the struggle. Frustrated by Cardoso’s failure to implement deeper reform, the MST diversified its tactics (Ondetti, in press: Chap. 5). Its National March, involving three large groups of activists who made their way through the interior for two months in early 1997, was a big publicity success. Militants in the Northeast participated in looting during the drought of the late 1990s, and, at the national level, the MST intensified its occupations of public agencies, targeting the powerful Finance Ministry, which it blamed for restricting funding for land reform.
Cardoso’s second term brought changes in both policy and protest. In 1999, facing an economic crisis, the government cut deeply into land reform spend- ing. It also announced a restructuring of a program, dubbed the “New Rural World,” aimed at making land reform more efficient (INCRA, 1999a). Despite its optimistic name, the plan featured changes rejected by activists, including administrative decentralization, reduced agricultural credit, and an emphasis on weaning settlers off of government support more quickly. It was widely viewed as a ploy to reduce spending and make the federal government less of a target for movement pressure. The MST reacted in early 2000 by ratcheting up its protest actions. It helped disrupt the government’s elaborate commemo- ration of the 500th anniversary of the Portuguese arrival in Brazil and launched a major campaign of occupations of public agencies in state capitals and Brasília. Cardoso responded with unprecedented force. Most important, he issued a decree making occupied farms ineligible for expropriation for at least two years. As a result, land occupations declined greatly.4
At the end of Cardoso’s second term, the government claimed to have settled more than 300,000 families in the previous four years. Land reform activists again dismissed these figures as fraudulent. A series of investigative articles published in the Folha de São Paulo, Brazil’s largest daily newspaper, in 2002 seemed to support their view.5 The stories accused the Ministry of Agrarian Development of systematically “inflating” its figures by counting as settlements expropriated properties with no infrastructure whatsoever and, in some cases, no settler families. They pointed out that these “settlements” did not meet the definition outlined in the INCRA’s own “Settler’s Manual.” Minister José Abrão responded by summarily changing the definition to match the ministry’s de facto usage.
MEASURING THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM
There is still no primary data source on the Cardoso land reform that by itself can be considered both comprehensive and reliable. However, the exist- ing sources allow us to sketch a rough portrait. I take on this task here, draw- ing on both government and other sources. Three works provide many of the data. One is the INCRA’s massive wrap-up report for the Cardoso era, released
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	15
in mid-December 2002.6 The data for 2002 are mainly projections. Another, Heredia et al. (2002), is a survey of 1,568 land reform settlers conducted in 2001–2002 in six areas with high concentrations of settlements. It includes 92 settlements established under various governments and does not distinguish between them. However, since 67 percent of the settlements (and probably a higher percentage of families) studied were created under Cardoso, the find- ings mainly reflect the work of the Cardoso government. The third, Sparovek (2003), is a study undertaken in 2002 by the INCRA and the University of São Paulo School of Agriculture.7 Most of this study consists of a survey that attempts to gauge conditions in land reform settlements. Rather than inter- viewing “rank-and-file” settlers, researchers targeted three types of experts for each settlement: INCRA employees with oversight responsibility, leaders of the settlement association or other internal organization, and older settlers consid- ered community leaders. Interviews were conducted with people connected to 4,340 settlements, “almost all” the settlements in Brazil. The other component of the study tries to assess settlement conditions indirectly by examining the environmental and socioeconomic characteristics of the local areas in which a settlement is located and comparing them with the larger regional and national context.
RESOURCE COMMITMENT
How much of a financial commitment did Cardoso make to land reform? The federal government spent about R$12.1 billion on land reform and related policies through 2001, for an average of R$1.7 billion annually in 2001 reals (Gasques and Villa Verde, 2003: 22). Most of this was concentrated in Cardoso’s first term. Average spending declined from R$2.1 billion in the first term to R$1.3 billion in the second, not including 2002 (which appears to have been one of the leanest years). The peak was in 1998, when R$2.2 billion was spent. The declining commitment from the first to the second term can also be seen by looking at the INCRA budget as a proportion of the total federal budget, a figure that shrank from 0.52 percent to 0.19 percent (INCRA, 2002a: II.4.1.1). Reflecting budget constraints, the INCRA’s staff actually shrank by almost 14 percent during the Cardoso era.
LAND REDISTRIBUTION
According to the INCRA final report for the Cardoso era, the federal gov- ernment obtained 19,863,572 hectares of land for the purpose of land reform between 1995 and 2002. This land was used to establish 4,864 settlements con- taining a total of 608,655 beneficiary families (INCRA, 2002a: II.4.3.1). Table 1 gives the year-by-year figures. The land redistributed represents about 5.6 percent of total agricultural land, and the number of families settled equals 7.6 percent of total families involved in agriculture.8 Most of the land was obtained through expropriation, with the rest coming mainly from govern- ment purchases, public property, and private purchases with land bank credit. Through 1999, 66.5 percent of the land came from expropriation (INCRA, 1999b). Only about 9 percent of the beneficiaries received land through the land bank (INCRA, 2002b).
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
16	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TABLE 1
Official Cardoso Settlement Results
Year	Land Obtained (ha)	Settlements Established	Families Settled
1995	2,754,105 1996	2,742,947 1997	4,017,240 1998	3,140,714 1999	2,369,472 2000	2,256,036 2001	1,852,625 2002	730,435
394	42,912 471	62,044 723	81,944 875	101,094 826	85,226 682	92,986 610	82,449 283	60,000
4,864	608,655
Total
19,863,572
Source: INCRA (2002a).
Other attempts to assess the extent of land reform under Cardoso cast doubt on the accuracy of these numbers. Researchers at the government’s own Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (Institute for Applied Economic Research—IPEA) found a major discrepancy when they compared the settle- ment figures announced by the Ministry of Land Affairs in 1999 and 2000 with numbers from an internal INCRA data set not available to the public or the press.9 The announced figure was 38 percent higher in 1999 and 48 percent higher in 2000. In addition, as part of the investigation mentioned above, the Folha de São Paulo persuaded 20 of the 29 regional INCRA secretariats to report their own settlement totals for 2001. On average, these figures were 14 percent lower than the ones announced by the ministry.
Sparovek (2003) is the closest thing we have to a contemporary census of land reform settlements. This study also tells a different story from the official one. It found 3,534 settlements established in 1995–2001. These had a total area of 17,528,000 hectares and were home to 328,825 families (44). The official figures for these years are 4,581 settlements, 19,862,842 hectares, and 548,665 families. In other words, if the Sparovek data are accurate, the official figures exaggerate the number of settlements by 30 percent and the number of settler families by 66 percent. The degree of the exaggeration is less for the amount of land redistributed, about 13 percent. If we use these percentages to estimate figures for 2002, we get a new estimate for the Cardoso period of 3,752 settle- ments with 364,970 families on 18,174,403 hectares of land. Using this esti- mate, the Cardoso reform encompassed 5.1 percent of the total agricultural land and 5.6 percent of the farming families. Table 2 gives a regional break- down of the 1995–2001 settlements located by Sparovek, showing that they are concentrated mainly in the Northeast and the North.
Officials often attributed the disparity between publicly announced settle- ment figures and other findings to differences in the definition of the word “settlement,” an issue supposedly resolved by Abrão’s 2002 redefinition. With this order, the minister defined all properties acquired for the purpose of land reform as “settlements,” even if they contained no infrastructure or families, and all families approved for land reform as “settlers,” even if they had not actually received land. Obviously, this change did not satisfy critics. Evidence turned up by Folha reporters also suggests that in some cases the ministry
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	17
TABLE 2
Settlements Established 1995–2001 According to Sparovek
Region	Settlements	Land Obtained (1,000s ha)	Families
North 701 Northeast 1,626 Center-West 532 Southeast 318 South 357
Total	3,534
7,561 4,377 4,386
820
383 17,528
90,523 139,856 59,261 20,678 18,508 328,825
Source: Sparovek (2003).
added to its totals families that had received land under a previous adminis- tration but got some additional infrastructure or service from Cardoso (Folha de São Paulo, September 29, 2002).
Not surprisingly, there is little agreement about the impact of reform on land distribution. According to the INCRA, the Gini coefficient for land dropped from 0.856 in 1995 to 0.809 in 2000 (INCRA, 2002a: II.2.1.1). However, experts have questioned the latter figure, noting that it was obtained using methods not employed in other studies (Garcia, 2003: 22). In local areas where reform was particularly intense, at least a moderate impact on the landhold- ing structure is evident. In the areas studied by Heredia et al. (2002) the pro- portion of agricultural land redistributed ranged from 3.1 percent to 40.4 percent (in southeastern Pará). At the state level, however, the proportion of farmland in settlements exceeded 6 percent in only one case, Pará, through the end of 1999 (15).
Critics often argued that Cardoso distributed land of inferior quality in terms of soil quality, climatic conditions, access to markets, and other vari- ables. Other than scattered case studies of individual (mainly pre-Cardoso) settlements, Sparovek appears to be the only source for an answer to this ques- tion. The methodology employed is, as I mentioned, indirect, examining the characteristics of local areas where settlements are located rather than the set- tlements themselves. In addition, the results do not distinguish Cardoso-era settlements from earlier ones. However, since the former make up 81 percent of the total, the data largely reflect the character of the Cardoso settlements.
The results are mixed (Sparovek, 2003: Chap. 6). Easily the most favorable finding was for ease of access to urban areas. Nationally, only 6 percent of set- tlements were in areas below the average in terms of this variable. Results for urban population density (a proxy for local market size) were also acceptable: only half of the settlements scored below average. These results are surpris- ingly good, given the frequent complaints of settlers and activists on these issues. However, they probably reflect, at least in part, the fact that much of the Brazilian territory is still sparsely populated and very difficult of access. Performance on soil quality was also not alarmingly bad, with 56 percent of settlements in areas below the national average. Even in the key farming regions, such as the Southeast, settlements were located in areas of about aver- age soil quality. The results for other variables were less favorable; for example, 67 percent of settlements were in areas with below-average rainfall, and in the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
18	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
notoriously arid Northeast this figure was 81 percent. Perhaps most distress- ing, about 80 percent of settlements were in areas below the national average in terms of the average cash income and gross agricultural production of small- holding families.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Even when settlers do receive good land they may be unable to attain a decent standard of living if they or their communities lack basic infrastructure and services. According to the INCRA “Settler’s Manual,” settlers are to receive a variety of services and infrastructure, including start-up credits for housing and other expenses, demarcation of internal and external settlement boundaries by topographers, potable water, electricity, and sewage treatment (INCRA, 2001). They are also eligible to receive agricultural loans through special credit lines. Implementation of these standards under Cardoso was patchy and often poor.
The INCRA’s own data suggest that the provision of infrastructure and support services lagged behind settlement, especially if one takes the settle- ment numbers at face value. Each family is supposed to receive two loans, one for home construction and another for general expenses, when it arrives on the land. The INCRA final report shows that 333,083 families, 54.7 percent of the number the government claims to have settled, received a housing credit, while 440,121, 72.3 percent, received the other loan. Performance in other areas was worse. Only 265,529 families, 43.6 percent of the total, had their set- tlement boundaries demarcated. This is an obstacle to welfare improvement, since it creates disincentives for long-term investment. The following figures are from graphs lacking exact values and are therefore only approximate: 160,000 families (26 percent) received electric power; 150,000 (25 percent) got access to clean water, and 210,000 (35 percent) had roads constructed in their settlements (INCRA, 2002a: III.3.4).
During his first term, Cardoso improved the existing program of agricul- tural credit for land reform beneficiaries, increasing the maximum amount of loans and improving the terms attached to them. With the elimination of this program in 1999, however, settlers had to get credit from a different program with less favorable conditions.10 The total amount of credit conceded to settlers increased fairly steadily between 1995 and 2000 but plummeted in 2001 and 2002 (INCRA, 2002a: III.3.4). Strikingly, the amount lent out in 2002 was simi- lar to that in 1995 despite the fact that there were about three times as many set- tler families. The number of loan contracts signed under the two programs from 1995 to 2002 came to 565,851.11 Since farmers generally need credit each season to plant, this figure suggests rather limited coverage.
The data collected by Sparovek and Heredia et al. also point to deficits in infrastructure and services. Sparovek (2003: Chap. 5) found that 32 percent of Cardoso-era settler families lacked a permanent dwelling, 62 percent lacked access to emergency medical care, 49 percent lacked access to good water, 29 percent of families with elementary-school-age children lacked access to a school, and 55 percent of the settlements lacked electric power. As a rule, the North, the major frontier region, had the worst conditions. Pre-Cardoso set- tlements generally had better infrastructure, probably reflecting a gradual
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	19
process of improvement. Heredia et al. found that 86 percent of the settle- ments they surveyed had elementary schools, but none offered schooling above the elementary level. Electric power existed in 78 percent of the projects, but only in 27 percent were all the households connected. Only 21 percent of the settlements had health clinics, although 78 percent were reported to be visited by health workers. Sixteen percent of the settlements had telephone service. Most settlements were not connected to the outside world by fully paved roads, and in half of them families reported that the settlement was inaccessible during rainy periods (Heredia et al., 2002: 17–21).
SETTLER WELFARE
Sparovek reports an average monthly income for families that received land under Cardoso of R$198, with regional figures ranging from R$162 in the Northeast to R$244 in the Center-West (2003: 138). The average for pre-Cardoso settlers was R$232. Heredia et al. found a much higher average monthly fam- ily income of R$312, ranging from R$117 in the dry interior of Ceará, in the Northeast, to R$439 in Santa Catarina, in the South (2002: 35). The better results found by Heredia et al. may have to do with the advantages, in terms of access to public services, of being part of a large concentration of settlements. These figures compare rather unfavorably with the average family income in rural Brazil, which was R$428 in 2000, with regional figures ranging from R$245 in the Northeast to R$632 in the South (IBGE, 2000). However, it must be remem- bered that most settlements are fairly new and the families they include were often among the poorest of the poor before obtaining land.
Heredia et al. also asked settlers to compare their present situation with their situation before being settled (2002: 35–36). With regard to overall “life condi- tions,” 91 percent reported being better off now than before. Other results were less impressive but positive: 79 percent said that they had better housing, 70 percent said that the education available to their children was better, 66 percent said that they were eating better, and 62 percent said that they had more pur- chasing power.
THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE
To provide a better sense of the extent of the Cardoso land reform program, in this section I locate it in relation to two comparative frames: the efforts of previous Brazilian governments and past land reforms undertaken in other Latin American countries.
It is hard to dispute the fact that land redistribution accelerated markedly under Cardoso. According to official figures, Cardoso settled an average of 76,081 families per year during his two terms. In contrast, the combined total for all governments between 1964 and 1994 is 218,534, or 7,049 families per year (INCRA, 2002b). During the Sarney and Collor/Franco years 150,138 families received land, for an annual average of 15,014 (INCRA, n.d.: 6). Even if we use Sparovek’s more modest numbers we find an impressive accelera- tion. The 1985–1994 annual average of 12,966 families settled falls very far
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
20	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TABLE 3
Latin American Land Reforms: Brazil in Comparative Perspective
Land Redistributed	Beneficiary Families Country (Years)	(% of total farmland)	(% of total farm families)
Bolivia (1952–1970)	18.2 Guatemala (1952–1954)	33.6 Mexico (1934–1940)	12.6 Peru (1969–1976)	39.4 Venezuela (1959–1970)	15.7 Chile (1970–1973)	31.0 Brazil (1995–2002)	5.6 Peru (1963–1969)	3.0 Chile (1967–1970)	9.0 Colombia (1961–1972)	9.6 Ecuador (1964–1969)	1.1 Dominican Republic (1963–1969)	2.0
(5.1)
39.0 33.0 25.8 24.9 14.7 14.0
7.6 (4.6) 7.1 6.0 4.2
3.5 2.0
Source: De Janvry (1981) and author’s calculations.
short of the 46,975 average for 1995–2001. Cardoso’s eight-year total (using my projection for 2002) is almost three times larger than the total for the previ- ous decade. Since land redistribution before 1985 was minimal, it seems clear that Cardoso settled more families than all the previous Brazilian presidents combined.
The second comparative frame of reference is land reforms in other Latin American countries. Just about every country in the region has undertaken some rural land redistribution (De Janvry, 1981; Thiesenhusen, 1989). Table 3 situates the Cardoso reform in relation to some of the others, including most of the largest and all of the largest reforms undertaken by democratically elected governments. The numbers in parentheses were calculated using Sparovek’s settlement data, projected through 2002.12
Clearly, the Cardoso program pales in comparison with the major reforms, such as those of Cárdenas in Mexico and the MNR in Bolivia, but it is compa- rable to some of the minor but not altogether insignificant ones of the 1960s, such as those of Belaúnde in Peru and Frei in Chile. Cardoso officials often argued that their reform represented the maximum that could be accom- plished without a violent revolutionary rupture. Let us examine this claim. Seven reforms in Table 3 (Guatemala, Chile 1967–1970 and 1970–1973, Peru 1963–1969, Venezuela, and Colombia) were undertaken by democratically elected governments. In terms of its overall extent, the Cardoso reform falls roughly in the middle of this pack, suggesting that deeper reform is indeed possible under democracy. Tellingly, however, the governments (Arbenz in Guatemala and Allende in Chile) that carried out by far the largest of these reforms were subsequently overthrown in military coups, attesting to the real difficulty of undertaking a major land redistribution under democratic condi- tions. In both Venezuela and Colombia, moreover, much of the land redistrib- uted belonged to the state rather than to private owners, making the reforms less politically contentious than they otherwise would have been.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	21
THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM: A POLITICAL ANALYSIS
As the above discussion suggests, Cardoso’s land reform program did not approach a sweeping restructuring of the land tenure system. Relative to the past, however, the Cardoso years did bring a marked intensification of land redistribution. This change merits explanation both because of its magnitude and because a number of characteristics of this government seemed to make it an unlikely candidate to be its protagonist. As I have said, Cardoso’s coalition included all of Brazil’s major conservative parties. Just as important, Cardoso had won the 1994 election on a platform stressing macroeconomic stability and market reform. More than any other president since World War II, Cardoso had a mandate to restrain spending and reduce the scope of state intervention in the economy. These conditions seemed to bode ill for land reform.
How, then, can we explain Cardoso’s surprising progress relative to past governments? In broad strokes, there are two main perspectives on this issue. One is represented mainly by Cardoso allies and some intellectuals, who see the program as a largely proactive initiative by a progressive president bent on reducing inequality and modernizing society. Perhaps the most sophisti- cated case of this type is made by the sociologist José de Souza Martins (2000). While not entirely dismissing the role of social protest, Martins emphasizes a proactive attempt by the state under Cardoso to combat the backward, oli- garchic aspects of rural society by breaking up unproductive estates, exerting greater state control over land use, and making good on the constitution’s promises regarding the “social function” of land.
The second view is championed by land reform activists and most scholars of the agrarian question in Brazil. It sees the intensification of land redistribu- tion by the Cardoso administration as essentially a product of the unprece- dented strength and organization attained by the MST-led land reform movement during the 1990s. For Wright and Wolford (2003: 276), for example, the Cardoso government did not accelerate reform “of its own volition.” Instead, “a social movement has forced the steps of an incomplete reform while the government has played a complicated and demoralizing game, crippling rather than fostering any real societal commitment to reform.”
In my view, neither view is by itself entirely correct. However, each contains or at least reflects an important element of truth. The idea that Cardoso’s land reform was a proactive initiative is contradicted by the evidence that land reform was a low priority for the government until events forced it into a reori- entation in late 1995 and, more decisively, 1996. Surely, no president bent on restructuring rural society would have put leaders of the conservative, landowner-dominated PTB in the two major positions of authority regarding land reform, as Cardoso did early in his first term. A president committed to land reform, moreover, would presumably not have allowed the INCRA’s manpower to deteriorate or permitted the percentage of the national budget devoted to this policy to fall by more than half during his second term.
Nonetheless, in their enthusiasm for defending Cardoso’s progressive motives, champions of the first position unwittingly betray a significant factor in the acceleration of land reform, one often ignored by proponents of the second: the president’s need to fulfill the expectations of progressive change created by his election. Although Cardoso’s coalition and program were basically
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
22	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
conservative, part of his appeal as a candidate lay in his background as a leftist intellectual and an opponent of the military regime. This helped him attract the support of much of the urban middle class and the intelligentsia, groups that would otherwise have hesitated to support a candidate allied with the PFL and the PTB. By comparison, Sarney and Collor, both conservative Northeasterners, lacked the same enlightened image. Itamar Franco had no public image to speak of before taking office and, in any case, was a caretaker president of whom little was expected. The fact that Cardoso introduced no major social initiatives and aggressively confronted organized labor early in his government generated a growing gap between his image and the conservative reality of his policies. Land reform ended up filling this gap, especially during his first term. Although the acceleration of land reform was largely forced on him by political pressure, Cardoso used it to bolster his progressive credentials for his 1998 reelection campaign, turning a liability into an asset.
The second perspective on the Cardoso land reform also contributes an important element of truth. By the mid-1990s the MST was the most extensive and best-organized rural movement in Brazilian history.13 The gradual growth of this organization during the late 1980s and early 1990s made it more likely that the agrarian question would eventually reemerge as a major political issue, as it did under Cardoso. In accelerating the pace of land reform, moreover, Cardoso was clearly responding to the political problems created by both the intended and the unintended consequences of landless protest. In terms of the latter, I am referring mainly to the two major police massacres of landless pro- testors. As my earlier account suggests, the public outcry surrounding these events in Brazil and abroad was largely responsible for pushing the president to take land reform more seriously.
Employing elements from each perspective, then, we can explain the accel- eration of land reform during the Cardoso years as the product of a confronta- tion between a growing social movement and a president with a progressive, modernizing image to protect. It would be an error, however, to interpret the program as the inevitable result of this combination of circumstances. In my opinion, chance events also played a substantial role in determining the out- come. In particular, I would emphasize the importance of the massacres at Corumbiara and, especially, Eldorado do Carajás. Although violent conflicts over land have been quite commonplace in Brazil and certainly could have been expected to occur under Cardoso, these incidents were in some ways highly unusual, and their timing was extremely opportune as far as the land reform cause was concerned.
Eldorado was exceptional in a number of ways. First, at least to my knowl- edge, it was the largest single incident of land-related violence in Brazil in sev- eral decades. Second, it is quite possibly the only instance in Brazilian history in which deadly land-related conflict has ever been captured on motion picture film, providing a powerful image of “public security” forces attacking appar- ently unarmed protestors. Disturbing still photographs of the corpses taken after the massacre added additional fuel to the fire. Finally, the fact that the Eldorado killings followed another exceptionally large and brutal massacre of landless protestors, at Corumbiara, by only a few short months made it much harder to dismiss the event as an aberration. This unusual combination of circumstances ended up transforming the Eldorado do Carajás incident into a strikingly powerful and enduring symbol of injustice in the Brazilian countryside.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	23
In terms of maximizing their impact on land reform, the massacres also occurred at an advantageous moment. In mid-1996 Cardoso was just beginning to lay the groundwork for reelection, a difficult process requiring as an initial step a constitutional amendment. Since the main opposition was predictably going to come from progressive forces, Cardoso needed to shore up his weak social flank. The explosion of the land reform issue at this point, when he still lacked any other significant social initiative, virtually ensured that it would become an important element of Cardoso’s claim to being a progressive presi- dent. Although he would substantially reduce the resources devoted to this policy during his second term, this strong show of commitment to land reform early in his presidency made it harder for him to back down from land reform altogether in subsequent years.
CONCLUSION
Few issues during the Cardoso years were as polarizing as land reform. Disagreements sprang not only from differing interpretations of official figures but from doubts about the figures themselves. I have attempted to bring greater clarity to this issue by drawing on the slowly increasing stock of infor- mation on Cardoso’s program. I have also tried to give a better sense of the extent of this program by comparing it with both the efforts of past Brazilian governments and some of the reforms undertaken in other Latin American countries. Finally, I have sought to explain how Cardoso, despite leading a center-right coalition government with a liberalizing economic agenda, became easily the most productive president in Brazilian history in terms of settling landless families.
As the data I have presented suggest, many of the criticisms of Cardoso’s land reform are essentially correct. The government’s official settlement figures were substantially inflated, and only a small percentage of the agricultural population received land. Many of the new “settlements,” moreover, lacked even the most minimal infrastructure and services. In my opinion, however, the most realistic standard by which to judge this reform is in comparison with what other governments have done, since this standard takes into account the considerable political obstacles to land reform. In this sense, the Cardoso program does not look quite so bad. Compared with previous Brazilian presi- dents, Cardoso’s superiority is clear. Without a doubt, he settled more landless families than all of his predecessors combined. From a pan–Latin American perspective, the results are more ambiguous but, in a way, also fairly positive. Compared with the major land reforms in Latin American history, the Cardoso reform was a negligible achievement, but few, if any, democratically elected Latin American governments have undertaken substantially deeper land reforms and survived to boast about it.
Given the character of Cardoso’s government and economic program, one of the most interesting questions about his land reform program is why it did not simply replicate the pathetic results of past administrations. To a large extent, this outcome was the predictable result of two aspects of the political context at the outset of Cardoso’s government: the president’s personal image as a progressive leader (combined with his failure to implement progressive
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
24	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
initiatives) and the growing strength of the MST-led movement for land reform. As I have argued, however, it would be mistake to see the program as simply the inevitable product of these contextual factors. Chance events, par- ticularly the major landless massacres of the mid-1990s, also played an impor- tant role. Had these events not occurred, occurred at a different time, or occurred in a different way, Cardoso might well have felt substantially less pressure to push forward land reform.
NOTES
1. Nevertheless, a number of assessments of Cardoso’s land reform have appeared in recent years, including Wright and Wolford (2003), Pereira (2003), Malin (2002), and Branford and Rocha (2002).
2. The development of the MST has been studied extensively. Some of the more compre- hensive and more recent studies include Wright and Wolford (2003), Branford and Rocha (2002), Ondetti (in press), and Fernandes (2000).
3. Under the legal structure adopted by the military government in 1964, private rural prop- erties could be expropriated on the basis of size alone. The 1988 Constitution eliminated this pos- sibility, limiting expropriation to large properties that also failed to meet minimum requirements in terms of agricultural productivity or compliance with labor or environmental codes. In prac- tice, expropriation has been limited to large, unproductive properties.
4. By 2002, occupations had declined to slightly above 1995 levels. For data on land occupa- tions and other rural social conflicts, see the CPT’s web site, http://www.cptnac.com.br.
5. The first story appeared on April 21, 2002. The reports were written by Eduardo Scolese and Ivan Valente.
6. Unfortunately, this document, which is more than 500 pages long, does not have page numbers. I cite the sections in which information cited is located.
7. The commissioning of this study appears to have been intended to address widening crit- icism of the INCRA’s settlement figures. However, as my discussion suggests, its results solidify the impression that the government’s figures were inflated.
8. The figure for total farmland is from the 1995/1996 agricultural census, available from the federal census bureau web site, http://www/igbe.gov.br. The number of families involved in agricultural production is from Del Grossi and Graziano da Silva (2000: 73).
9. Results of the study are reported in the Folha de São Paulo, April 28, 2002. 10. This new program was established in 1996 to benefit family farmers. When the first program was abolished in 1999, the government established a special line within the second for land-
reform settlers. 11. This figure combines figures for the first program reported by INCRA (2002a) with those
for the second reported on its official web site, http://www.pronaf.gov.br. 12. I have used the official settlement numbers as the main frame of reference for the Cardoso land reform, since the data reported for other countries also come from government sources. As I have noted, the official Cardoso figures appear to be significantly inflated. However, it would
be naïve to assume that governments in other countries do not engage in this practice as well. 13. Although the rural workers’ union system is more extensive, many local unions are little more than conduits for the delivery of social services and thus are not really social-movement
organizations.
REFERENCES
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha 2002 Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	25
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique 1999 “Discurso do presidente da República, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, em audiência ao presidente, diretores e superintendentes do INCRA—Palácio do Planalto.” Agência Brasil. http://www.radiobras.gov.br/integras/99/integra_2112_2.htm.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo and José Graziano da Silva 2000 “Ocupação nas familias agrícolas e rurais no Brasil, 1992–1997,” in Clayton Campanhola and José Graziano da Silva (eds.), O novo rural brasileiro: Uma análise nacional e regional. Jaguariúna, SP: Embrapa.
De Janvry, Alain 1981 The Agrarian Question and Reformism in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano 2000 A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Garcia, Ronaldo Coutinho 2003 O desenvolvimento rural e o PPA 2000/2003. IPEA Texto para Discussão 938.
Gasques, José Garcia and Carlos Monteiro Villa Verde 2003 Gastos públicos na agricultura: Evolução e mudanças. IPEA Texto para Discussão 948.
Heredia, Beatriz, Leonilde Medeiros, Moacir Palmeira, Rosângela Cintrão, and Sérgio Leite 2002 “Os impactos regionais da reforma agrária: um estudo sobre áreas selecionadas.” MS.
Hoffman, Rodolfo 1998 A estrutura fundiária no Brasil de acordo do cadastro do INCRA: 1967 a 1998. Campinas: Unicamp.
IBGE (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística) 2000 “Censo demográfico: trabalho e rendimento.” http://www.igbe.gov.br.
INCRA (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária) 1999a “Jungmann divulga Novo Mundo Rural projecto de reformulação da reforma agrária em discussão pelo governo.” Brasília. 1999b Balanço da reforma agrária e da agricultura familiar. Brasília. 2001 Manual dos assentados e assentadas da reforma agrária. Brasília. 2002a Balanço global de gestão: Relatório final. Brasília. 2002b Balanço da reforma agrária. Brasília. n.d. Resumo das atividades do INCRA—1985/1994. Brasília.
Malin, Mauro 2002 “Agricultura e reforma agrária,” in Bolívar Lamounier and Rubens Figueiredo (eds.), A era FHC: Um balanço. São Paulo: Cultura.
Martins, José de Souza 1999 “Reforma agrária: o impossível diálogo sobre a história possível.” Tempo Social 11: 97–128.
Ondetti, Gabriel Forthcoming. Land, Protest and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park, PA: Penn State.
PT (Partido dos Trabalhadores) 1999 Primeiro governo FHC (1995–1998): “Dossiê” reforma agrária e agricultura. Brasília: Secretaria Agrária Nacional, Liderança da Bancada na Câmara Federal.
Pereira, Anthony 2003 “Brazil’s agrarian reform: democratic innovation or oligarchic exclusion redux?” Latin American Politics and Society 45: 41–65.
Sparovek, Gerd 2003 A qualidade dos assentamentas da reforma agrária brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas & Letras.
Thiesenhusen, William C. (ed.) 1989 Searching for Agrarian Reform in Latin America. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford 2003 To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. San Francisco: Food First.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
