Latin American Perspectives
http://lap.sagepub.com/
An Interview with João Pedro Stédile
Maria Orlanda Pinassi, Fátima Cabral, Mirian Cláudia Lourenção and Laurence Hallewell Latin American Perspectives 2000 27: 46
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X0002700504
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/27/5/46
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/27/5/46.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
An Interview with Jo&atilde;o Pedro St&eacute;dile
by Maria Orlanda Pinassi, in collaboration with
F&aacute;tima Cabral and Mirian Cl&aacute;udia Louren&ccedil;&atilde;o Translated by Laurence Hallewell
Introduction: Land reform in Brazil today is not just o n e	of the m o s t press-
ing needs to make a clearly bourgeois developments viable but also (and in the first place) our country’s oldest historical obligation. From the old promise held out in the times of the early colonial land grants, proprietorships, and
slave plantations to its reappearance as a key motif in the popular rebellions under the Brazilian empire and in the settlements of Canudos (in the Bahian outback in 1896-1897) and Contestado (the no-man’s land between the states of Parana and Santa Catarina in 1912-1916), land reform has been regarded as one oftheprincipalinternalproblemstobeovercome,justifyingandfos- tering the Brazilian military and paramilitary apparatus.
In the twentieth century, history repeated itself, just as bloodily as in the nineteenth, and, since 1964, when the new military regime of President Humberto de Castelo Branco enacted the Land Tenure Statute, the state has
itself assumed responsibility for carrying out land reform, depriving it, of course, of its most obvious political context. The cost-the very high cost- ofthearmy’sruthlessrepressionwas thedestructionofthegreatmass move- ments represented,principally,bythePeasantLeagues’andthePartidoCom- unista Brasileiro (Brazilian Communist party-PCB). The consequences of this w e r e harrowing but not fatal. Despite its violence toward popular m o v e - ments, the military regime lacked the courage to tackle the underlying prob- lems that created the demand for land reform. The civilian governments that have been in power since 1985 have been equally timid, with the result that the question has transcended the transition from dictatorship to democracy- a transitionthathasbeenratherpoorlydefinedinmanyotherrespectsas well. Theroots oftheproblemlieina rulingclassforwhichlandspeculationisthe
Maria Orlanda Pinassi is a professor of sociology at the Mar&iacute;lia campus of S&atilde;o Paulo State Uni- versity, the author of Tr&ecirc;s devotos, umaf&eacute;, nenhum milagre (1998), and a contributor to the jour- nalsPraxisandCr&iacute;ticamarxista.F&aacute;timaCabralandMirianCl&aacute;udiaLouren&ccedil;&atilde;oare professorsin the Faculty of Philosophy and Sciences of the S&atilde;o Paulo State University, Mar&iacute;lia campus. Laurence Hallewell, was, until his recent retirement, Latin American librarian at Columbia Uni- versity. This article records an interview with the president of the Movimento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Sem-Terra (Landless Workers’ Movement&mdash;MST) in February 1998.
46
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
principal way of enriching itself. This historical legacy, however, has n o w had added to it other woes, such as unemployment and the economic ruin of smallfarmersandbusinesspeople,creatingan accumulationofproblemsthat seem atfirstglancetobebeyondsolution.
Behind its changing faqade, be it of violence, bourgeois (&dquo;yuppie&dquo;) val- ues, or enlightenment, the Brazilian state has always been balanced in favor
of the big landowners, and it has always shied away from any reform beyond the palliative and rhetorical. The proof lies in theconcentration of landowner-
shipandtheproportionofunproductiveland,bothamongthehigheston the planet.Thestatisticsbearthisout.Brazil’sbiglandownersown 35,083prop-
erties, 1 percent of the total, with a total acreage of 378 million (153,000,000 ha), almost half the area of all rural landholdings put together. Even more unreasonably, these 35,083 holdings belong to a much smaller number of owners. Moreover,only14percentoftheirarableareaproducescropsand48 percent livestock; the remaining 38 percent is totally unproductive wilder- ness. According to a survey conducted by the newsweekly Veja (April 16,
1997), the &dquo;country’s 4.5 million farming families o w n a quarter of the lands
used for agriculture, directly supporting 18 million people, or almost 12 per- cent of the Brazilian population. And quite a few of these rural smallholders lacktheresources andthetechnologytodomore thansurviveon subsistence agriculture,growinglittlemore thanwhattheirfamiliesneedtoavoiddying of hunger.&dquo;
TomakeBraziliansawareofthissituation,toopposeit,andtofightthe
tragedyofinequalityinBrazil,therearose in 1978,inthemunicipio(county) of Ronda Alta in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, what could be called the embryo of the MST. This was the start not only of one of the largest and best-disciplinedorganizationsinBrazilbutalsoofone ofthemostcombat- ive.Thankstotheactionsof MST’smilitantmembership,governmentcanno long treat land reform with paternalistic, benevolent condescension. Over and above its general aims regarding economic growth and income distribu- tion, the M S T has inspired fear and respect through the extremely detailed way in which its members have gone about planning their successive inva-
sions of unproductive land and organizing the squatter settlements they have established there. They have linked pragmatism to proposals of a socialist
nature, mostly inspired by the ideas of the Sandinistas and the Zapatistas,
tinged with a strong dose of liberation theology. For a number of years the MST was despised as a simple nuisance the
police could deal with, but as it gradually came to have an impact on the nationalscene a seriesofreactionsandconfrontationsservedtodividepublic
opinion, and its future has become less predictable. Congress has been split over themovement’slegalposition.Deputiesfromruralconstituencieshave
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
47
48
formed two opposing groups. One group represents the big landowners. The other, mostly made up of deputies affiliated with the Partido dos Traba-
lhadores (Workers’ party-PT), has endeavored to give legal cover and pro- tectiontothelandlessmovement’sstruggle.Atthesame time,openrepres-
sion, traditionally left to the army to carry out, has been reinforced by the
undercover violence of paramilitaries, encouraged and paid for by the big landowners, united in their own organizations, such as the Uniao Demo- crdtica Ruralista (Rural Democratic Union-UDR). Between them, the land- owners andtheparamilitarieshaveperpetra~dsome oftheworstabusesthat have occurred in contemporary Brazil: repeated murders, isolated or en masse, of landless workers exercising their lawful rights.
None of these crimes and threats have, however, been sufficient to break the spirit of the MST. On the contrary, the leadership and the active member- ship are increasingly resolved to continue the struggle and find better ways of doingso.Thecauseoflandreformisthusadvancedbytherebelliousspirit and concrete actions of the MST, increasing its political involvement and showing the country and the world that there are ways to embark on an effec- tive transformation of the hostile reality that is capitalism.
MOP: Only a few years ago, few people knew of the MST’s existence. Thishasbegunto change.TheMST occupiesspaceinthemediaandattracts the support and sympathy of broad sectors both inside Brazil and abroad. What has given the M S T this visibility? Has this had the approval of everyone in the movement?
JPS:Therearemanywayswecananalyzewhichfactorshavebroughtthe land reform question into the center of public debate. Clearly, the perfor- mance ofthecurrenteconomicmodelandtheworseningofthesocialcrisis have been influences. But as for the factors linked directly to the MST, I would like to list the following:
First, our cause isjust. However much conservative sectors may criticize
our tactics, no one with any conscience can defend the present concentration
oflandownershipinBrazil.Second,our struggleispersistent.Whateverthe difficultiesandchallengeswehavehadtoface,wehaveneverrunawayfrom the fight. We are very obstinate, whether the circumstances are favorable or not. Even under the New Republic,’ when many sectors of the Brazilian left, especially those linked to the Brazilian Communist party and to the Partido Comunista do Brasil (Communist Party of Brazil-PCdoB [Translator: orig- inating in 1962 as a Maoist split from the PCB]), opted to compromise with thegovernment,we choseto continuethestruggle.Thirdly,we havenever had any illusions about the government or the situation. We have always
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
believedinmass organizationsas theprincipalwaytocarrythestrugglefor- ward. And, finally, having learned from many other workers’ organizations thatprecededus inBrazilandinSpanish-speakingAmerica,we havesought toputintopracticecertainprinciplesoforganizingthathavehelpedus topre- serveourmovementfromtheattacksoftherulingclasses.Thereisnoroom totheorizeon theseprinciplesnow,butIwouldjustcitesome ofthem:collec- tive leadership, division of tasks, discipline, permanent links with the masses, andthepracticeofnew valuessuchas solidarityandunityofaction.Havethe decisions within the movement always beet~~unanimous?Obviously not. We areamassmovement,andthereforeweincludearangeofopinions,andthis ispositive.Butintheprocessofbuildingupourmovementwehavealways soughttoguaranteeunityofactionon thebasisofa solidmajoritythatisnot justamatterofvotes.Whenthereisnoconsensusaboutsomequestionorif themajorityisonlya smallone, we preferto waita littlelongerandletopin- ions mature until it becomes clear to a broad majority what is the best way forward in this process of building up our movement.
MOP: During the nearly 180 years of struggle for land reform in Brazil, the landowning elite, supported by the repressive forces of the state, has imposed many defeats and losses on the movement. Their activities have increased during the New Republic, even while many militants and intellec-
tualson thelefthavebeguntoputtheirtrustin&dquo;Sarney-styledemocracy.&dquo;On thisquestion,howfarare theMST’schannelsofnegotiationwiththegovern-
ment from the political independence so necessary for an emerging rebel movement?
JPS:Since1984,whentheMSTbecameanationwidemovement,wehave adoptedcertainguidelinesthathavecome tocharacterizeit.Forinstance,we defineourselvesasamassmovementofthepeople,becauseweuniteevery- one,regardlessofage,andonethatisatradeunioninthewayweareorga- nized and a political movement in the way w e fight the state and the big landowners. The MST has, therefore, a clear class basis. Another of our chosen guidelines is independence from the church (despite its doctrinal influenceon muchofour activemembership),frompoliticalparties,and, obviously, from the government and the elites. Political autonomy is what gives us strength, because our principal objective is the conquest of rights, and we are not concerned with how this affects our relationships with other organizations.
At the same time, we have always negotiated with governments. To negotiatedoesnotmeantogiveinortomakeconcessions;itmeanstomove forward and win victories over our enemies. We see negotiating not as a
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
49
50
stand-alone process but as the result of our struggles. We do not negotiate until after each battle. In our debates within the movement, we compare negotiation to visiting the Soccer Federation the day after the<match	to have the score officially recorded. Recording the score makes sense only if there hasbeena match,iftherehasbeena confrontationon thefieldofplay.Any- one whodoesnotrecognizethisbutgoestonegotiatethescore intheFedera- tion’s offices without ever having played the match will always lose out. Our
ruling classes will just claim victory by walkover.
MOP: Speakingofyourexpectedgrowth,thiscan bea two-edgedsword, can’tit?Ontheone hand,ifitsmembershipincreases,themovement’spoliti- calweightwillalsogrow.Butatthesame time,suchincreasecan bringwithit difficultiesinsomethingthathascharacterizedthemovement: howitsmem- bers’ activities are coordinated. With the growth of unemployment and mis- eryinBrazil,willnottheMSTrun theriskofhavingitsmembershipfilled with people it will find difficult to organize and make politically aware, such as the lumpenproletariat (or the socially excluded, as the liberals and the Christians would prefer to call them)?
JPS:Obviously,theneweconomicmodel’beingimplantedinBrazilhas created crises in agriculture, in employment, and in society that are marginalizingruralworkersinagriculturejustas muchas thoseinindustry. Thisgivesusasocialmixfromwhichwecanmoreeasilyorganizemassesof the socially excluded. But the existence of a greater number of the unem- ployed and the desperate has not been a problem for us. It is only fair to say that being out of work does not turn people into a lumpenproletariat. The lumpenproletariat is in a more permanent social situation resulting from a previously existing condition. In general, the lumpenproletariat is work-shy, dislikes organization, and has little interest in becoming squatter farmers, withalltheattendantsacrifice.Other,simplerformsofstrugglesuchas dem- onstrationsor even themarchon Brasliawouldattractmore lumpenproletari- ansthanourlandinvasions.Evenwhentheydogetinvolvedinourlandinva- sions and squatter settlements, the ways these are internally organized are poison for them and lead them to quit. They want immediate results, while our struggles are long-term and involve sacrifice.
Ourgreatestchallengeistobeabletotrainmore activememberstogoout andorganizethemillionsofruralpoorwhoare feelingmore andmore hope- lessandareanxiousforproposalsthatholdoutsomeprospectofafuturefor their families.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
MOP:Fortheunemployed,acommitmenttotheMSTmustrepresentthe recoveryof a modicumofdignitytotheirlives.Nevertheless,whathavebeen MST’s strategies to raise the political awareness of its grassroots member- ship ?How does itgetitsrank and fileto distinguishbetween their immediate struggle for survival (to acquire a patch of land) and the wider struggle that themovementisengagedin?
JPS: I have already mentioned the increase in rural unemployment. According to the official figures for the pa4ttwo years, over 800,000 rural workers have lost their jobs, particularly in the cotton, cacao, and sugarcane sectors,andthishasincreasedthesocialbasisofour struggleforland.Obvi- ouslytheimmediateconcern ofthecomradewhohaslosthisjobisjustforan alternative way to support his family and give it a future. But from the very moment hejoinsthefight,ina landinvasion,ina squattersettlement,or on a march, he has entered a real school of the class struggle that will transform him and help him discover his class identity. He learns that just obtaining a pieceof landisnotthesolution,thatsocietypresentsotherchallenges.Wein the MST are combining various forms of mobilization and struggle such as programs of education and of political preparation. People do not learn on their own; they must have a solid political and ideological background. This isan ongoingprocess.Thegreaterthecontradictions,thegreaterthereadi- nesstostudy,thegreaterthenumberofactiveyoungmembers,andthemore quickly they learn to struggle for their rights and for changes in society.
MOP: In economic terms, how do the MST’s proposals for land reform differ from the struggles of the movements that existed before 1964-the Peasant Leagues, for example?
JPS: Well, this is a very long story. W e really need to review the history of the struggle for land reform in Brazil. Explaining the objectives of the pre- 1964 peasant movements and comparing them with those of today requires consideration of the many changes that have occurred. We think of ourselves as thesuccessors, or theconsequences,ofthePeasantLeagues,andtheywere very radical in their methods, as their motto bears witness: &dquo;Land Reform by Law,or byForce.&dquo;TheMovimentodosAgricultoresSemTerra(Movement ofLandlessFarmers-MASTER4)insouthernBrazilwas alsoradical.The Uniao dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agricolas do Brasil (Union of Farmers andAgriculturalWorkers ofBrazil-ULTAB),5underthetutelageoftheCom- munist party, was more bureaucratized and tended toward institu- tionalization. This in fact happened when in 1961 it became legal to form trade
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
51
52
unionsandtheywere allmergedintoa new SindicatodosTrabalhadoresRurais
(Union of Rural Workers). But all of these showed their naivete by struggling
justforlandtoplanton. Itistruethatcapitalisminagriculturewasitselfless
developedthen.Andperhapsthiswas theBrazilianrulingclass’slastchance
to undertake a land reform of the classic capitalist type, to develop the inter-
nal market and capitalism in agriculture. Unfortunately, the elites opted for the so-called conservative modernization of our agriculture, as Jos6 Fran-
cisco Graziano da Silva [1981] has clearly shown. In other words, our elites chosetopromotea capitalisminagricultureIbasedon largelandholdings.
Thesituationinour capitalistagriculturetodayisentirelydifferentfrom thatofthe 1960s.Undertheobjectiveeconomicconditions,our proposalfor
land reform has to avoid the oversimplification of classic capitalist land reform, which merely divides up large landholdings and encourages their
productiveuse. Weare convincedthatnowadaysitisnecessarytoreorganize agricultureon a differentsocialbase,democratizeaccess to capital,democra-
tize the agroindustrial process (something just as important as landowner- ship), and democratize access to know-how, that is, to formal education. We
mustcontemplateanew socialreorganizationofurbanspace,creatingagro- cities where an electricity supply becomes viable and community activities
possible. W e also need to reformulate the present-day technological model, which is totally dependent on the multinationals, who cause both our con-
sumption of toxic agricultural inputs and our adoption of farm machinery ill-suited to conditions in Brazil. In the days of the Peasant Leagues, they did not have to bother about any of this.
MOP:Andinpoliticalterms,can we achieveanyeffectivechangeinthis agrarian structure of ours that has remained unchanged for centuries?
JPS:Inpoliticalterms,thebigchangeisthatthepeasantsno longermake up the majority of the population. Today, the rural population constitutes only 23 percent of the national total, estimated at 164 million, and therefore its
political strength has decreased. Nevertheless, our urban society has now begun to take an interest in land reform-not just as a result of propaganda butbecauseourcitydwellerscan seethattheserioussocialproblemsthatthe towns are having to confront-unemployment, hunger, misery, violence, socialexclusion,andruralout-migration-willonlybesolvedifwe firstsolve the land problem, that is to say, the land problem as I defined it in answering yourpreviousquestionandnot,as itwas intheearlystagesofcapitalism,just a question of the concentration of land ownership.
Nevertheless, this widening of the base of political support for land reform has not yet been transformed into effective political acts that could change the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
correlation of forces. Why? Because the social and political situation of Brazilneedsmore thanjustchangesinagricultureandlandreform;we have to change the economic model that the Cardoso government is implanting, and that will involve society in a far greater dispute! The challenge of land reformtodayisthatitwillworkpoliticallyonlyifwe alsochangetheeco- nomic model. This is why our struggle is so complicated and difficult, even thoughwe havewidespreadsupportthroughoutsociety.Inthissense, thehis- toricalsituationwe arelivingthroughparallelsthestruggletoabolishslavery. Allofsocietywas againstslaveryexceptfora sectionoftheruraloligarchy, whose members also happened to be the grandfathers of the big landowners of today. But abolition’ happened only after many years of struggle, because the change w a s not just o n e of social status but of the economic model, that is to say, it involved a shift from an economy based on exporting agricultural products to one based on manufacturing.
MOP: Is the MST’s land reform proposal aimed at family farming?
JPS: Asking whether our proposed land reform is consistent or not with
family farming suggests to m e a mistaken assumption. Our land reform pro- posal requires the reorganization of the form of production in Brazilian agri- culture. Obviously, the workers, those who produce, will then be the protago- nistsintheproductiveprocesswitharighttotheresultsoftheirownwork.
Butthiseconomicprinciplecan beappliedtovariouswaysoforganizingpro- duction.Wecan havegreatexpansesofarablefarms,we can havecollective farms,andwe willcertainlyhavefamilyfarmunits.Onetypeoffarmcom- plementstheother.Theonlythingswewanttowipeoutarelarge-scale, unproductive landholdings and the landowners who live solely from their income from renting out their land.
MOP: There is a tendency among the population to interpretthe actions of
theMSTas aimedatcreatingatypeofindependentpeasantrybasedon sub- sistence farming. To what extent does this idea apply in fact to the MST?
JPS: There is a lot of confusion about what exactly land reform is. At pres- ent Brazilian society is confusing three quite different concepts. There is the concept of the classic capitalistland reform that has been carried out by bour- geoisindustrialgovernmentsinvariouscountriesoftheworld,suchas Japan, Taiwan, and Korea, and in Europe and that, basically, is just the breaking up ofthelargelandholdingsthat,as we havesaidabove,were merelyhangovers of the stage capitalism had reached in agriculture between the end of the nine- teenth century and World War II. The Brazilian government uses this concept
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
53
54
withoutputtingitintopractice.Eveninthecase ofsuchclassiccapitalistland reform, its basic characteristic is the elimination in a short period (a year or
two)ofalllargelandholdingsthroughoutthecountry-all,notjustsome. I havealreadyheardJungmann’sayon anumberofoccasionsthatanyprocess of land reform takes 10-15 years to be completely implemented. This is a fib, butbecausehisjobisjusttospoutthegovernmentlinewe forgivehim.No capitalist country has taken that long.
There is a proposal for land reform put forward, with slightdifferences, by various social movements in Brazil-we could call this a workers’ proposal
for land reform-that goes well beyond just giving out land, as I explained earlier. And there is a rural settlement policy. That is to say, the government realizes that some social movements are ready for direct confrontation, invadinglandandsettlingon it.Insuchcases,itmayresignitselftopurchas- ing or confiscating such properties and allow these bold landless families to take them over, lest their continued resistance give it an even greater head- ache. However, the Cardoso government and all its predecessors have been only practicing a policy of settlement, not o n e of land reform, e v e n o n e of the capitalisttypesuchas theone theU.S.generalDouglasMacArthurimposed on Japan at gunpoint.
Our struggle is a struggle of resistance, audacity, and conquests. We are trying to go forward in a continual conquest of political and territorial space togivetheworkersmore powerso that,whenthetimeisripeinBrazil,condi- tions will allow us to carry out a real land reform. This is our policy. Clearly, we areatthemercyofhowsocietyoracademeinterpretsthesituationandthe nature of our present land settlements. But, strictly speaking, they are only spaceswehavewon andevidenceofourresistance-thenewtrenchesofthe struggle, not its ultimate objective.
MOP:InvariousstatementsbyyouandotherleadersoftheMST,onesees
special attention being given to the organization of cooperatives and to set- ting up agroindustries in the settlements or forming connections with any
suchindustriesexistingnearby.Willyousaysomethingon thissubjectand on theproposalsoftheMST’sunionofcooperatives?
JPS:Well,we haveawell-thrashed-outpolicyon howproductioninour settlements should be organized. We want this production to contribute toward resolving the problems of the real income of the families settled there so thattheycan reallyimprovetheirlives.Butwe knowthemodel’slimita- tions,andwe donotdeludeourselvesthatwe can reorganizeproductionor the market as a whole. Our general aim is the production method known as
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
thepolicyofagriculturalcooperation.Why?Becauseour 18years’experi- ence ofestablishingsettlementsandwhatwe knowofwhathashappened
elsewhere have convinced us that progress and improved incomes are possi-
ble only if there is a stimulus to agricultural cooperation. It is o n e thing for eachcomradetoreceivehisown individualplotofland,buttoorganizepro-
duction it is necessary to keep developing farm cooperatives. And the secret of introducing farm cooperatives is never to impose them, only encourage
them. There are, however, different, complementary forms of cooperative
farming appropriate to the objective conditions of each settlement: its natural
resources, type of farming, how much capital has been saved, the distance to
markets, and the degree of technological sophistication among the settlers. There are also such subjective conditions as the settlers’ level of political
awareness, their cultural tradition, etc. It is these conditions that determine thebestwaytofarmcooperatively,whichcan rangefromthemostbasic,such
as making harvesting a group effort or cooperative purchasing and market- ing, to m o r e complex forms such as the installation of a processing factory.
We have a sector within MST called the Settlers’ Cooperative Sector that
unites formal and informal cooperatives and is the body responsible for
applying and adjusting the organization’s policy of setting up cooperative farmingon thesettlementsinaccordancewiththeprevailingconditions.
It is clear that the ideal w e dream of would be for each settlement to install
itsown planttoprocessitscrop,therebyincreasingitsincomeandproducing a m o r e rapid improvement in the settlers’ living conditions. But this doesn’t
dependonlyon thewilloftheorganizationor oftheMST,doesit?Itdepends, once again,on thecorrelationof forcesinsocietyandour confrontationwith
the elites and the government, the controllers of the market, capital, agricul- tural industries, and farming policy.
MOP: This would be a production strategy for the settlements directed by the MST whereby they would become competitive in order to confront the
rules of the market, by being competitive. To what degree does this strategy of action go beyond fundamentally capitalist objectives? In other words, what is MST’s policy toward capitalism and what its policy for the march toward
socialism?
JPS: Our strategic objective is to contribute to such a reorganization of the BrazilianeconomyandsocietythatallBrazilianscan havework,education, housing, food, health, leisure, cultural activities. That’s simple, isn’t it? But it cannotbeachievedaslongaswehavetocontendwiththegreedofourruling class.Wedonotcareforlabels.Wearefightingforanideal:theidealofalife
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
55
56
andbetterconditionsforeverybody,andImean everybody.Capitalismhas alreadyprovedthatitcan neitherprovideforeveryone’slivingconditionsnor
improve them. How can w e escape from capitalism, and what will replace it? There lies a challenge for the whole of Brazilian society and one that must be tackled by the organizations of all of the working class. We do not consideritataskfortheMSTalone,whichiswhywearenotexplicitlycon- cerned with it.
MOP:Itseemsthereisaverymarkeddifferenceintheresultsachievedby the different settlements depending on where they are situated. How does MST tackle this regional difference?
JPS:Ihavealreadycommentedearlierthatthereare objectiveandsubjec-
tive conditions in each settlement that result in differences in the level of
development of production, of cooperative farming, and obviously in the resultingimpacton incomeandthebettermentoflivingconditions.Fromour concrete experience, w e find that individual settlements have rather similar histories and, that, subject to the differences in conditions I have mentioned, such similar histories generally recur.
There is a first stage, which can last two or three years, immediately after the land has been secured, in which the families are concerned only to pro- ducefortheirown subsistence,buildtheirlittlehouses,andsee thattheirchil- dren go to school. That is, they are concerned with reorganizing their lives. At thisstage,theyrecover thedignityofworkingon theirown account,staunch theirhunger,andgettoeatreasonablywell.Theysoon see that,althoughthis is fine, it is insufficient for them to be able to make further progress. Then comes thesecondstageofstruggleon thesettlement,whentheydiscussthe needto grow somethingforthemarket. We endeavor,throughour production sector, to further this discussion, discovering markets that are nearby or that haveappropriatespecializations,cropsthatdonothavetobegrownon large ranchestobeviable,productsthatgivemore incomeandthatcan makeuse of more manpower.Thesettlerstrytoproduceforthelocalmarket,forthemass of ordinary consumers, and to obtain greater income. This is not always pos- sible.Settlementsthatare farawayfromthemarketare gravelyhandicapped. Thisiswhywe opposethecolonizationoftheAmazonregion,becausethe colonists will be going to a hell where it is impossible to produce for the m a r - ket. There are also settlements that delude themselves into growing such cropsassoybeansorcornandtrytocompetewiththebiglandowners.They fall flat on their faces. We cannot hope to improve our income by growing cereals for the market. The majority of the settlements are in this phase: of
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
discoveringthemarket.Fromtherewe enterthethirdphaseinthehistoryofa settlement, when its members realize that they are going to improve their incomeonlyiftheyinstalltheirowncrop-processingplants.Buttodothat they have to form a cooperative or introduce some other type of cooperative farming.Thisisone ofthemostdifficultstagesbecauseitrequiresmore capi- tal.Andthemarketiseven more specialized,althoughatthelocallevelthere are many opportunities, provided that the product is of good quality. This is thewayoursettlementsevolve.Settlerswhodonotmanagetogobeyondthe stage of subsistence farming are not going to progress.
All the same, w e cannot analyze the success of a settlement justby its eco- nomic results or its participation in the market. There are two other criteria that have to be taken into account. A settler turns himself into a citizen; he ceases to be a modern slave. He walks with pride, he votes with awareness. He participates in society. His children study. When he lived as a landless peasant,sharecropper,daylaborer,or crofter,hewas a pariahunwantedby society, a commodity in the bosses’ labor market. The very fact of having escapedthis condition transforms the subjectinto the citizen. No statistic can measure that!t
Another criterion is to compare the social functions of the land that has
beeninvaded.Beforetheinvasion,whenitwas alargelandholding,society receivedlittlefromit,anditcouldhavesupportedfarmore inhabitants.Now,
manymore peoplelivethere,anditgrowscropsthatare destinedforsociety. Thecomparisonswe havemadealmostdefybelief.Wehavefoundincreases of at least 10 or 15 to 1.
MOP: Until a few years ago, when the new trade unionism was coming into existence as the only organizational way out for the Brazilian working class,theruralmovementswereseenassectorsthatcameintheirtow.Today the M S T is capable e v e n of attracting the attention of sectors o n the left that in
generalsee thecountrysideas a theaterofpetty-bourgeoisstruggles.Whatin facthaschangedinthisrelationshipthatuntilrecentlywas soproblematic?
JPS: Just like the elites, the Brazilian Academy of Letters has always been
colonized, and both of them, equally, have assumed the posture of colonials,
alwaysthinkingas iftheirfeetwere stillplantedinEurope.Unfortunately,the Brazilian left has also been under this negative influence and, perhaps for this reason, has never understood the countryside. There are many jokes about how old-fashioned the theories in favor among the Brazilian left are. The Trotskyites are always hoping for the insurrection of the great apes of Sao Bernardo,8 the&dquo;Partidao&dquo;[thePCB]isalwaysintow tothenationalbourgeoi-
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
57
58
sie, the PCdoB remains in its Maoist phase, waiting for the Japanese invasion
to begin the Great March, and the Christian left trusts in the free action of the
people and the hope that the poor will conquer the heavens. Despite this, I
thinkthatallofus arelearninginourideologicalunderdevelopment,andnow we seemore clearlywhatourpoliticalchallengesare,theneedforvarietiesof
mass organization,thefightagainstvanguardism,thediscourse,etc. Ithink thattheMSTisthefruitofitsown experience,ofitsmistakes,andofthe
learningprocessoftheleftas a whole.Andcertainlynew formsoforganiza- tionwillemerge,newmovements.Thinkinginthisway,theMSTcanbeseen
as an exampleor a perennialexperiment.We are instrumentsforachievingan objective, but the main thing is the objective, not the instrument.
MOP:ThereisapolicyoftheMSTtoattractandacttogetherwiththe urban sectors, above all the unions. Are there links between the MST leader- shipandtheCUT?Ifthereare,whatarethey?
JPS:FromthebirthoftheMST,withitsformalizationasanationalmove- mentinJanuary1984,wehavebeenconcernedtoplaceasoneofourprinci- palobjectivesan alliancewiththetrade-unionmovement,andwe defineour strategic alliance as being with unionism as understood by the CUT-a unionism of the grass roots, of the masses, combative, democratic, and class- based.Becauseofthiswe havesoughtfromthebeginningtocontributetothe strengtheningoftheCUTunionsjustas we havealwayssoughttoworkin conjunction with them. Our links are therefore of objectives and practices. It mayhappenthatwe dothingstogether,butthisisadetail.Themainthingis nottohaveacommonprogram,foreachsocialmovement,popularorunion, hasitsown dynamic,itsown wayofacting.And,attimes,forcingtheadop- tionofacommonprogramcanbemorehindrancethanhelp.Wealsotakepart in various forums run jointly with other workers’ organizations, for example, the National Forum AgainstViolence in the Countryside. We worked together in mobilizing the people for the Constituent Assembly of 1987-1988. Then we carried out the march to Brasilia, in April 1987 as a jointendeavor. In that march,althoughitwas calledtheMarchof theLandless,we oftheMSTnum- bered in fact only 1,500. It was a march of all Brazilian workers and all of societyagainsttheneoliberalprogram.Itwas theCUTunionists,theUniao Nacional dos Estudantes (National Union of Students-UNE), the churches, and the Federation of Popular Movements that together made the great march onApril17,1997.Thiseventwas alandmark,foritprovedthatitispossible for us to unite to defeat the Cardoso government and its neoliberal model.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
MOP:WhattypeofrelationhastheMSTbeenestablishingwiththePT
and the other political parties, considering both the history of the m o v e m e n t and its relations with them in the run-up to the coming presidential election?
JPS: Among the characteristics of our movement, as I explained above,
is our determination always to defend the MST’s independence. As an
autonomous social movement, w e are free to choose our political direction
anddoctrine,toplanour own struggle,fixour own objectives,anduse our
ownhumanandfinancialresources,andwearealsofreefromchurchesand
parties-and from the PT, too. We do, however, feel a greater identity with
thePT.Mostofour activemembers,totheextentthattheyhavebecomepolit-
ically involved and are increasing their political participation in society, opt forthePTas theirpartyofchoice,andthisideologicaltieistheresultofour
commonhistory,ofsharedstruggles,andtosomedegreeowessomethingto thewaywe respecteachother’sautonomy.But,our grassroots-theland-
less, those in the camps, the squatters-reproduce what happens, to a lesser degree, in the general run of rural communities, albeit with, in our case, a greaterlevelofpoliticization(accordingtoan opinionsurveycarriedoutin ourcampsbyDataFolha,about65percentregardthemselvesas supportersof thePT).Thisrepresentsa higherdegreeofpoliticizationandpartyallegiance
than in the society in general. Amongour activemembersthereare alsosome whorepresentotherpar-
ties on the left such as the PDT, the PSB, and the PCdoB.9 And as we all
respect each other’s independence, we have never had any problems, even during the run-up to elections when the movement is discussing policy and defining itself clearly by its support of specific candidates for state and fed- eral legislatures, governorships, and the presidency of the republic. For example,we came outlastyearinsupportof Lula’srun forthepresidency 10as the best instrument with which to overturn the government of Fernando HenriqueCardoso.Andwe choseLulanotbecausewe aretiedtothePTor driven by it but simply because Lula is greater than the PT as a political and electoral vehicle. We feel, moreover, that he is the only candidate with cha-
rismaanda fightinghistory,capableofunitinga broadenoughpopularbase, especially among the excluded and the unorganized. And he is the only one with enough strength to be able, after he has won, to really force through a land reform and implement a n alternative economic model to neoliberalism.
Imyselfam convincedthatifwe achievea broadenoughmass mobili- zation,ifwemanagetotransformthisyear’selectoralcampaignintoareal movementtoraisepeople’spoliticalawareness,ifwe managetojointogether
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
59
60
specificmass strugglesagainstneoliberalism,ifwe managetoshowthepeo- ple that what is really in play is national sovereignty, that the choice is betweentwodifferent.futuresforour society,thepeoplewillliaveno doubts about choosing Lula and seeing to it that this government will not be able to selloutBrazil,nor theenemiesoftheworkerscontinueintheirinfamousmad rush to hand over our country to the interests of international capitalism and plunge our people into a state in which it will be harder and harder for them to survive.
Iamanoptimist.Wewillcarryoutareallandreforminourcountry,and w e will succeed in defeating these colonized elites whose only dream is of Miami, Florida.
NOTES
1.ThePeasantLeagues(LigasCamponesas)were thefirstandbroadestformoforganiza- tion of the rural social movement. Founded as the Sociedade Beneficiente de Defuntos (Death Benefit Society) in the 1950s and 1960s, the leagues organized the struggles of the tenant farm- ers, squatters, small landowners, and farm workers in general in the coastal z o n e of the Brazilian Northeast against the expropriation and exploitation caused by the expansion of large-scale landholding in the region. This movement began in reaction to the founding of the Sociedade Agr&iacute;cola de Plantadores e Pecuaristas de Pernambuco (Agricultural Society of Farmers and Ranchers of Pemambuco&mdash;SAPP) in 1954 on the Galil&eacute;ia sugar plantation in the county of Vit&oacute;ria de Santo Ant&atilde;o (in Pernambuco state). As it was a mutual-aid society, its aims were to establisha school,buildupa funeralbenefitfund,supplyfarmtoolsandseeds,andeven obtain technical help from government agencies. The leagues spread throughout the Northeast and into other parts of Brazil, with the support of the Brazilian Communist party, marking with their struggle the first land reform movement in Brazil. The military coup d’&eacute;tat of 1964 suppressed the movement, and its leaders were driven into exile abroad or killed.
2. In the 1980s, after 20 years under the military regime, a large part of the urban population came onto the streets to clamor for direct elections. The opposition, representing the popular will,drewupthenecessaryconstitutionalamendmentso thatthecountrymight,atlast,electits presidentonce more (thelasttimethathadhappenedhadbeenwhenJ&acirc;nioQuadroswas elected, in1961).Therewere 11monthsofintensecampaigningfordirectelection,butthebilllost(in Congress) by 22 votes, and Brazil tasted bitter defeat in its struggle for democracy. Tancredo de Almeida Neves, of the Partido do Movimento Democr&aacute;tico Brasileiro (Party of the Brazilian DemocraticMovement&mdash;PMDB),hadtakenan activepartinthedemonstrationsbutcavedinto the maneuverings of the outgoing dictatorship and ran for president under the indirect voting system,withJos&eacute;Sarney,formerpresidentof theSocialDemocraticparty(PartidoDemocr&aacute;tico Social&mdash;PDS).The75-year-oldTancredoNeveswas electedin1985butdiedjustbeforehis inauguration.Itwas lefttoSarney(withhisclosetiestothedictatorship)tobeginBrazil’sreturn todemocracy.(Translator:Sarney,dissatisfiedwiththecandidatechosenbythecaucus ofthe PDS, the direct successor of ARENA, the military regime’s parliamentary support, had bolted his party with several of his chief associates to form a n e w party that offered its essential votes in the electoral college to Tancredo in exchange for the number-two position on the slate.) Thus began the period we know as the New Republic. Sarney governed for six years and almost
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
became a popular hero for his Cruzado Plan, which consisted, basically, in freezing the prices of allconsumergoodsandsocreatinganenormousconsumerboom.Butthisveryboomwrecked
the plan, frustrating the efforts of Sarney’s price police&mdash;the citizen volunteers, mostly house- wives,whowentroundthestorestoensurethattheywere observingthepricefreeze.InDecem- ber1989thecountryemergedfromtheyearsof leadonlytosinkintheseas ofmudofthepresi- dency of Fernando Collor de Melo.
3. The economic model is based on the external imposition of neoliberal reforms.
4. In Rio Grande do Sul, in the 1960s, an area of 1,600 ha (3,954 acres) occupied by 300 squatterscame tobeclaimedbya supposedowner. Theattempttodriveoutone squatterresulted in the organization of the rest, creating the first nucleus of the MASTER. In 1962 the landless begana formofstrugglethatcame totypifytheirmethods:establishingcampson theedgesof unproductive large landholdings. New camps mushroomed, built by expropriated peasants whodemandedtherighttotakeoverstatelandofdoubtfultitle.Until1963thecampshadthe support of the then Governor Leonel Brizola. In 1964 the movement was	smashed by the mili- tary takeover.
5.UndertheguidanceoftheBrazilianCommunistparty,ULTABwas createdinS&atilde;oPaulo in 1954 with the aim of coordinating the peasant associations already in existence. It functioned as a party front in unifying the rural struggle and that of Brazilian workers in general toward unionization.
6.Themore generalpolicy,implementedforthephasingoutofslaveryinBrazil,datesfrom 1871 with the Free Womb Law. This declared that all children born from that date to a slave woman wouldbelegallyfreefromthemomentofbirth.Thislawencouragedboththeabolition- ist movement and acts of resistance by the slaves themselves, whose own freedom would be
enacted o n May 13, 1888, after m o r e than 300 years of forced labor. But three centuries of slav- ery and the consequences it left in the most diverse aspects of Brazilian life were, obviously, not obliteratedbyamereActofParliament.
7. Raul Jungmann has been Minister of Land Policy in the Cardoso administration since 1996.
8. A city of the most industrialized region of the state of S&atilde;o Paulo, cradle of Brazil’s biggest trade-union federation, the Central &Uacute;nica dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Unique Federation&mdash; CUT) and of the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ party&mdash;PT).
9. Translator’s note: The Partido Democr&aacute;tico Trabalhista (Democratic Labor party&mdash; PDT)wasformedinMay1980byLeonelBrizolawhenthecourtsforbadehimtheuseofthetitle "Partido Trabalhista Brasileira." The party’s strength has been in Rio de Janeiro (where Brizola waselectedgovernorin1982and1990)andinhisnativestateofRioGrandedoSul,butithas also had its candidates elected mayor in S&atilde;o Luis, Curitiba, and Natal. The Partido Socialista Brasileira(BrazilianSocialistparty&mdash;PSB),thefourthBrazilianpoliticalpartytobeso named, was formed in February 1947 under the leadership of Joao Mangabeira out of the earlier Esquerda Democr&aacute;tica. It advocated a mildly socialist program and campaigned against Get&uacute;lio Vargas’s authoritarian "fascist" leanings. In 1960 it w o n only 1 percent of the national vote. Its best-knownmemberwas thePeasantLeagues’FranciscoJuli&atilde;o.Reestablishedin 1986afterthe fallofthemilitaryregime,itwas deridedas the"PartyoftheIntellectuals"andelectedonlytwo deputies to the Constituent Assembly of 1987.
10.Lu&iacute;sIn&aacute;cio(Lula)daSilvabecamefamousas leaderofthestrikesintheABCindustrial zone ofGreaterS&atilde;oPauloattheendofthe1970s,whenBrazilwas stillunderthemilitarydicta- torship.Atthatperiod,underhisleadership,300,000carworkersstoppedwork.Lulawas one of the founders of the PT and is currently its honorary president. He established his definitive place inBrazilianhistoryas thefirstblue-collarworkertobecomea presidentialcandidate.Thatwas in 1989,whenhelosttoFernandoCollordeMelo.In1994heran again,thistimeagainstCardoso,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
61
62
andalthoughhelostagainhisdegreeofsuccess invote gettingwas one of themost amazingphe-
nomena inBrazilianpolitics.In 1998heagainran unsuccessfullyagainstCardoso,whowon a second term in office.
REFERENCE
Silva, Jos&eacute; Francisco Graziano da 1981 A moderniza&ccedil;&atilde;o dolorosa. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
