Introduction: Globalizing Resistance: The New Politics of Social Movements in Latin America Author(s): Richard Stahler-Sholk, Harry E. Vanden, Glen David Kuecker Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 34, No. 2, Globalizing Resistance: The New Politics of Social Movements in Latin America (Mar., 2007), pp. 5-16
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27648006 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 19:41
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
Introduction
Globalizing Resistance The	New	Politics	of Social	Movements	inLatin America
by Richard Stahler-Sholk, Harry E. Vanden, and Qlen David Kuecker
The past two decades have seen an upsurge of Latin American social move
challenging	the neoliberal	paradigm	and	the governments	thatwould impose it.
A little over ten years ago, Latin American Perspectives published	two special issues on social movements. Edited by David Slater (1994b, 1994c), these
issues focused on the significant increase in research and theory concerning
the intersections of politics, economics, society, and culture in social move ments. The case studies presented in them pointed to the emergence of Latin America's new social movements as important actors. The growth of these movements has been the subject of intense study ever since. In today's
context, such movements	include the indigenous mobilizations	led by the Confederaci?n	de	Nacionalidades	Ind?genas	del	Ecuador	(Confederation	of
ments,
Nationalities	of Ecuador?CONAIE),	the cocoteros and mobiliza
Indigenous tions against water privatizations and gas pipeline investments in Bolivia, the Zapatista	movement	inMexico,	theMovimento	dos	Trabalhadores	Rurais
Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers' Movement?MST)	in Brazil, Afro Colombians	resisting	displacement	in	a	region	coveted	by	investors,	the
piquetero eruptions ofworkers and the urban poor in thewake ofArgentina's financial crisis, and the incipient cross-border and migrant movements and
mobilizations against "free-trade" agreements. They contest the region's polit ical and economic systems and challenge traditional definitions of citizenship,
democracy, and participation. As they contest power and policy, they chal lenge traditional rule by the dominant economic classes and the politicians
who	enable	it (see Vanden,	2003). These	phenomena	transcend	the expectations	of themainstream	"transitions
to-democracy" literature, which interpreted social movements as a tempo
rary outgrowth of the suppression of conventional politics by bureaucratic authoritarian regimes, a trend thatwould fade again with the return of elec
toral democracy.1 The intensification of social movements appears to be not only a continuation of historical resistance and mobilization of themasses but a specific response to the advance of neoliberal globalization within the process	of nominal	democratization.	Although	it flows most	strongly	from	the
Richard Stahler-Sholk is an associate professor of political science at Eastern Michigan University and an associate editor of Latin American Perspectives. Harry E. Vanden is a professor of political science at theUniversity of South Florida, Tampa. Glen David Kuecker is an associate professor of Latin American history at DePauw University. The collective thanks them for their work in
this issue.
organizing LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 153,Vol. 34No. 2,March 2007 5-16
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X06299088 ?	2007 Latin American	Perspectives
5
6	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
laboring	classes,	this resistance	is, however,	by no means	exclusively	mani
fested in class-based organizing. And while the global spread of free-trade market forces involves a rollback of the state, the neoliberal state has devel
oped new functions of structuring and policing the new conditions for global
capital	accumulation.	In	this	era	of	increasing	globalization,	pressure	to
become integrated into global markets threatens a heterogeneous group of social subjects who, in turn, are generating new resistance movements.
These new movements	seek to define a novel relation to the formal political
realm by fundamentally reworking relations of power. Unlike traditional guer rilla movements or electoral expressions of the left, they are not fundamentally
organized to seize state power. Yet they have contributed to destabilizing and in some cases ousting governments in, for example, Bolivia, Argentina, Ecuador, and, arguably, Mexico, while coexisting in awkward relationships
with leftparties such as Brazil's Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers' Party?
and	Mexico's	Partido	de Democratic Revolution?PRD)
la	Revoluci?n	Democr?tica	(Party	of	the and guerrilla movements such as Mexico's
PT)
Ej?rcito	Popular	Revolucionario Ej?rcito	Revolucionario	del	Pueblo	Insurgente	(Revolutionary	Army	of	the
(Popular	Revolutionary	Army?EPR)	and	the
Insurgent	People?ERPI).	And	they have	forced policy	to the left in places	like Argentina. Parallel to the increase in social protest movements is the develop
ment ofmovement-based politics of a populist variety such as Lavalas inHaiti, chavismo	inVenezuela,	and	the Evo Morales	phenomenon	in Bolivia.
Mainstream attention has been focused on the apparent ascendance of the electoral left (in its domesticated or demonized variants) across the region as
the twenty-first century begins. But perhaps significant for lasting change is the grassroots mobilization	that gave those "left" parties an opening and con
tinues to hold them accountable to their base. The ability of these new move ments to influence and articulate policy does indeed suggest that?to some extent?they actually can rule from below. There are parallels here to the ten
sion between themobilized base of theUnidad Popular coalition inChile from 1970 to 1973 and theAllende government's effort to effect change fromwithin the existing liberal-democratic	institutions, and to the "radical moderation"	of the Sandinista government in Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990 (Winn, 1986;
Vanden and Pr?vost, 1993). From theArgentine cry of "?Que se vayan todos!"
(taken up by movements	elsewhere)	to the Zapatista	concept of mandar obede ciendo,	these movements	are	struggling	for a	radical	redefinition	of politics.
Building on the 1994 special issues on social movements and political
change in Latin America, this issue explores the roots and implications of social movements in the contemporary context. The contributors offer fresh insights that flow from their recent fieldwork. They examine three sets of
issues: the origin and context of the upsurge of social movements, the strate gies and dynamics of their struggles, and their outcomes and implications.
WHY NOW?
It ishard	to take themeasure	of a historical	trend that is stillhappening.	Rather than simply assuming the existence of the phenomenon in question, it isworth
old/new
discontinuity, analysts of social movements	since the 1980s have noted
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	7
posing the basic question what is really new about the Latin American social movements of recent decades (Kuecker, 2004). The phrase "new social move ments" has been in vogue since at least the early 1980s (Melucci, 1980; Tarrow,
1998). The early invocations of that phrase focused on the advanced industrial ized capitalist societies, whose emerging "postmaterialist" values and redefini
tions of equality and citizenship had supposedly shifted the locus of organizing from traditional unions and parties tonew, amorphous groupings around values
such as civil rights, environmentalism, gay rights, feminism, and planetary sur vival in the nuclear age (see, e.g., Laclau and Mouffe, 1985). Yet this analysis was questioned by Latin Americanists who noted a somewhat parallel phenomenon
in a very different regional context (Foweraker, 1995; Slater, 1985; 1994a). The Latin American-enriched	study of social movements	added	important compar ative analyses, particularly the influential compilations by Eckstein and Alvarez
(1992) and Alvarez, Dagnino, and Escobar (1998). Some usefully questioned the dichotomous terminology of "old" and "new" movements (Fuentes and Frank,
1989), suggesting amore dynamic and interactive process ofmovements adapt ing to changing forms of the state and market. The new forms of global capital
ism and	the challenges	of its reregulation?a	transition	in the "world	system"	for some?are part of the common context for changing responses of popular mobi lization in both the center and the periphery of that system (Foran, 2003).
Neoliberal restructuring or reregulation of global capitalism is caused by the breakdown of the Fordist system in the capitalist center and the emergence of
flexible regimes of accumulation (Harvey, 1989). The devastating social impacts in Latin America	are part of the context of the current wave	of popular mobi
lization (Green, 2003; Prashad and Ballv?, 2006). Indeed, there is a strong argu
ment to be made that the region iswitnessing a sea change in politics and participation and that these new movements have taken full advantage of post
colonial definitions of agency and citizenship, the Internet and other globalized
communication, globalized networks of resistance, and the political space that democratization has provided to create repertoires of resistance and action that are indeed new and subversive of traditional politics and traditional political cul
ture (Gills, 2000b; Vanden,	2004; 2006). Social movements are, then, in some senses "new" by definition in that they
eschew the conventional political institutions of the day in favor of heteroge
neous collections ofgroups and individuals employing impolite ("contentious") tactics and organizing challenges to old social values. Without overdrawing the
their (1) tendency to seek autonomy from conventional/hierarchical	political
institutions, (2) attention to horizontal and participatory process in decision
making,	and	(3) quest	for solidarity	derived	from notions	of social	justice	linked
to shared subjective identities such as race/ethnicity or gender (Hellman, 1995). Several things are noteworthy about the changing context for social movement organizing since the 1980s. One is clearly the framework of global
ization and theneoliberal free-market project signaled by the 1982 debt crisis that began with theMexican crash and inaugurated a wave of "structural adjust ment programs" supervised by international financial institutions. These were
actually predated by themonetarist orthodoxy of the "Chicago Boys," reflecting the ultra-free-market	ideology	purveyed	by University	of Chicago	economists
8	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Milton Friedman and Arnold Harberger and ushered into the halls of power by the 1973 coup inChile (the "Other September 11"). The standard economic
formulas	that were	tellingly	labeled	the	"Washington	consensus"	centered
around	public-sector	cutbacks	(austerity),	privatization,	and	market oriented realignment (economic liberalization) of trade and finance (Rosen
and McFadyen,	1995). More than simply a shrinking of the state, the neoliberal project called for
a reconceptualization	of the state and its interaction with civil society (Robinson, 2004; Hardt and Negri, 2000). The new globalized regime of capi
tal accumulation converted states into brokers for a transnationalized ist class (Sklair, 2000). The resulting destabilization of the established citizenship compact (of nation-states) has been accompanied by a new sense of outrage
capital
(Vilas, 1996; Eckstein and Wickham-Crowley, 2003; Hershberg and Rosen, 2006). An example of this visceral response can be seen in the postfinancial crisis Argentine escraches, graffiti/street-theater identifying those seen as betraying the public trust (i.e., the state-society pact). Neoliberal market
reforms make	the poor	invisible	by	redefining	citizenship	as market	partici pation. Today's social movements are battles to redefine citizenship, in effect
constructing a broader and more inclusionary meaning (Kuecker, 2004; Vilas, 1997). Inwhat Yashar (2005) calls the "postliberal challenge," Latin America's
poor and marginalized are demanding collective citizenship rights, not just the individualism and formal equality promised by themarketplace that in
practice leaves somany destitute and disempowered. Ironically, the liberal,
U.S.-style
market-linked	version	of	democratization	and	the	concomitant
emphasis	on procedural	democratic	guarantees	has helped	the popular	strug gle to open greater political space inwhich mobilizations	and new forms of
resistance	can	challenge	the neoliberal	model	and	the very	capitalist	concep
tion of formal, representative	democracy	that underpins	it. The changing political context has also included a wave of regional transi
tions from various	forms of authoritarianism	to low-intensity democracy	(Gills,
2000a).	The	transitions-to-democracy	literature	analyzing	the demise	of bureau cratic authoritarianism	in South America	noted	the emergence	of social move
ments where traditional political organizing had been thoroughly suppressed by themilitary regimes of themid-1960s tomid-1980s. The Mexican case of soft
authoritarianism was somewhat distinct, with a series of mobilizations and
politicalcrises(in1968,1982,1985,1988,and 1994)highlightingthefailureofthe state to address the needs of the people, leading to a partial political liberaliza tion in 2000 that had stalled by 2006 (Rus and Tinker-Salas, 2006). In all these
cases, the assumption (hope?) was that theywould quietly go away, Rosie-the Riveter-like, when normal politics returned. They have not.
In seeking to explain the spaces being occupied by these movements, some have argued that formal democracy in the sense of "choice" of leaders devoid
ofmuch substantive content or direct participation?polyarchy?is	the logical
political complement ofneoliberalism (Robinson, 1996). Parties and other tradi tional institutions become vehicles for technocrats and marketing specialists,
and people	lose interest and trust. In any event, the larger scale of global market structures and the shift of power to distant international institutions results in
what mainstream political scientists call a "democratic deficit," a globalization
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	9
from above that critics insist can be challenged from below by those who believe
that "another world is possible" (Brecher, Costello, and Smith, 2000). This shift, however, has ambiguous implications for the relation between social move
ments and parties. In that gray area, some parties have tried to repackage them selves as movements,	and parallel	to the rise of social movements	is the rise of
populist	formulas	on	both	the	left and	the	right,	capitalizing	on widespread	cyn icism about	the political	class.
The universal condemnation of authoritarian regimes and the atrocities they
committed has thoroughly delegitimized and discredited the repressive mech anisms	thatwere	required	to stop	the popular	mobilizations	and	revolutionary
movements of the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s. In accordance with the U.S democratic model, elitist control is increasingly being exercised by hege monic control of themedia and culture and attempts todefine democracy pro
cedurally (democracy exists so long as there is freedom of press and assembly and bourgeois elections), regardless ofwhether it really is by, of, and for "the people"?a	construct defined by the impoverished majority inLatin America.
As	these new	popular	movements	have	broken	this hegemony	and	insisted	on
real, effective, and participatory democracy, they have developed and refined mechanisms of power that promote liberation and invoke visions of a new
society	(see Vanden,	2006). What	is still unclear	iswhether,	even	if they dele gitimize, discredit, and disregard neoliberal policies and traditional forms of
rule and control, theywill be able to implement new policies and alternative
conceptions of power, rule, and the state. The fundamental question is how much liberation can be achieved with mechanisms of power that endeavor to rule from below without actually taking power and utilizing state control to
achieve	their objectives. Finally, the changing context must also include the end of the cold war, for
mally symbolized by the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall but perhaps under way in
slow motion throughout the late Brezhnev-Reagan years. This change may have freed some of the Latin American left from theweight of vanguard and central
izing political models, as Casta?eda (1994) has rather smugly observed.2 The declining appeal of state socialism and of seizing state power from above also creates	space	for a different model	of organizing	from below	(Holloway,	2002).
MOVEMENT STRATEGIES AND DYNAMICS
In studying what	is new	about	the current wave	of social movements, important not to romanticize	social-movement	cycles of protest or assume	that the strategies will necessarily be effective just because they are noble or cre
it is
ative.	Bearing	inmind	the historical	context,	it is useful	to recall	thatwhereas revolution was a prominent feature of the Latin American agenda from the 1960s through the 1980s, now we speak the different language of social move
ments, civil society, and contentious politics. Some of the current social move
ments are also not necessarily against capitalism but more narrowly oppose the particular	form of capitalism	that is neoliberalism,	making	at least some of them reformist rather than revolutionary. Indeed, we may need to rethink the
very definition	of "revolution"	in an era of globalization,	when	the overthrow
10	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES of the state is not necessarily the key to radical transformation of social rela
tions (Stahler-Sholk, 2001). Clearly it is not just the forms of popular that have adapted but also the forms of organization of the state and the
market in dynamic interaction with each other. The essays in this issue invite the reader to consider what strategies will work in the context of global capi tal and a downsized	state.
Revolutionary movements and organizations of the past were excessively hierarchical and centralized, which proved problematical forhorizontal democ
racy and empowerment of themass base. Those that still cling to their vanguard models	have	lost momentum.	An	important	question	to	consider	is whether
contemporary social movements are necessarily more internally democratic or
progressive	than	other	forms	of	organizing	and	if they necessarily	lead	to higher levels of empowerment. Informal networks of power can be just as stultifying
as more	institutionalized	hierarchies	and	perhaps	harder	to change.	The	old	rev olutionary movements often found that seizing state power was hard enough but social and ideological transformation was even more difficult. It is not yet clear that contemporary social movements solve these problems by skipping
straight to the transformation phase without a foothold in state power. Before
celebrating the separation from parties and other traditional organizations?the "fetishism	of autonomy,"	as Hellman	(1992)	calls	it?we	need	to ask whether
that autonomy yields more horizontal and participatory and transparent
processes and whether it is an effective organizing strategy. A cautionary example is the caudillo model of populists who claim to be above politics yet
mobilize from above for their own purposes. At the same time, the bottom-up emphasis of new left social movements may come at the expense of organiza
tional focus and ideological coherence.
Another	strategic	challenge	facing	social	movements	is how	to generate	and sustain a subjective sense of solidarity in the face of the atomizing effect of the
neoliberal policies applied across the region for over two decades. The new movements are defining agents of social change inways that cut across old
categories?for example, theBrazilian MST recruiting among landless peasants and urban favela dwellers; theArgentine piqueteros bringing together elements of	the middle	class,	the workers,	the	unemployed,	and	other	urban	poor;	and
Mexico's	Zapatistas	issuing	appeals	to all	those	"on	the	left and	at	the bottom." The effectiveness of these attempts to construct new social subjects depends on
whether they build community and collective consciousness so that the per ceived commonalities of interest are transformed into durable alliances.
A related issue is the strategy of organizing around identities such as race, ethnicity,	and	gender.	The	"old	left" often	suffered	from blindness	to any	iden
titybesides class, a category derived frommaterial relations of production. But nonmaterial identities, woven around economic relations, influence people's
willingness	to act. The	challenge	for social movements	is to connect	the dots	of identity-based forms of resistance that are very localized, making itvery hard forgeographically	dispersed	pockets	ofmobilization	to communicate,	interact, and do what isnecessary to form a collective consciousness around an identity issue. The organizing	challenge	is, for example,	forAfro-Colombians	in the
Choc? and indigenous people inMesoamerica	to see that they are being dis placed from ancestral lands in the interest ofmega-investment	schemes such as
struggle
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	11
dams and canals, and for targets of femicide inCiudad	Ju?rez to see the struc tures of transnational capital that produce themaquiladoras	and drug cartels
that	interact with	patriarchal	ideologies	in a murderous	brew.	Identity	politics is problematical	in terms of forming the collective consciousness	thatmay be
necessary	for a revolutionary	agenda.	Lacking	that agenda,	being	fragmented leaves identity-based movements vulnerable to co-optation, as inwhat Hale
(2004) calls "managed neoliberal multiculturalism" or the "indio permitido."
Identity does not have to be a narrow and exclusionary basis formobilization, but connecting such identity to broader struggles against neoliberalism is a
strategic challenge. The relation between social movements and allegedly progressive parties
and governments is another challenge. The dilemmas can be seen in the various positions	reflected, for example,	in the Brazilian MST's	critical distance	from the ruling PT, the Zapatistas7 avoidance of the PRD electoral sideshow, and the
Ecuadorian indigenous movement's ambivalence toward thePachacutik option
ofmorphing	frommovement	into party. The Argentine	piqueteros	divided	over responses to reformist concessions by theKirchner administration. Left-leaning
governments face the discipline of global financial markets, as is illustrated by
"Lula Lite" in Brazil and by themarket-friendly platform of the 2006 presiden tial candidate Andr?s Manuel L?pez Obrador inMexico. The Chavez adminis
tration inVenezuela, with its oil resources, may be the exception that proves the rule, but the government's autonomy from international finance does not nec
essarily mean	social-movement	independence	from the government	(Ellner and Tinker Salas, 2005). It remains to be seen how Bolivian President Evo Morales
will fare in facing the dual pressures of grassroots mobilization	and interna tional constraints.
Similarly, the strategy of forming transnational social movement networks is
a double-edged sword. They may be a necessary response to the organizing
advantages of increasingly mobile global capital, but old colonial patterns may be replicated in the relation between Northern-dominated	nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and local grassroots organizations in the South. Not
every component of civil-society organizing is a social movement, and not all social movements are progressive. Institutions such as the Inter-American
Development	Bank	and	corporate-sponsored	outfits	such	as	Conservation International have learned the advantages of funding workshops forwell
behaved	local	groups	to undercut	the	initiative	of more	radical	bottom-up mobilizing.
WHAT NOW?
If contemporary	social	movements	aim	to bring	about	fundamental	change without	taking	state power,	they nevertheless	have	to have	some	effect on	the
state. Their	lasting	impact may	depend	on	their ability	to bring	about	change in political institutions to consolidate their gains. Civic mass protest move
ments	have	demonstrated	a	capacity	to bring	down	governments,	but	if they are not going to enter the new governments themselves they need to devise another way to affect policy beyond the yes-or-no referendum of the street.
12	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Revolutionary movements of the past that had the goal of taking state power
(and	sometimes	succeeded)	faced	problems	of how	a movement	organized	for insurrection might become one that governs (Selbin, 1998) or, in the Sandinista
case	inNicaragua,	how	to go back	to being	a movement	thatmight	"govern
from below,"	in the language	of Daniel	Ortega's	unfulfilled	promise	of 1990. Contemporary	social movements	that do not seek state power nevertheless have to deal with issues of internal power relations in their organizations and
parallel governance in their territorial spaces. The challenges can be seen in the Zapatistas' bold and creative solution of Juntas de Buen Gobierno and
"leading by obeying," an experiment that appears promising but does not entirely avoid the issue of how to transform the state?a challenge that they
have taken up since late 2005 with the national outreach known as the "Other
Campaign"	(Harvey, 2005). Ifwe think of social movements that are concentrating on organizing civil
society rather than taking state power in terms of a Gramscian war of position, we also need tobe aware that changing power relations through resistance leads
to countermeasures by the state, including sophisticated strategies of low
intensity conflict and low-intensity democracy. As social movements	are exper
imenting with new strategies, there are also adaptations in theWashington consensus on neoliberal economics and in the politics of counterinsurgency.
With	the Free Trade Area	of theAmericas	(FTAA)	stalled	in its original	formu
lation,	the package	is being	broken	into	little bits,	as	bilateral	agreements	nego tiated between theUnited States and individual Latin American countries are
thewave	of social movements,	international
pushed	through piecemeal.	Riding financial institutions and "development"	agencies are co-opting the language of
civil-society participation and sustainability, with Powerpoint-ready workshops to train their preferred domesticated	intermediaries.
The outcomes of today's social movements will not be apparent until after a fewmore rounds of these dynamic struggles. Some of the keys will include the ability of themovements	to create local self-sufficient economies	that represent
viable	alternatives	to global	capitalism	and	regional	social movement	solidarity such as the Latin American women's movement, V?a Campesina, or the
Mesoamerican	coalitions against theCentral American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and Plan Puebla-Panam? (PPP). In raising theunanswered question of social movement outcomes, an issue that remains to be explored iswhether the resistance can survive if itdoes not put forward a coherent anticapitalist alter
native. In an era of globalization and mobile capital, creating local political and
economic autonomy without transforming larger structures (i.e., revolutionary change) may mean that the problems caused by those structures are simply dis
placed	to other places	in theworld	that are not organized	in local resistance.
Alternative models that seem locally promising (such as fair-trade, organic
shade-grown coffee) do not necessarily translate into a globally sustainable model	of alternative	development.
NEW IDEAS
The essays in this collection are a sampling of work that brings new research and new perspectives to bear on these questions of origin, strategy,
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	13
and outcomes	of social movements	in Latin America	today. Versions	of these and a wider selection of essays are being edited for inclusion in a projected
volume forRowman and Littlefield's LAP in theClassroom series. Vanden	frames the current wave	of social movements	in historical	context.
He uses the examples of the Brazilian MST and Bolivian indigenous move ments to reflect on historical continuities and discontinuities, highlighting
new	repertoires	of collective	action	including	national	mobilizations	that have
altered or toppled governments. Spronk	and Webber	consider	the origins	and	context	for the emergence	of
social movements, taking a political economy approach in comparing the Bolivian gas and water wars. Drawing on David Harvey's (2003) concept of "accumulation	by dispossession,"	they emphasize	structural differences between the contexts of these movements stemming from the different strate
gic places of the two resources in today's global capitalist system. Yet they
are also attuned to questions of agency and issue framing that shaped movement.
each
Most of the essays speak centrally tomovement strategies and dynamics. Stahler-Sholk's piece on theZapatista autonomy movement examines some of
the ambiguities and pitfalls of the concept of "autonomy" in the era of global ization. The Zapatista movement, while deeply rooted in the local, is also
struggling	to	find	a	strategy	of wider	mobilization	that will	help	bring	about macro changes inMexican national politics and in the articulation to the
global economy. Mora, also writing on the Zapatistas, focuses on indigenous identity. Her	extensive	fieldwork	inZapatista	communities	draws	out ways	in
which themovement's formulation of indigenous collective rights destabi lizes	the neoliberal	paradigm	but	also	poses	challenges	for an	old	left vision still wedded narrowly to class analysis. Swords's article recasts the scope
of this same case by examining social-movement "networks," specifically
some	of the groups	inspired	to organize	in parallel	to the Zapatista	initiative. She	applies	this	broader	definition	to	an	examination	of	the way	the move
ment has altered political discourse about such concepts as democracy and
development. The essays by Kuecker and Swanger offer close-up portraits of two move
highlighting	in different ways	the centrality of community-building
ments, strategies in forging the collective consciousness and motivation of partici
pants. Kuecker takes us into the life experiences of communities in the
Ecuadorian mountains confronting amining subsidiary of the transnational Mitsubishi. His study explores the question whether local victories are suffi
cient to challenge mobile capital in a global system. Swanger brings us the feel
and the voices of emerging solidarity among women organizing in the alien ating border environment of Ciudad Ju?rez. Both convey a sense that the
consciousness-raising	ismore important for the long term than the specific organizational	forms and outcomes	in the short term. Issa's article on theMST,
Latin America's largest social movement, adds new perspective on the ideo
logical dimension of organizing. Focusing on the concept of m?stica, she explores the processes that built a subjective sense of solidarity among the social subjects of rural struggles in Brazil, a key factor in the growth and
longevity of thatmovement.
14	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Villal?n's contribution on theArgentine piqueteros illustrates not only the diverse	social	origins	ofmovement	participants	who	largely	left their old	party and union ties behind but also the richly creative range of strategies and tactics
available. At the same time, the case carries a cautionary note about outcomes, as the breadth of the coalitions proves a source of strain and the electoral "left" co-opts a layer of leadership from themovement with amodicum of social com pensation. Alca?iz and Scheier focus on a specific radical group within the
piquetero movement that adopted a creative strategy, building on Communist
party networks and cooperative economic projects to gain financial and organi zational autonomy from the statewhile resisting party control. These two takes
on	the Argentine	case	illustrate	the	dilemmas	of movement	strategy	and	the
complexities	of sustainability. Space constraints make it impossible to address the full range of social
movements	shaking	Latin	American	politics	(which	would	include,	for example, various cross-border and transnational community organizing initia
tives). We	hope	to highlight	some	trends	and	raise	some	critical	questions	for
further reflection and action. There are still gaps in the research agenda on Latin American social movements. There have been significant advances in understanding themovements' origins and dynamics, but more theoretical
work is needed on their outcomes. The region's political shift to the electoral left at the beginning	of the twenty-first century calls for academic	and activist
analysis of the opportunities and problems posed for social movements. The essays in this issue should help stimulate debate on the possibilities and pitfalls
of contemporary	social movement	organizing	inLatin America.
NOTES
1.A critical review of this early "redemocratization"	literature can be found inNef (1988). See
also Petras and Morley	(1992). 2. For an interesting polemic about left strategies in Latin America, see Ellner (2004; 2006) and
Casta?eda	et al. (2005).
REFERENCES
Alvarez,	Sonia	E.,	Evelina	Dagnino,	and	Arturo	Escobar	(eds.) 1998 Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures: Re-Visioning Latin American Social Movements.
Boulder:	Westview	Press.
Brecher, Jeremy, Tim Costello, and Brendan Smith 2000 Globalization from Below: The Power of Solidarity. Cambridge:	South End Press.
Jorge G.
Casta?eda, 1994 Utopia Unarmed: The Latin American Left after theCold War. New York: Vintage Press.
Casta?eda,	Jorge G., Marta Harnecker,	James Petras, and Steve Ellner 2005 "Left strategy inLatin America: A symposium." Science & Society 69: 137-190.
Eckstein, Susan E. and Sonia E. Alvarez (eds.) 1992 The Making	of Social Movements	in Latin America:	Identity, Strategy, and Democracy.
Boulder:	Westview	Press.
Eckstein,	Susan	E.	and	Timothy	P. Wickham-Crowley	(eds.) 2003 Struggles for Social Rights inLatin America. New York: Routledge.
Ellner, Steve 2004	"Leftist	goals	and	the debate	over	anti-neoliberal	strategy	in Latin	America."	Science	& Society 68: 10-32.
Hardt,	Michael	and	Antonio
2000	Empire.	Cambridge:
Harvey,	David 1989The Condition
Negri Harvard
University	Press.
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	15
2006 "The defensive strategy on the left in Latin America: objective and subjective conditions in the age of globalization."	Science & Society 79: 397-410.
Elmer,	Steve	and	Miguel	Tinker-Salas	(eds.) 2005 Venezuela: New perspectives on politics and society. Latin American Perspectives 32(3).
For an, John (ed.) 2003 The Future ofRevolutions:RethinkingPolitical and Social Change in theAge ofGlobalization.
London:	Zed	Books.
Foweraker,	Joe 1995 Theorizing Social Movements: Critical Studies of Latin America. London: Pluto Press.
Fuentes, Marta and Andr? Gunder Frank 1989 'Ten theses on social movements/' World Development 17: 179-191.
Gills, Barry 2000a	"American	power,	neo-liberal	economic	globalization,	and	low-intensity	democracy:
An unstable trinity," pp. 326-344 inMichael Cox, G. John Ikenberry, and Takashi Inoguchi (eds.),	American	Democracy	Promotion:	Impulses,	Strategies,	and	Impacts.	Oxford:	Oxford
Press. 2000b "Introduction," in Barry K. Gills (ed.), Globalization and thePolitics ofResistance. New
York: Palgrave. Green, Duncan
2003 Silent Revolution: The Rise and Crisis ofMarket Economics in Latin America. 2d ed. London:
Latin American	Books. Hale,	Charles	R.
2004 "Rethinking indigenous politics in the era of the 'indio permitido.'" NACLA Report on the Americas	38(2):	16-21.
University
An	intothe	Cultural ofPostmodernity:	Inquiry	Origins of	Change.Cambridge,
UK: Blackwell. 2003 The New Imperialism. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Harvey,	Neil 2005	"Inclusion	through	autonomy:	Zapatistas	and	dissent."	NACLA	Report	on	theAmericas
39(2): 12-17. Hellman, JudithAdler
1992 "The study of new social movements in Latin America and the question of autonomy," pp.	52-61	in Arturo	Escobar	and	Sonia	E. Alvarez	(eds.),	The Making	of Social Movements	in Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
1995 "The riddle of new social movements: who they are and what they do," in Sandor Halebsky and Richard L. Harris (eds.), Capital, Power, and Inequality in Latin America. Boulder:
Westview	Press.
Hershberg, Eric and Fred Rosen (eds.) 2006 Latin America afterNeoliberalism: Turning theTide in the21st Century? New York: New Press.
Holloway,	John 2002 Change theWorld Without Taking Power. London: Pluto Press.
Kuecker,	Glen 2004 "Latin American resistance movements in the time of the posts." History Compass
2(LA126): 1-23. Laclau, Ernesto and Chantal Mouffe
1985 Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso.
Alberto 1980	"The	new	social	movements:	a	theoretical	approach."	Social	Science	Information	19(2): 199-226.
Melucci,
Nef, Jorge 1988 "The trend toward democratization and redemocratization in Latin America: shadow
and substance." Latin American Research Review 23: 131-153.
Petras, James and Morris Morley 1992 Latin America in theTime ofCholera: Electoral Politics, Market Economics, and Permanent
Crisis. New York: Routledge.
16	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Prashad, Vijay and Teo Ballv? (eds.) 2006 Dispatches from Latin America: On theFrontlines Against Neoliberalism. Cambridge: South End Press.
Robinson,	William	I. 1996	Promoting
Polyarchy:	Globalization,	U.S.	Intervention,	and	Hegemony.	Cambridge:
Press. 2004 A Theory of Global Capitalism: Production, Class, and State in a Transnational World.
Baltimore:	Johns Hopkins	University	Press. Rosen, Fred and Deidre McFadyen	(eds.)
1995 Free Trade and Economic Restructuring inLatin America. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Rus,	Jan and Miguel	Tinker	Salas	(eds.) 2006 The Mexican Presidency, 2006-2012: Neoliberalism, social movements, and Electoral Politics.
Cambridge	University
Latin American
Perspectives	33(2).
Selbin, Eric 1998 Modern Latin American Revolutions. 2d ed. Boulder: Westview Press.
Sklair, Leslie 2000 The Transnational Capitalist Class. New York: Blackwell.
Slater, David 1994a "Power and social movements in the other Occident: Latin America in an international context." Latin American Perspectives 21(2): 11-37.
Slater, David	(ed.) 1985 New	Social Movements	and	the State	in Latin America.	Amsterdam:	CEDLA. 1994b Social Movements and Political Change in Latin America 1. Latin American Perspectives
21(2). 1994c Social Movements and Political Change in Latin America 2. Latin American Perspectives
Tarrow, Sidney 1998	Power	inMovement:	Social	Movements	and	Contentious
21(3). Stahler-Sholk,
Richard 2001 "Revolution," inNeil J.Smelser and Paul B. Baltes (eds.), International encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences, vol. 26. Oxford: Pergamon.
University Vanden,	Harry	E.
2003 "Globalization American	response."
in a time of neoliberalism:
social movements 308-333.
1996
29(6): 1997
"Neoliberal	social	policy:	managing	poverty	(somehow)."	NACLA	Report	on	theAmericas 16-25.
Press.
politicized Journal	ofDeveloping	Societies	19(2-3):
movements,	governance,	and	the	breakdown	of	traditional	politics	in America."	International	Journal	ofPublic	Administration	27(13-14):	1129-1149. "Social	movements,	hegemony,	and	resistance,"	inGary	Pr?vost	and	Carlos	Oliva	(eds.),
"New	political
2004 Latin 2006 The Bush Doctrine and Latin America. New York: Palgrave.
Vanden, Harry E. and Gary Pr?vost 1993 Democracy and Socialism in Sandinista Nicaragua. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Vilas, Carlos M.
"Participation,	inequality,	and	the whereabouts	of	democracy,"	in Douglas	A.	Chalmers et al. (eds.), The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and
Representation.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press. Winn,	Peter
1986 Weavers of Revolution: The Yarur Workers and Chile's Road to Socialism. Oxford: Oxford
Press. Yashar,	Deborah	J.
2005	Contesting	Citizenship	in Latin Challenge.	Cambridge:	Cambridge
University
Politics.
Cambridge:
Cambridge
and the Latin
America:	The	Rise	of Indigenous	Movements	and	thePostliberal
University
Press.
