Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements: An Interview with Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile, a Leader within Brazil’s O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST)
Jeff Garmany
Department of Geography and Regional Development, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; garmany@email.arizona.edu
Fla ́via Bessa Maia
Department of Geography, University of Sa ̃o Paulo (USP), Sa ̃o Paulo, SP, Brazil; flabmaia@gmail.com
Having first emerged over 25 years ago, O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST) has grown to become what many consider the largest and, according to Wendy Wolford and Angus Wright (2003:xv), “most important” social movement in Latin America today. Organized around securing land rights for Brazil’s camponeˆs population (peasant or landless rural workers), the MST seeks agrarian reform in a country where 45% of the agricultural land is controlled by only 1% of the population (Lerrer 2003:27). By occupying unproductive land, MST squatter settlements (called assentamentos) pressure the federal government to enact a constitutional amendment providing agricultural land reform. The MST’s actions have been notably successful, having secured well over 1000 settlements for formerly landless rural workers (Wolford 2004:412).
While the movement’s leadership base is remarkably decentralized, the most prominent MST leader in the public eye is undoubtedly Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile. As an academic activist, his numerous publications, interviews, and public appearances have made him the most recognized face of the MST. Among the many written works he has published, Brava Gente (Stedile and Fernandes 1999) stands out as one of the more widely read and “most comprehensive sources on the
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
188	Antipode
movement” (Wolford and Wright 2003:356). The book is composed of a series of interviews between him and Bernardo Manc ̧ano Fernandes, a Brazilian geographer at the State University of Sa ̃o Paulo (UNESP).
In July 2006, we had an opportunity to conduct an updated interview with Stedile in Sa ̃o Paulo. This interview comes seven years after the publication of Brava Gente, situating the MST within the current Brazilian political setting, and has been translated for English-speaking audiences. Further, our interview has important ramifications for spatial theory and social movements, as our questions to Stedile focused upon the importance of space and the movement’s ideological conception of territorial occupation. What follows are some excerpts from our hour-long discussion, the entirety of which was far too lengthy to be published as an intervention. For an extended, continued excerpt from this conversation, please see Garmany and Maia (2007).
Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile (JPS): In the political struggle for the land we’re always disputing, like you say, a space. For example, we occupy a latifu ́ndio1 that has a power as a place where people reside, work, live, and create a family. But in the head of a camponeˆs there doesn’t exist this idea of “space”. He thinks, “I want to have a place to live, a place that gives me security, where I can raise my family and where no one will bother me”. Then the camponeˆs begins to have a small feeling of individual sovereignty: “here I have autonomy, here I can develop my production, here I can have my culture, and here I can be a person”. This is what’s in his head. And when we go to public spaces, on the roadways and city walkways, I think that there’s a mentality within the movement that has grown throughout the long period of this political struggle that we always need to go with a lot of people. When there are a lot of us, we have the sensation that we can occupy that space because deep in that space are the people, and it’s a public space. Now when we have only a few people, we’re afraid. We know that it isn’t ours and that there exists an institutionalized power that controls that space. So the only way that we can secure public space is when we have a lot of people. If not, we don’t even try.
There has also been much debate within the movement in recent years to envision schools as a public space, and now we’re also using the expression “occupy” the school. Or stated differently, the school is a very public space and the people have the right to control it and to guarantee that their children frequent it. This vision of school includes not only access to the physical space itself, but to the knowledge of society. So we fight so that the children have guaranteed schooling and so that we can also study there. Within the movement there is this mentality, this philosophy, that everyone must
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements	189
continually be studying. And, for this to happen, we have to occupy the school.
Jeff Garmany and Fla ́via Bessa Maia (JG/FBM): Then considering this idea of the occupation of space, do you think the movement is trying to change, or perhaps reprogram space in this way? Is there something that the movement does to try to change the mentality of the people within the spaces of the MST?
JPS: Like I told you before, we don’t have a lot of political debate in terms of the significance that a territory or a space has. Still, in the past we looked at a settlement mostly as a piece of land to work upon. Now we are taking into account that a settlement is more than that: it is a territory where we can have autonomy not only to produce, but also to reproduce our culture, our family, and as such, to construct our own values. And more recently we have also incorporated this debate together with the fight against agribusiness and the transnationals for the control of seeds, for the control of water, and for the control of biodiversity. Five, six years ago nobody within the movement considered this issue. Well, international financial capital came to dominate Brazilian agriculture and began to dispute the water; it wanted to privatize the water, it wanted to import transgenic seeds, it wanted to control biodiversity, and it wanted to take possession via patent laws. So the camponeˆs movement reacted and woke up! Now we’re realizing that to have control over nature and biodiversity is a very important thing, that to have control of the water is a very important thing, and that to have control of the seeds is a very important thing. It’s important for autonomy, for the future of the movement, and for the future of camponeˆs agriculture as such. So I think that deep down these contradictions and this political clash represent a true class struggle. On one side is the camponeˆs model, and on the other, the model of agribusiness that is an alliance here in Brazil between the large capitalist farmers and the transnationals. There is a permanent clash between these two visions of agriculture, and this clash is generating a consciousness in the camponeˆs movement that disputing the territory is needed; that it’s needed to dispute biodiversity and that it’s needed to have control over these resources that should be at everyone’s disposal.
JG/FBM: In regards to this issue of class struggle, between that of labor and capital, do you think there exists for the MST a profound difference, or perhaps an important difference, between urban and rural contexts?
JPS: The majority of the gravest social problems that we have in Brazil are inter-related. They have a common cause which is the super- exploitation of labor. Thus, this super-exploitation, which has increased in the last 15 years under neoliberalism, has created the three principal sicknesses that affect the social body of Brazil. The first is poverty.
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
190	Antipode
And what are the origins of poverty? The origins of poverty are in the concentration of landed property. It’s in the concentration of the means of production in the city. And if you were to look at the owners of the means of production in the city, you’d see that they’re also the owners of the land in the countryside. The dominant class is the same. It’s been mixed.
The second sickness is social inequality. Brazil, as you know, has the most unequal society on the planet. There’s a tremendous difference between the poor and the millionaires here. And it’s getting even worse today. And if you look again to where the roots of this inequality are, they’re in the ownership of the land, they’re in the methods of production and in the wealth that has been accumulated throughout our history. And now it’s getting worse with the third sickness which is unemployment. Unemployment in Brazil has transformed into a structural problem. It’s no longer like in the industrial capitalism of Marx’s era that earned the nickname “the army of the industrial reserve” because it was part of the logic of capitalist accumulation to always have a small, rotating contingent that kept salaries low. Not today. Today it’s structural. Twenty to twenty-five percent of the Brazilian population cannot find work, which is now common for counties on the periphery. And the cause is not an underqualified labor force; it’s the logic of the model. In this stage, under this model, you don’t need to exploit the labor of everyone. At most they’re exploited for their consumption needs; for them to consume electricity, for them to consume water, but not for labor. So, evidently there is an intrinsic tie between the problems of the city and the problems of the countryside.
In the beginning the MST thought that poverty and social inequality could be resolved simply by occupying land and trying to democratize the latifu ́ndio. Now we’re being forced to realize that the problem is larger. And as such, the economic model needs to change. This is the stage that the Brazilian society is now living in. And, right now, we have a concrete problem. There is the neoliberal economic model that allows finance capital and transnational corporations to dominate our society. So we have to fight that and implant another model, or at least a transitional one that fundamentally has at its base a solution to the problems of people in society. To guarantee work, guarantee land, guarantee shelter, guarantee school. But if the problem nowadays is the model, obviously the camponeses alone can’t change it. We are a fragile force. In order for agrarian reform to advance in Brazil, so that camponeses can continue to produce, the agribusiness model must be knocked out. A change in the model as a whole is needed. So the camponeses need to join with the urban social movements, to generate an energy, a confluence of forces that permit a revival of the proletariat in Brazilian society and remove this minority that is exploiting us even more everyday.
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements	191
And so this is where we are today. It explains why the MST continues to occupy latifu ́ndios today; latifu ́ndio occupation today, for the rural poor, is necessary for survival. If not, they would have to go to the city and that would be the end of them as a class. But only occupying latifu ́ndios doesn’t defeat the model. So the MST must combat their larger enemy which is the banks, the transnationals, the model itself; we must align ourselves with the people of the city. Today we’re putting a lot of energy into constructing spaces of conversation with different social movements, and we’re trying to create a unity, not an alliance, but a unity between the various camponeˆs movements.
Endnote
1 A large agricultural estate or plantation.
References
Garmany J and Maia F B (2007). Resistance and social reform in Latin America: speaking with Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile of Brazil’s “O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra” (the MST). Journal of Latin American Geography 6(2)
Lerrer D (2003) Reforma Agra ́ria: Os Caminhos do Impasse. Sa ̃o Paulo, SP (Brazil): Editora Garc ̧oni
Stedile J P and Fernandes B M (1999) Brava Gente: A Trajeto ́ria do MST e a luta pela Terra no Brasil. Sa ̃o Paulo, SP (Brazil): Editora Fundac ̧a ̃o Peseu Abramo
Wolford W (2004) This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94(2):409–424
Wolford W and Wright A (2003) To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Books
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
