Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land: New Forms of Peasant Rebellions
LEANDRO VERGARA-CAMUS
In this article, the author reviews some of the conclusions of the literature on peasant rebellions in the light of current land struggles of the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST) in Brazil and the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) in Chiapas, Mexico. The author argues that conventional explanations of peasant rebellions are inappropriate for the analysis of current land struggles in Latin America in the midst of the process of neoliberal globalization. Neither struggle can be characterized as ‘quasi-feudal’, nor as conservative reactions, but instead should be interpreted as attempts to create a basis for self-subsistence and autonomy. Consequently, the author proposes Marx’s concept of alienated labour as an alternative explanatory concept, because it highlights one of the main objectives of the members of the MST and the EZLN, which is the control over their livelihood through a struggle for their re-peasantization.
Keywords: MST, EZLN, peasant rebellions, subsistence, autonomy
INTRODUCTION
Latin America has a long history of peasant revolts, rebellions and revolutions. The land struggle currently being carried out by the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers’ Movement, MST) in Brazil and the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional (Zapatista Army of National Liberation, EZLN) in Chiapas, Mexico, share many of the characteristics of previous peasant rebellions. Although the MST and the EZLN struggles for land are not social revolutions in
Leandro Vergara-Camus, Centre for Development Studies, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 800, 9700 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands. e-mail: l.a.vergara@rug.nl
I am indebted to Judith Adler Hellman, Lissa North, Cristóbal Kay and Luin Goldring for their insightful guidance, comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this article. I am also grateful to Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, Cliff Welch, Lúcio Flávio de Almeida and Renata Gonçalves, in Brazil, and to Xochitl Leyva-Solano, Daniel Villafuerte, José Luis Escalona and Mercedes Olivera, in Chiapas, for commenting on some of the initial fieldwork findings and hypothesis upon which this article is based. I would also like to thank the three anonymous referees who provided valuable suggestions to improve the final version of this article.The research and fieldwork were funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Ontario Graduate Scholarship and the Faculty of Graduate Studies of York University in Toronto.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
366	Leandro Vergara-Camus
a strict sense,1 their struggle does represent a radicalization of peasant politics that shows both continuities and ruptures with other peasant rebellions studied by a previous generation of scholars (Moore 1966; Wolf 1973; Migdal 1974; Paige 1975; Scott 1976; Skocpol 1982). Both organizations have strongly opposed the imple- mentation of neoliberal policies, questioned the sanctity of private property, chal- lenged the existing power relations in the countryside and have inserted their struggle within a broader perspective of global social transformation.The fact that the MST and the EZLN have adopted forms of political action that privilege social mobilization over military confrontation should not impede us from using the term rebellion to characterize their struggle for land, because it simply shows that peasant movements adopt forms of struggle in accordance with historical circumstances. Even if they justify their actions on the state’s own terrain by linking it to national symbols, the contemporary discourse on democracy and even the constitutional basis of the current political regimes, the MST and the EZLN still seek to radically transform the existing social order. Furthermore, the political practices encouraged within these movements also represent a radicalization of more traditional forms of politics because they emphasize grassroots politicization and participation within the territorial spaces under their control – namely encampments and settlements in the case of the MST and autonomous indigenous communities and municipalities in the case of the EZLN.
In this article, I will present some of the main features of the struggle for land of the MST and the EZLN by looking at the processes and dynamics that have been debated by students of peasant rebellions. This article does not pretend to survey all the different aspects of the struggle for land of the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas. Neither will it attempt to address the whole range of theoretical writing about agrarian structures and peasant agriculture. Its focus is much more modest. It seeks to revisit a few classics of the literature on peasant rebellions because the questions they raise are still relevant if we wish to understand the nature of the struggle for land and the development alternatives of the MST and the EZLN.
Scholars of peasant rebellions have identified the expansion of capitalism and state modernizing policies as two of the fundamental processes triggering agrarian changes that lead to revolts. However, since most studies were conducted during periods when traditional agrarian social structures characterized the countryside, most scholars inserted their analysis of the process of proletarianization within a framework that also attributed a great importance to peasant–landlord relationships, which were seen as quasi-feudal. As will be argued below, this framework is no longer appropriate to study the current resurgence of peasant struggles in Latin America. In the last thirty years, following a continental trend (Kay 1995, 2000), in Brazil and Mexico ‘traditional landlords’ of the kind Moore, Wolf, Paige and Scott
1	According to Theda Skocpol, social revolutions are ‘rapid, basic transformations of society’s state and class structure, accompanied and in part carried through by class-based revolts from below’ and tend to happen at moments of ‘administrative-military breakdown of pre-existing states’ (Skocpol 1979, 287).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	367
wrote about have essentially disappeared.2 Hence, I will argue that the MST’s and EZLN’s struggle for land cannot be explained by referring to feudal-like relation- ships and that consequently we are now witnessing new forms of peasant rebellions. Thus, I will argue that Marx’s concept of alienation, as it theorizes the origin and the specificity of capitalist forms of exploitation, can provide valuable insights in the process of exploitation, resistance and motivation of landless rural workers or land-poor peasants of the MST and the EZLN.
Scholars who have sought to characterize and explain peasant rebellions have mainly focused on four interrelated issues: (i) the conditions giving rise to peasant rebellions; (ii) the social and political goals of the rebellions; (iii) the class compo- sition of the rebellions; and (iv) the reasons explaining the success of the revolu- tionary movement.There is a large body of literature that has focused on identifying and analyzing the political and organizational processes that led to the emergence, development and success of the MST (Almeida and Ruiz Sánchez 2000; Navarro 2000; Branford and Rocha 2002; Welch 2006) and the EZLN (Collier with Quaratiello 1994; Harvey 1998; Nash 2001; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001). Hence, in this article, I will focus mainly on the first three issues.
In the first section of this article, I will describe the neoliberal restructuring of the countryside that has occurred in Brazil and in Chiapas. I will follow with an overview of some of the debates on the goals and the class composition of peasant rebellions. In the last section of the article, I will provide a characterization of the class composition of the membership of the MST and the EZLN and I will propose the concept of alienated labour as a concept that can illuminate some of the broad objectives of both movements.
THE NATURE OF THE CRISIS OF PEASANT AGRICULTURE UNDER NEOLIBERALISM
Most scholars of peasant rebellions (Moore 1966; Wolf 1973, 1999; Migdal 1974; Paige 1975; Scott 1976; Skocpol 1982) agree that modern peasant rebellions are responses to sudden drastic agrarian changes that disrupt the daily lives of peasants, and that trigger economic and political crisis. Focusing on Latin America, Susan Eckstein has also pointed out that the existence or the absence of exit options for peasants was crucial for determining whether or not a revolutionary movement emerged.When impoverished peasants are able to find work in cities or in agri- cultural enterprises, or when they can migrate to other regions, a revolutionary organization will have difficulty in finding recruits. Conversely, if no exit options exist, peasant rebellions are more likely to develop (Eckstein 2001, 46).
At first glance, if we look at the general structural causes that gave rise to the MST and the EZLN, the origin of these struggles for land does not seem to diverge
2	Of course the disappearance of traditional landlords does not mean that authoritarian and repressive labour regimes do not exist in Latin America anymore. There are numerous regions of Latin America, including some regions of Brazil, where coercion still plays an important role in the subordination of peasants or rural workers.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
368	Leandro Vergara-Camus
from previous rebellions. However, the contemporary crises of peasant agriculture can no longer be seen in terms of encroachment upon the non-capitalist logic of isolated peasant villages by the logic of capitalist market relations. Members of the MST and the EZLN, although they partly rely on non-capitalist social relations for their survival, have engaged in capitalist exchanges for a long time, either through the sale of the crops they produce or their labour for a wage. Hence, it is not the expansion of capitalist relations per se, but rather the nature of the restructuring of agriculture that explains the re-emergence of the struggles for land in Brazil and Chiapas.
As has happened in other regions of the Third World, the profound crisis of the peasant economy, exacerbated by growing unemployment in the countryside and in cities triggered by neoliberalism, has endangered the subsistence of peasant families (Bryceson 2000b; Bernstein 2004; Moyo and Yeros 2005), and has led many sectors of the peasantry to embark on a new wave of land struggles. New land struggles have emerged because the neoliberal restructuring of agriculture was accompanied by a dramatic drop in the price of agricultural products, a reduction in employment opportunities due to mechanization and a reinforcement of the process of priva- tizing land rights.The rise of the MST and the EZLN are collective responses to similarly unstable and unfavourable economic conditions for peasant families gen- erated by neoliberal restructuring in Brazil and Mexico in the last decades. However, since Brazil and Mexico adopted very different paths of capitalist devel- opment and state formation, which can be traced back to different regimes of land property rights, the actual nature of the countryside differed.
In Brazil, the twentieth century is marked by the gradual, but inexorable, establishment of absolute private property rights as the basis for further land concentration, commoditization of land, the generalization of wage labour, and the consolidation of a large capitalist sector. As the ruling class was successful in establishing absolute private property in land by the end of the nineteenth century, Brazil developed agrarian structures dominated by a landed class that owned very large commercial plantations that produced for the market mostly on the basis of the labour of tenant farmers, and wage workers. However, alongside these large commercial farms a great variety of rural producers (family farmers, share-croppers, bóias frias [day-labourers], posseiros [squatters], etc.) were involved in agricultural activities. In the sugar plantations of the North-East region of Brazil, the abolition of slavery gradually gave way to a system of tenant farming, where ex-slaves remained as permanent workers (moradores) within the plantations (Martins 2003, 309).At the end of the nineteenth century in the coffee and sugar plantations of the state of São Paulo, planters introduced the colonato system, which combined salaried work, payments of rent in kind or labour, and special arrangements such as the colono’s right to plant subsistence crops between the aisles of coffee trees (Martins 2003, 305–6). Finally, in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paraná, as a result of a deliberate state policy to encourage European immi- gration, a small peasant sector producing a variety of food and cash crops was able to develop (Martins 2003, 310). This sector, however, persisted alongside – and was subordinate to – the large latifundios.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	369
In the late 1960s, the military junta implemented the ‘modernization of agri- culture’ by providing heavily subsidized credit to large capitalist farmers for the production of cash crops such as wheat, soy bean and corn, as well as for cattle ranching. Throughout Brazil, the modernization of agriculture led to increased mechanization in most sectors and the growth of cattle ranching, both of which drastically diminished the need for labour. As a consequence, between 1960 and 1980, 28 million rural workers and peasants were expelled from the countryside (Sparovek 2003, 24) to cities that were unable to provide employment for these newcomers.
In southern Brazil, where the MST emerged, the modernization of agriculture was closely associated with the expansion of soybean production, which saw the rise of the soybean–wheat farmers who cultivated soybeans during the summer and wheat during the winter (Papma 1992, 144). Since capitalist farmers had easier access to credit and were able to purchase tractors and combine harvesters, they were in a better position to benefit from the soybean boom. Medium and even small family producers, on the other hand, were also integrated to soybean pro- duction, but they held a subordinate position in relation to capitalist farmers because they lacked the means to access modern technology (Papma 1992, 149). At one extreme, large ranchers and capitalist farmers thrived during this period. At the other extreme however, most of the posseiros, sharecroppers and rural workers lost their access to land. Caught in the middle, millions of family farmers clung to their small plots but did not have enough land to redistribute to their children who, in addition to working on the family farm, often worked on-and-off as day-labourers on capitalist farms.
In contrast, in Mexico the massive peasant participation in the Revolution of 1910–17 obliged the new ruling class to accept an agrarian reform that created the ejido form of land tenure,3 which represents a political limitation on absolute private property rights over land.4 In turn, the ejido, by impeding the subordination of land to capital, blocked the complete generalization of wage labour and allowed for less polarized agrarian structures, the development of a diversity of forms of production, and the persistence of a peasant economy much more important than its counter- part in Brazil. Subsistence agriculture has always been much more important in Mexico than in Brazil. This said, as in Brazil, from the 1970s the Mexican state has also implemented policies seeking to modernize agricultural production and stimu- late cattle ranching in order to support industrialization.
3	The ejido is a form of land tenure, dating back to colonial times, that was institutionalized after the Mexican Revolution.The ejido refers to a peasant community that has been awarded by the state a title of collective use right over a given territory. However, even if the ejidatario (most often a male) has exclusive right to his plots of land, before 1992, he could not sell his plot or use it as collateral for loans.The exclusive usufruct right over a parcel of land given to an ejidatario is accompanied by political rights and duties.
4	It was only in 1992 that the liberalization of agriculture culminated with amendments to Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution that signalled the end of the agrarian reform and opened the way for the privatization and concentration of land (Moguel 1992; Ibarra Mendívil 1996; Goldring 1996). However, in contradiction to many predictions, in most regions of Mexico, ejido land has not been privatized and most ejidatarios have preferred to cling to their land, which for many of them represents a safety net from falling income.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
370	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Since the 1980s, Brazilian and Mexican agriculture have been transformed by market and trade liberalization, the specialization of production and the dominance of the world food regime by agribusiness. In both countries, transnational agribusi- ness complexes have also filled the void left by the retreat of the state and have increased their involvement and control of the liberalized market. In both countries, processing companies set production standards and conditions, while the banks of agricultural equipment companies, such as John Deere, have become an important source of credit for modernized agricultural producers (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 103; Rubio 2004, 953). In Brazil, however, even though agricultural credits were cut fivefold during the 1980s (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 96), the state continued to intervene in the market throughout the 1980s and the early 1990s by purchasing and stockpiling food crops and maintaining guaranteed prices (Dias and Amaral 2002, 214; Delgado 2001, 47). As a result, large Brazilian capitalist farmers were protected for several decades and are now fully integrated with the transnational agribusiness sector (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 98), as well as with the national supermarket chains (Dias and Amaral 2002, 217). In Mexico, in contrast, between 1981 and 1997 public investment in agriculture decreased 85.7 per cent (Calva 1999, 511), but as Mexico opened its agricultural market faster than NAFTA proscribed it, heavily subsidized agricultural imports from the United States have pushed small and even medium agricultural producers to migrate (Rubio 2004) or into production for self-consumption (Barkin 2002). Only a small proportion of medium producers were able to find a niche in fruit and vegetable markets through production contracts with agribusiness (Barros Nock 2000, 169).
In Brazil and Mexico, small and medium producers, peasants, squatters and rural workers have had to bear the costs of this restructuring. In Brazil, in addition to the already mentioned 28 million rural workers and peasants who were expelled from the countryside between 1960 and 1980, 10 million lost their jobs in the agricul- tural sector between 1985 and 1995 (Carvalho Filho 2001, 196) and it is estimated that another 4 million people abandoned agriculture between 1995 and 1999 (Petras and Veltmeyer 2003, 75).5 Similarly in Mexico, the number of profit-making agricultural producers dropped from 4 million producers in 1994 to only 300,000 in 2000 (Rubio 2004, 955) and in Chiapas, according to official data, the percentage of municipalities considered of ‘high’ and ‘very high’ marginalization went up from 63.06 per cent of all municipalities in 1995 to 93.16 per cent in 2000 (Gobierno de Chiapas 2003, 27).
In Chiapas during the 1980s, poor indigenous peasants experienced the crisis through a drastic drop in the price of maize and coffee, the two crops from which they derived their monetary income. INMECAFÉ, the state corporation that regulated, financed and purchased coffee production, was privatized in 1989 in the midst of the worst coffee crisis that saw prices fall by 50 per cent in a year, leaving thousands of small and micro producers loaded with debt and without access to credit (Harvey 1995, 42–3). Similarly, the price of maize dropped drastically to the
5	However, smallholder production was far from being eradicated because up to 1995 as much as 69.8 per cent of all production units in Brazil cultivated an area of less than 20 hectares (Buainaim et al. 2003, 322).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	371
extent that in 1987 43 per cent of maize producers were operating at a loss.The number jumped to 65 per cent in 1988 (Harvey 1995, 44). As a consequence, in all regions of Chiapas, this crisis propelled an even more dramatic struggle for land.
In the Lacandona jungle, where the EZLN emerged, the low price of coffee and maize came to exacerbate the already abrasive land conflict between indigenous peasant communities and the state, which dated back several decades. First, President Gustavo Díaz Ordáz (1964–70) promulgated a decree promising ejido titles to the peasants that would colonize and settle in the Lacandona jungle. Then in 1971, his successor, Luis Echeverría (1970–6), halted the possibility of gaining access to land through colonization by attributing 614,321 hectares of the jungle to only 66 families of Lacandon Indians and cancelled the rights of 26 indigenous communities of other ethnic origins that had recently settled in the area (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 113).The indigenous settlers, whose lands were now endan- gered by the decree, did not want to relocate and began an arduous struggle against the government. Subsequently, in 1979, President José López Portillo (1976–82), through another decree, created the ecological reserve of Montes Azules, which meant another relocation of hundreds of indigenous peasant settler communities, and the revocation of their ejido titles.This threat against their land rights in the context of a deep economic crisis was at the root of an important process of communal organization and mobilization that culminated in the development of the EZLN (Harvey 1998, 68–90). Hence, in 1989, when President Carlos Salinas de Gortari (1988–94) granted ejido titles to 26 ‘illegal’ communities settled within the Montes Azules bio-reserve (Collier with Quaratiello 1994, 78), it was, for most of them, too little too late.The state had lost the little legitimacy it had enjoyed in the eyes of the peasantry, had become a class enemy and had effectively been replaced by the EZLN, which was at the time still a clandestine organization (see Collier with Quaratiello 1994, 51).
Thus, beyond some important differences between the conditions and develop- ment of the Brazilian and Mexican countryside, the modernization of agriculture in Brazil and the neoliberal restructuring of the 1980s in both countries led to a crisis of peasant agriculture and the marginalization of peasants and rural workers. In turn, this crisis created favourable conditions for the emergence of the struggle for land by the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas. In the case of the MST, the land struggle started before the implementation of neoliberal policies, but neoliberal restructuring gave it a second impulse and has allowed the MST to continue growing nationally until today. In the case of the EZLN, neoliberal restructuring exacerbated an already existing local land conflict between indigenous peasant communities and the state.The deepening of the economic crisis of the Chiapan countryside has allowed the EZLN to expand its social base outside the initial geographic area of the Lacandona jungle, but only into regions within the state of Chiapas that are populated by indigenous subsistence peasants.
In this context, for marginalized families, access to land represents a kind of ‘insurance policy’ against neoliberal restructuring. In Brazil and Mexico, particularly in Chiapas, the economic crisis reached such a degree that the struggle for land by poor families is now geared toward the simple and dramatic issue of securing their
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
372	Leandro Vergara-Camus
subsistence. In both countries, maintaining or gaining access to land, and thus reclaiming the peasant condition (i.e. re-peasantization), is a political strategy adopted by some sectors of the subaltern classes to resist the ongoing crisis, because they do not see rural–urban exodus as a desirable option.6 However, the Zapatista struggle, because it takes place in a region with little market penetration, where land is not yet commoditized, is mainly a struggle to maintain and re-invent communal rights as a basis of the peasant economy. In contrast, the MST’s struggle, which takes place in a countryside that has long been organized under a capitalist logic, represents a struggle to re-create a space for subsistence based on a peasant economy in times of structural crisis.This focus on subsistence is where both movements are similar in their response to neoliberal restructuring. MST settlers, however, see subsistence and food production for self-consumption as the first stage of a process leading to modern family farming.
The neoliberal restructuring of agriculture that occurred in Brazil and Chiapas provides the conditions that made revolt possible, but it does not in itself tell us why peasants rebelled only in those two regions and not elsewhere in Latin America. Three factors can help explain the peculiarity of the struggle for land by the MST and the EZLN. First, peasant politics and the state’s response to it in Brazil and Mexico run counter to the recent history of peasant politics elsewhere in Latin America. Peasantries in Latin America have participated in guerrilla movements since the 1960s in Colombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Peru. Over a period of several decades, while guerrilla movements were frequently able to destabilize local oligarchic regimes, they never managed to defeat them completely. As a consequence, peasant movements in Central America have accepted that their demand must remain within the limits of liberal representative democracies instead of challenging them like the MST and the EZLN do. Jeffrey Paige, taking issue with Barrington Moore’s (1966) three routes to modern democracy, argues that Central American failed ‘socialist revolutions from below’ exemplify a fourth route to democracy, because the unintended consequence of these revolutions was the establishment of liberal democratic regime (Paige 1997, 316, 329–32). In contrast, Brazil and Mexico are two countries where the state managed to suppress guerrilla movements very early on in the 1960s and 1970s.The Brazilian and the Mexican states were also able to develop or maintain successful corporatist structures in the countryside until the early 1980s (Houtzager 1998; Villafuerte et al. 1999, 154). Hence the demise of these corporatist structures, due both to the implementation of neoliberal policies and the challenge of a new wave of peasant movements, has led to the radicalization of peasant politics two decades later than in other Latin American countries.
Second, the absence of an exit strategy for peasants and rural workers in Brazil and Chiapas provided further impetus for this radicalization of peasant politics. In the case of Brazil, the mere size of the rural population expelled from the coun- tryside eliminates the possibility of speaking of any kind of significant exit option.
6	It is important to note that in Mexico migration to the US has replaced migration to the city as an exit solution, but until very recently this option was not as common among indigenous peasants in Chiapas as it has been in other indigenous regions of Mexico.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	373
For many peasant families wanting to remain on the land, the choice was simply between social marginalization in cities and land occupation with the MST and other peasant organizations. The same is true for indigenous regions of Chiapas. Sources of local off-farm work that had traditionally been important for the subsistence peasants of the Lacandona jungle and for other indigenous regions of Chiapas became ever scarcer as a result of the development of cattle ranching from the 1970s and the coffee crisis of the 1980s. Moreover, in contrast to other indigenous regions of Southern Mexico, in Chiapas migration to the United States did not replace migration to the city as an exit strategy. In 1995 Chiapas was still ranked 27 out of 32 Mexican states in terms of the amount of remittances received from abroad, as indigenous peasants continued to rely more on their kinship network and community for their survival than on migration.7
The third factor distinguishing the experience of the MST and the EZLN from other peasant organizations in Latin America arises from the role played by these peasant movements in the radicalization of peasants and landless rural workers. As was mentioned in the Introduction, there is an extensive literature that has looked at the role of the MST and the EZLN in the politicization and radicalization of rural producers. For the purpose of this article, I simply want to underline how crucial the control of a territorial space by the MST8 and the EZLN has been for the successful politicization and radicalization of their membership. Joel Migdal emphasized that peasant revolutions could emerge only if a revolutionary organi- zation filled the political vacuum created by the decline of traditional village institutions and leaders. For him, peasants would be ready to join a revolutionary organization if it was able to offer concrete solutions to their problems, provide them with material rewards or services, or allow them to reach longer-term goals (Migdal 1974, 237–52). Barrington Moore, on his part, highlighted the importance of the ‘types of solidarity arrangements among the peasants . . . insofar as they constitute focal points for the creation of a distinct peasant society in opposition to the dominant class and as the basis for popular conceptions of justice and injustice that clash with those of the rulers’ (1966, 479). However, he seemed to suggest that the type of solidarity arrangements was more the result of the agrarian structure of a peasant society and less the fruit of the efforts of peasant organizations. The experience of the MST and the EZLN show that by controlling a territorial space – the encampment and the settlement in the case of the MST and a whole network of indigenous communities in the case of the EZLN – these organizations were able
7	This trend has been reversed since the mid-1990s, but in 2003 Chiapas still accounted only for 2.97 per cent of the total amount of remittances sent to Mexico from the United State (Villafuerte 2005, 473). Migration is now an important phenomenon in indigenous regions of Chiapas. However, to my knowledge, there are as yet no reliable data or studies on migration of indigenous peoples in Chiapas. The magnitude of the phenomenon is hence difficult to evaluate. The data collected by Villafuerte, for instance, show that two-thirds of remittances are received by families living in municipalities that are predominantly non-indigenous, and his data do not show how the remaining third is distributed nor the amount of remittances indigenous municipalities receive (see Villafuerte 2005, 479).
8	For a theorization of the importance of the control of a territorial space for the struggle of the MST, see Fernandes (2005).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
374	Leandro Vergara-Camus
to replace the state and provide peasants with political representation and basic services (Robles 2000; Fernandes 2005;Vergara-Camus 2009; Burguete Cal y Mayor 2003). From these ‘autonomous rural communities’ they were able to develop a radical understanding of politics and social change based on the re-creation or strengthening of the bonds of solidarity among peasants and landless rural workers. Very few peasant movements in contemporary Latin America have achieved a similar control over a territorial space that can be translated into a powerful tool for social mobilization. When they have achieved that control, like the indigenous movement in Ecuador, the actions of peasant movements have yielded impressive political results (see Perreault 2003).
PEASANT REBELLIONS: CONSERVATIVE OR REVOLUTIONARY?
Most authors have highlighted that peasant rebellions are often accompanied by – or rooted in – profound moral outrage responding to a sudden increase in levels of exploitation or insecurity. Scott emphasizes the suddenness of the shock these changes create because they are more likely to be seen as a ‘sharp moral departure from existing norms of reciprocity’ (1976, 194). In the case of Latin America, Eckstein has noted that peasants will take the risk of direct confrontation only when the injustice against them is perceived as intolerable, and when local and national institutions and cultural conditions, such as strong kinship and ethnic and cultural bonds, lead peasants to struggle collectively (Eckstein 2001, 15).
However, because peasants revolt it does not mean that their objectives are necessarily revolutionary ones. Scott’s view of the peasant village dynamic, for instance, led him to argue that peasant revolts were ‘best seen as defensive reactions’ (Scott 1976, 10). According to Scott, the moral claim to subsistence is not revolu- tionary because it rests on the norm of reciprocity that links poor peasants with the ruling elite in the village or the region, which obliges the ruling elite to secure and promote the well-being of the lower classes (Scott 1976, 189). As we have seen, Migdal in contrast to Scott did not see peasant rebellions as a priori conservative or even inclined toward reforming the traditional order.
As has been the case with past peasant rebellions, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN also come to the fore through a moral discourse.This discourse is the foundation of the Sem Terra and Zapatista demand for land. In both cases, we find a conception of justice, based on a moral understanding in which land is understood as a right that does not necessarily depend on – or that goes beyond – the existence of a legal framework. In other words, in a fashion that is reminiscent of Scott’s argument, for the Sem Terra and Zapatistas, subsistence needs and the right to a dignified life take precedence over legality (Meszaros 2000;Van der Haar 2001).
However, the struggles of the MST and the EZLN go far beyond the defensive character that James Scott (1976) attributes to peasant revolts. Indeed, in Brazil and Chiapas, one of the first institutions of the capitalist society to be challenged by the struggle of the MST and the EZLN is private ownership of land.The legitimacy of private ownership of land, particularly if it is perceived as constituting a latifundio, is assessed through a moral understanding of justice. Land concentration, regardless
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	375
of its legal character, is considered unjust because it blocks the access of poor people to a decent livelihood. Within this perspective, for Sem Terra and Zapatistas, the right to land is associated with a right to live with dignity, understood as a fundamental human right and thus as having supremacy over property rights. Moreover, this claim to the right to land for subsistence reasons is not directed at traditional landlords or village elites, as Scott would have it.The land struggles of the MST and the EZLN are not struggles demanding that elites live up to their moral obligations towards their subordinates. On the contrary, both movements seek to fundamentally transform or even transcend that relationship by empowering their membership through the creation of ‘autonomous rural communities’ (Robles 2000; Burguete Cal y Mayor 2003;Vergara-Camus 2009).These ‘autonomous rural com- munities’, who practice self-governance over a great variety of issues and break away from traditional forms of subordination, allow their members to secure and protect their access to land and hence resist the full commoditization of land and moneta- rization of relations of production (Vergara-Camus 2007).
More importantly, this non-correspondence between the characteristics of the land struggle of the MST and the EZLN and Scott’s conclusions highlights one of the major limitations of the conventional studies of peasant rebellions in general. Although analysing the impact of the expansion of capitalist relations and state modernizing policies on peasant communities, most scholars of this specific litera- ture continued locating peasant rebellions within rural contexts in which the subordination of peasant to traditional landlords was one of the central forms of exploitation and domination. Scott, more than any of the others, is a good example of this reliance on an underlying feudal-like model. The consequence of the adoption of a feudal model to analyze peasant rebellions is to over-emphasize the conservative character of peasant rebellions, by arguing that peasant rebellions aim mainly at re-establishing a social order ex ante, characterized by a submissive relationship to landlords.
The feudal-like model is inappropriate to analyse the land struggle of the MST and the EZLN because traditional ‘landlords’ – i.e. those who extract rent from tenant farmers or labour services from squatters in exchange for usufruct rights – have lost most of their economic and political power (Kay 1995, 2000) or are far from being the main class enemy of these movements. In Brazil, traditional landlords have transformed themselves into large capitalist farmers or have used their access to land to venture into other economic activities (Palmeira and Leite 1998, 122–5). In addition, in many regions of Brazil, traditional landlords have been replaced by non-agricultural enterprises, which have appropriated a substantial amount of land in order to benefit from tax exceptions (Palmeira and Leite 1998, 123).9 As for the existence of a feudal-like peasant culture, in Southern Brazil where the MST
9	A decade ago, a study that looked at the 46 largest latifundios of Brazil by economic sector found that companies from the financial sector owned 22,133,342 hectares of land, those from the industrial sector 19,991,211 hectares and those from the agricultural sector 6,277,169 hectares. In all these cases, the percentage of cultivated land in relation to the whole property remained very low: 17.16 per cent for properties owned by the financial sector, 18.12 per cent for those of the industrial sector and only 14.42 per cent for those of the agricultural sector (Júlio José Chiavenato, cited by Robles 2001, 152).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
376	Leandro Vergara-Camus
originally surfaced, there is no entrenched history of common peasant culture establishing social limitations on the power of landlords.
In Chiapas, in the Lacandona jungle, the region that gave birth to the EZLN, traditional landlords were almost absent, although reminiscences of serf-like rela- tionships persisted in the outskirts of the jungle until the 1970s. The original Zapatista rebel communities of the Lacandona jungle, and even most of the indigenous peasants of the Highlands, were also not inserted within a rural context that resembles the traditional image of the quasi-feudal landlord/tenant model. Indigenous peasants moved into the Lacandona jungle from the 1950s onward and established ejidos of subsistence peasants, which complemented their income by selling their coffee or cattle in the fincas (haciendas) that surrounded the jungle (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 92). These indigenous peasants from the Lacandona jungle were thus subject to exploitation by modernizing landowners, but more as temporary wage labourers or sellers of cattle than as traditional tenants. Furthermore, as was seen, the main source of contention of these communities was not the power of large landowners but rather the arbitrary decisions and policies of the state.10 Traditional landlords did not dominate the landscape in two other regions where the EZLN expanded after the uprising of January 1994. In the Highlands, beginning in the 1960s, traditional Ladino11 landlords had been slowly expelled, whereas in Northern Chiapas, they had modernized their estates by switching to cattle ranching with its characteristic reduced need for labour. In this latter case, which is studied by Aaron Bobrow-Strain (2007), it could be said that the landed class was the focus of the contention, as the numerous land occupations can attest. However, the indigenous peasants that carried out these occupations in the aftermaths of the Zapatista uprising in Northern Chiapas, as elsewhere in the state, were not in their majority members of the EZLN (Villafuerte et al. 1999, 180– 98).12 Bobrow-Strain, following Jeffrey Paige, characterizes these land invasions as classic examples of a ‘land rush’, which occurs ‘when a landed upper class has been critically weakened . . . [It is] a short intense movement aimed at seizing land but lacking long-run political objectives’ (Paige 1975, 42–3 cited by Bobrow-Strain 2007, 148). Hence, in some degree and notwithstanding the important financial compensations they received in exchange for their land, landowners, even if they were not the principal target for Zapatista grievances, ended up on the losing end of the social, political and cultural transformations triggered by the Zapatista uprising at the regional level.
10	However, the experience of semi-servile subordination to a landlord remained a very vivid memory in the minds of older indigenous settlers who moved into the Tojolabal Highlands in the outskirts of the jungle and the North of Chiapas between the 1950s and 1960s (see Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 129–31). This generation obviously had an influence on the class discourse of the Zapatistas.
11	Ladino is the term used in Chiapas and Central America to refer to the local population of European descent or with non-indigenous racial features. 12	Most certainly, the EZLN had some presence in the North of Chiapas before 1994, but its organization was not as consolidated as in the Lacandona jungle. However, since 1994 the EZLN has managed to expand into Northern Chiapas by providing the political organization to protect some of these land occupations.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	377 Searching for a Revolutionary Social Subject in the Countryside
Determining which sector of the peasantry is more prone to adopt revolutionary strategies has been at the centre of many heated debates among scholars of peasant rebellions. Indeed, in his study on the Russian countryside, Lenin argued that middle peasants were a barrier to socialist transformation ‘because of their vacillating nature on the border of subsistence and profit-oriented production, and because of the brake they placed on the development of a home market, given their tendency to be self-sufficient producers’ (Bryceson 2000a, 10). Lenin added that instead landless rural labourers, because of their class position, could be considered allies of the industrial proletariat in a socialist revolution.
Two of the most influential studies on peasant rebellions, Barrington Moore Jr’s
Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World (1966) and Eric Wolf’s Peasant Wars in the Twentieth Century (1973), provided evidence against the argument about the conservative orientation of peasants and the revolutionary potential of rural labourers. For Moore, Wolf and Scott, landowning peasants were more prone to rebel than landless peasants and rural workers (Skocpol 1982, 352). Wolf’s work is more relevant here because, among the three, he is the one who tried to push and refine this argument the furthest.
According to Wolf, poor peasants or landless labourers cannot be revolutionaries because they have no tactical power (Wolf 1975, 268). Only the ‘land-owning middle peasantry’ or a ‘peasantry located in a peripheral area outside the domain of the landlord control’ has sufficient internal leverage to sustain a rebellion (Wolf 1975, 269). But for Wolf it was basically middle peasants, those ‘who work their own land with labour of their own family’, who were the ‘prime movers to rebellion’, because ‘only they possess the degree of autonomy required to initiate political action and to become viable allies for “outside agitators”’ (Wolf 1999, 235). In contrast to Wolf, Jeffery Paige recognized that under particular circumstances peas- ants could radicalize and even engage in revolts, but only to return to their prior conservatism (Paige 1975, 339). For Paige, it was the migratory estate labourers and the sharecroppers (i.e. the poorest sectors of the peasantry) who formed the principal base of revolutionary movements.13
In a contradictory way, the respective positions of Wolf and Paige in the debate over which sectors of the peasantry were more prone to rebel is grounded in different views with regard to the ties that different rural direct producers maintain with land and with their communities. Indeed, Wolf argued that middle peasants were ‘primary movers of revolutions’ also because their children, who are sent to the city to work, maintain their ties to their village and can introduce to the village revolutionary ideas learned in the city (Wolf 1973, 292; 1999, 235). Conversely, according to Wolf, children of poor peasants, once in the city, simply break their ties
13	Other authors, who are probably closer to historical evidence, have shown that successful revolutionary movements have tended to win support from many kinds of rural producers, such as middle peasants, squatters, sharecroppers and migrant labourers, and sometimes even rich peasants and landlords (Goodwin and Skocpol 1994, 262; Wickham-Crowley 2001, 146–7).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
378	Leandro Vergara-Camus
with their family and village (Wolf 1973, 292; 1999, 235). In contradistinction to Wolf, Paige’s analysis of the migratory estate system shows that it is the ties of poor peasants (migrant estate workers) with land and their communities that allow for peasant communities to be drawn into a revolutionary movement (Paige 1975, 361).
At the beginning of the new millennium, experiences as wage labourers in the countryside or in the city are extremely important in the radicalization of landless rural workers in Brazil and subsistence indigenous peasants in Chiapas. I would contend, however, that these experiences are not as important in terms of access to revolutionary ideas – especially not today – as they are in terms of experiences of alienation and marginalization.The long periods of unemployment and on-and-off casual wage work leads poor peasants and landless rural workers to reassess the advantages of having access to land. In the case of indigenous peasants in Chiapas, these experiences with the vicissitudes of underemployment, that are racially medi- ated, reinforce their sense of alienation from Mexican society.
As early as the late 1960s, some Latin American Marxists argued that expelled peasants would not be integrated into the reserve army of labour but would instead enlarge a marginal population (marginal mass or marginal pole) that is permanently unemployed and reproduced through various activities within what has been called the ‘informal sector’ (Kay 2006, 459–62). Following that trend of thought, Cristóbal Kay has recently argued that as a result of the modernization of agriculture during the last thirty years, which has entrenched seasonal work as the main type of occupation in the countryside, ‘most of Latin America’s peasantry appears to be stuck in a state of permanent semi-proletarianization’ (Kay 2000, 132). Indeed, the particularity of the process of industrialization and agricultural modernization in Latin American countries makes it difficult to talk about proletarianization as the main or the only tendency in the countryside, unless by proletarianization one simply refers to the generalization of experiences of wage-labour within various sectors of the peasantry. To the contrary, even in cases such as Brazil where the process of proletarianization of rural direct producers has progressed more rapidly than in other countries of Latin America, the peasant response to the restructuring of agriculture impedes a linear understanding of the process. Hence, land struggles in the context of incomplete proletarianization are products of dynamic processes of de-peasantization/semi-proletarianization/re-peasantization. In this context, rural direct producers, in response to the instability of their wage-earning situation, shift back and forth between the condition of semi-proletarianized rural workers and peasants, combine both for an extended period, and often seek to regain their peasant condition.
THE MST AND THE EZLN: ALTERNATIVES TO IMPOVERISHMENT AND SOCIAL MARGINALIZATION
In contrast to how past peasant rebellions were portrayed by a previous generation of scholars, the social composition of both the MST and the EZLN is very diverse. Indeed most scholars of peasant rebellions differentiate between peasants and rural wage-labourers, associating the latter with the proletariat. As the previous discussion
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	379
highlights, this clear-cut distinction can no longer be made in Latin America, as the great majority of rural producers combine different activities and class experiences, and move from one condition to the other.14 Nevertheless, some distinctions between the social composition of the MST and the EZLN have to be drawn if we want to understand the specificity of their struggle for land.
Since the early 1980s it is possible to identify two fundamental waves of militants. Most of those who make up the first wave struggled for land in the 1980s, have a family history of land possession, and are thus from an unambiguously peasant background. The first wave of Sem Terra were mainly land-poor peasants, landless peasants (sharecroppers or squatters), and landless rural workers who, in the 1970s, because of land concentration and the mechanization of agriculture, had to migrate to other rural areas or to the cities in search of employment.An important proportion of the people who joined the MST in the 1980s were thus former peasants or rural workers with access to land through a family member. Especially in the early 1980s, Sem Terra have, in their past, experiences with subsistence agriculture and non-monetarized relations of productions somewhat similar to those of Zapatista indigenous peasants. However, this does not apply to all the members of the MST, since many of them come from family farming, which especially in the South is much more integrated within the circuit of modern capitalist farming.
The second wave of MST militants is probably more diverse than the first wave, although the proportion of landless peasants, sharecroppers and the like is lower than in the first wave.This second wave of SemTerra is much more clearly made up of landless rural workers, often with no family history of land possession, while the proportion of urban dwellers with little or very distant connection with the countryside is now growing. This last tendency directly contradicts Wickham- Crowley’s argument (2001, 151) that a peasantry that has been landless for some time will tend not to participate in radical movements. In the case of the current second generation of Sem Terra, it cannot be said that their struggle represents a reconnection with a lost peasant past. Their struggle represents more a de-connection from a current experience of urban marginalization. Regardless of the differences between the two waves of landless people, both share the objective of finding a space for subsistence within a peasant economy in the midst of a profound unemployment crisis.The achievement of this goal depends on gaining access to land and, at least in the beginning, producing food for self-consumption (Vergara-Camus 2009). Once this initial phase of survival is completed, MST settlers become much more preoccupied with finding ways to better integrate into the market through the creation of cooperatives, the diversification of production or through participation in the niche market of agro-ecological production.
In contrast, the EZLN is a movement made up of subsistence indigenous peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin, who migrate temporarily to work in
14	This highlights the shortcomings of the attempt to restrict the use of the term ‘peasantry’ only to small independent landowning producers instead of employing it to refer to a class with internal divisions and a diversity of forms of production, which is closer to the lived experience of most peasantries.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
380	Leandro Vergara-Camus
farms and ranches or cities of Chiapas. The Zapatista movement has enrolled communities in the Lacandona jungle, the North, the Highlands, and the Fronteriza regions of Chiapas. The EZLN has not been able to set up alternative political structures in the non-indigenous regions of the state, such as the Soconusco and Central Valley, which are more integrated into the market and where contingents of rural proletarians are larger.
One of the early discussions around the Zapatista uprising in English-speaking academic circles was the debate around whether the Zapatista rebellion was mainly an indigenous or a peasant rebellion. Some authors argue that the Zapatista move- ment is an identity-based movement (Burbach 1994; Gossen 1996). Others empha- size that class still plays a central role in defining the movement (Veltmeyer 1997; Petras and Veltmeyer 2001). The great majority of authors, however, prefer to highlight that identity and class are two fundamental and inseparable social catego- ries that allow us to understand the character of the Zapatista movement (Nash 2001; Harvey 1998; Otero and Jugenitz 2003). Following this latter trend, I argue that the EZLN is an ‘indigenous peasant movement’ whose membership is essen- tially made of indigenous subsistence peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin.
Many authors (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 105–6; Márquez and Legorreta 1999, 11; Villafuerte et al. 1999, 107) have pointed out the existence of two logics within the Chiapan countryside: the ‘peasant logic’, associated with subsistence farming, and the ‘accumulation logic’, associated with commercial farming. Historically, peasant or subsistence logic marked the agricultural practices of indigenous peasants while the accumulation logic dominated among Ladino landowners. According to the great majority of studies, based on a comparison of data from the 1990 agricultural census with the previous decades, the main ten- dency in the Chiapan countryside was toward the encroachment of the subsistence logic by the logic of accumulation (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 89, 92, 128, 137;Villafuerte et al. 1999, 108, 110).
Traditionally in Chiapas, as in many other parts of Mexico, the peasant com- munity, which rests to a great extent on female unpaid labour, assumes part of the burden of the survival of their members that work for a wage and thus makes up for part of the reproduction of the agricultural labour force (Otero 1999, 62). Historically, in order to increase the monetary income derived from the sale of agricultural products, men had to seek wage-labour outside indigenous regions. Most of them left their community for short periods of time to earn money for the rest of the year, during which time women and children worked the family plot. Thus, a significant proportion of Zapatistas have had – and still have – experience with wage-labour in fincas and ranches15 but also in urban centres of the region (Palenque, Ocosingo, Comitán,Villa Hermosa), where they seek any employment16 they can find. Hence, in the face of difficulty, the response by indigenous peasants
15	The young Zapatistas from the Northern fringe of the Lacandona Jungle, for instance, migrate temporarily to Tabasco to work in the lime and lemon plantations during harvest-time in February and March. 16	The construction sector is one of the major employers of temporary indigenous peasant labour in local urban centres (Collier with Quaratiello 1994).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	381
in Chiapas has been to pull back from the market and reinforce the communities, which are built around kinship networks (Earle and Simonelli 2005, 21).
New data from the national census of 2000 suggest that, as a result of more than a decade of economic stagnation, an important tendency toward subsistence agri- culture can be observed in many indigenous regions of Chiapas. According to the census of 2000, in Los Altos, 45.5 per cent of all households do not receive any income.This proportion rises to 68.6 per cent when we add households with less than half a minimum salary. In the North, these proportions reach 48.7 per cent and 65.4 per cent, respectively. In the jungle, they are 46.3 per cent and 60.4 per cent (INEGI 2000). In a recent article,Villafuerte has modified his earlier view on the subordination of the ‘subsistence logic’ to the ‘accumulation logic’ within Chiapas agriculture (2005, 462). He now argues that Chiapan agriculture is going through a ‘terminal crisis’, in which the rise in production for subsistence is among the most important indicators (Villafuerte 2005, 470–2). In sum, the tendency within the peasant economy is thus not toward the expansion and generalization of commercial agriculture. Rather, the phenomenon that can be observed is a ‘retreat movement’ toward subsistence agriculture and activities. More and more peasants, particularly in indigenous regions of the jungle, the Highlands and the North, are retreating, as much as possible, from commercial relations – dedicating only a minimal portion of their activity to this purpose.17
Thus, because it emerged and developed in regions of Chiapas with less pen- etration of capitalist relations, the EZLN is basically made up of indigenous subsistence peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin. Most of the indigenous subsistence peasants are ejidatarios whose plots are subject to demographic pressure and decreasing fertility. The semi-proletarian members of the EZLN are mostly young males without rights to land in their communities, who subsist on their parents’ plot and contribute to the family household in labour or with monetary income from their temporary wage work.
Hence, contrary to García de León’s opinion that the support for the EZLN comes from the ranks of the middle peasants and not from isolated poor peasants (García de León 2005, 514–15), I argue that the majority of Zapatistas are subsis- tence peasants and that fewer can be found within the ranks of market-dependent indigenous peasants. From the testimonies that I collected from Zapatistas during fieldwork, the middle peasants – who in Chiapas would be the more market- dependent indigenous ‘peasant/ranchers’ – joined the movement in the first years of the conflict. Many of these more market-dependent peasants thought that they would improve their situation by benefiting from the concessions that the state would eventually make. When the policy of resistance18 was decided, many of them abandoned the EZLN.The fact that the EZLN is made of poor subsistence peasants
17	However, this tendency is not uniform since, as Burguete Cal y Mayor (1999, 290–5) underlines with regard to the Highlands region, a small privileged sector of the indigenous population is taking advantage of the commercialization and ‘Indianization’ of certain economic activities such as transport, usury lending, flower and coffee production, as well as artisanal crafts/handicrafts.
18	The policy of resistance was a decision that was taken by the EZLN in 1997 to refuse any state funding, programmes or negotiation until the federal government complied with its acceptance of the San Andrés Accords on Indigenous Rights and Culture and ratified it into law.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
382	Leandro Vergara-Camus
explains why so many of the choices that the movement has made on issues of land tenure focus on agricultural production, and micro-development projects are geared to reinforcing self-subsistence and self-reliance (see Earle and Simonelli 2005; Vergara-Camus 2007).
Anti-Capitalist Struggles for Different Forms of Autonomy
In the current context of the profound crisis of peasant agriculture and rural and urban unemployment, and considering the experience that Brazilian and Chiapan direct rural producers have had with the market, Marx’s concept of alienated labour (Marx 1992) is very useful to help us understand the roots of the moral and political claim on land put forward by Sem Terra and Zapatistas.
The starting point of Marx’s reflection on alienation is that all human beings possess a creative capacity and that, in fact, that capacity is what distinguishes human beings from other living creatures (Marx 1992, 328). For Marx, human beings exercise that creative capacity through their labour, by transforming nature and their social environment in an infinite number of ways. Human beings fulfil their creative capacity as long as they control their labour, the labour process and the product of their labour. However, with the constitution of the private ownership of the means of production, whereby labourers are expropriated from their means of subsistence, labourers are obliged to sell their labour power to the owner of the means of production, thus alienating their creative capacity to someone else in exchange for a wage. As a result, human beings are alienated in four ways: (1) from their labour, which is not theirs anymore but belongs to someone else; (2) from the product of their labour, which because it also belongs to someone else presents itself as something external to them; (3) from nature and from their nature as creative beings; (4) from other human beings, who are the subjects behind this process of alienation (Marx 1992, 326–31). In all four forms of alienation, disempowerment and the loss of autonomy are the common denominators.
For Marx, the establishment of private property of land was thus the beginning of a long process of expropriation of the direct producers that he documented for the case of England in his chapter on the ‘So-Called Primitive Accumulation’ in Capital (Marx 1990). Only by cutting off the labourers from the land, as a means from which they secured their subsistence, could the process of commoditization of social life expand, forcing direct producers to become simple wage-workers and giving money a social power it had never had before (Wood 1994).
Because peasants, in all their differences and diversity, are often closer to this original process of expropriation of the means of subsistence and production, they are perfect examples of a class that experiences the genesis of the process of alienation and disempowerment in the course of their lives. Having to seek work in several settings, most members of the MST and the EZLN are also exposed to the insecurity of wage work in a context of high unemployment.
In Brazil, during my interviews with landless people living in encampments or with long-time members of the MST who had been successful in gaining access to land many years ago, the desire to be free of the dependence on someone else’s will
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	383
in the effort to sustain their families came up again and again. Similarly, in Chiapas, in my conversations with Zapatistas, the issue of controlling the pace of work in the field also came to light. Within this context, gaining and protecting access to land means gaining control over their labour and the autonomy of taking decisions on issues of agricultural production. However, as has been argued below, the experi- ences of members of the MST and members of the EZLN are very different, and so are their more concrete objectives. The struggle of landless people in Brazil, for instance, aims at regaining the right to citizenship, while the struggle of the Zapatistas is also an anti-colonial struggle.
In Brazil, one of the most determining experiences of Sem Terra is the prolonged experience of unemployment and underemployment, lived as a situation of com- plete loss of control over their life and of marginalization from society. Because of the negative perception that the rural population in general had of landless people, joblessness has also often been lived as a humiliating experience. In a collective discussion with acampadas and acampados19 in the region of Andradina (SP), one acampada summed up the general feeling:
The struggle for land is a struggle for a dignified life. We are not ‘vagabonds’. We are landless.We want to work the land.When you are working the land, you are producing, you are contributing to society, you are moving forward.
In a very fundamental way, access to land is thus a way of regaining the human dignity that is associated with a productive life, but also with the right to participate in a more just Brazilian society. Because many current acampados and acampadas have lived in cities for relatively long periods of time, Brazilian landless people build this moral discourse on the right to land and the valorization – and idealization – of the peasant condition in contrast to urban life. In many discussions with acampados and acampadas, access to land and life in the countryside had the advantage of securing self-subsistence and a peaceful community life, whereas unemployment, poverty, violence, drug abuse and impersonal relationships were seen to characterize city life. Landless people also emphasized the advantage of having access to the means of subsistence in the countryside as compared with the absence of this resource in the city. Many MST members also associated life in the city with the inescapable power of money:
Luis: Winning land resolves the questions of employment and housing and also of hunger. In the city, without money you can’t do anything. In the countryside, there is always a way to have something to eat.
Dona Lidia: Here I have everything for me to eat. In the city if you don’t have money, you don’t have anything. Here my daughter was able to study. She is a teacher. Do you think that I would have achieved this in the city?
Hence, landless people see access to land also as a way to counter the need for – and power of – money that completely dominates life in the city because this power
19	Acampada and acampado could be translated as ‘squatter’ and are the terms used to refer to the landless people living in encampments or land occupations.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
384	Leandro Vergara-Camus
finds at least some limits when one owns a plot of land.The right to work or to have a decent source of income, both derived from the access to land by landless people, is a right that landless people oppose to the blind functioning of the market.This type of discourse, shared by settlers from the early 1980s and current squatters, is one of the ideological foundations of the struggle for land of the MST. However, this claim on land does not form part of a broader system of customs and traditions that one could associate with a moral economy of the Brazilian peasantry.20 This strong association between land and work is more a consequence of the political influence of progressive clergymen who adopted the ‘preferential option for the poor’ within the Catholic Church and who were key leaders in the rebirth of the landless movement in the early 1980s (Almeida and Ruiz Sánchez 2000, 14; Cadji 2000, 32; Navarro 2000, 37). Indeed, in the 1970s and 1980s, Catholic priests, reframing Marx’s distinction between use-value and exchange-value, promoted the distinction between ‘land for production’ or ‘land to work’ (terra para producir or terra para trabalhar) and ‘land for business’ (terra para negôcio). Regardless of who introduced the formal idea of distinguishing ‘land for production’ and ‘land for business’, the idea struck a chord with many landless rural workers because of their own lived experiences.
However, the MST land struggle is not only for the right to work the land, nor is it only against unemployment and marginalization from Brazilian society. It is also for the right to work autonomously, for the right to control one’s own work, and the product of one’s labour. In many discussions that I had with Sem Terra, the sense of being at the mercy of someone else’s will, of being treated as an object and not as a person, was emphasized again and again. Adão, for instance, expressed this view in the following way: ‘Winning land was a satisfaction because I had always worked for someone else. My work would become the profit of someone else.’ If gaining land was presented as a way out of the humiliation of unemployment and marginalization, it was also seen by landless people as a way to take their destiny into their own hands.
Zapatista subsistence peasants share many of the same experiences of alienation and marginalization that Brazilian rural workers have endured. Pedro, a Zapatista from the Northern fringe of the Lacandona jungle, for instance, had decided to return to the village after having worked for a few months in a modern car parts factory in Monterrey, in Northern Mexico.When I asked him why he came back, he told me that he did not like life in Monterrey, that he preferred life in his village, indeed, that ‘life in Monterrey was not life’. He went on to say how, in his community, he did not have to put up with someone telling him what to do. Life, he argued, was also much slower, much more enjoyable in his community, regardless of the hard times they had to endure.
This type of testimony to the value of peasant village life is probably as old as peasant resistance to industrialization and modernization itself. But in the case of indigenous peasants, in addition to the idea of control over one’s life, it also suggests the attachment of indigenous people to a way of life and, most importantly, a way
20	Some collective practices of peasant solidarity and reciprocity, such as labour corvée called mutirão, have existed within the Brazilian peasantry but have always had minimal effects, and are not as generalized and enshrined in cultural practices as they are in other parts of Latin America.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	385
of looking at life (i.e. a worldview) that clashes with the most alienating experiences of modern urban existence.21 This valorization of village life speaks also to the importance of being peasants and part of a community for the constitution of the indigenous identity in regions like Chiapas. For indigenous peoples in Mexico, ever since the conquest, the community has always been a space of refuge from the city, where indigenous people suffer all kinds of discrimination. In addition, many of the features of colonial domination can still be seen today in the different regions of Chiapas. Indeed, since colonial times, Indian peasants and communities have been maintained in a subordinated position by a landed oligarchy of European descent that controls the local state and the local market. Historically, the ethnic and class domination of Ladinos over Indians was exercised through control of the Indian labour force. The development of market relations since the 1960s reinforced this subordination, because Ladino merchants were also in a position to buy cheaply the agricultural products produced by Indian peasants. In turn, they could sell dearly the consumption products that Indians gradually started to need as a result of the growing commercialization of their agricultural activities (Stavenhagen 1975). Throughout the 1980s, with the obvious intention of avoiding the Ladino mer- chants, many peasant organizations from Chiapas used state credit to attempt to organize their own channels of commercialization or ventured into new activities, such as the sale of art crafts (Nash 2001, 95–102). There were some successful experiences, but the dominance of the market and the state by Ladinos has not been eradicated and many indigenous peasants still see Ladinos or Caxlanes as class oppressors.
Xochitl Leyva Solano (2005) has recently looked at the development of an Indianist movement22 within independent indigenous organizations in Chiapas since the 1970s, which led to the construction of an alliance with the EZLN, and the creation of a neo-Zapatista network. Leyva Solano argues that the current indig- enous discourse emerging from Chiapas is a manifestation of similar ‘claims to recognition’ by indigenous peoples in Latin America and that they can be looked at as claims to ‘ethnic citizenship’, where particular ethno-cultural groups demand the adaptation of universal rights to their collective particularism (2005, 574). In effect, to a great extent the San Andrés negotiations between the Mexican government and the EZLN and the development of rebel autonomous structures of power in Zapatista territory since 1994 are mainly about this issue. However, if we seek to understand the Zapatista struggle for autonomy and self-determination within the context of persisting unequal power relations between Indians and Ladinos, the
21	Of course, this is not to say that indigenous peoples in Chiapas and elsewhere in Latin America reject modernity and are not attracted by modern commodities and technology.Their relationship toward modernity, like that of any other subaltern social group, is certainly a very complex and contradictory one, influenced by capitalist hegemonic discourses. The point here is simply to highlight that alienating experiences in the city often lead to a revalorization of community life in the countryside.
22	Indianismo refers to an ‘ideological and political movement, the objective of which is centred on the liberation of the Indian, not the liberation of an individual Indian but the Indian as a member of indigenous civilization, who lives in the collective memory of indigenous groups, and rather than having been destroyed, waits patiently for liberation’ (Velasco 2003, 122 cited by Leyva Solano 2005, 568).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
386	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Zapatista struggle can be seen as a de-colonization struggle (Burguete Cal y Mayor 1999, 284), as a sort of Indian nationalism articulating the interests of poor indig- enous peasants.This resonance within indigenous communities of the need to right the wrongs of the conquest is why occupations of private land are often presented by Zapatistas as ‘land restorations’ even where there is no concrete history of community dispossession in the particular area where the restoration is taking place. However, as the land restorations of private fincas by Indian communities of the municipality of Las Margaritas in the outskirts of the Lacandona jungle can attest, there are also recuperations that were justified more as an act of justice because their ancestors had been exploited as mozos (semi-servile labourers) in those particular fincas than simply because they were indigenous (Van der Haar 2001, 205).
The indigenous composition of the EZLN gives the Zapatista land struggle a peculiar character.The Zapatista struggle is not only a struggle for land as a source of subsistence and autonomy. It is also a struggle for land understood as a territory, as a space for physical, cultural and spiritual reproduction. In the case of the Zapatistas then, the struggle for land is a struggle to regain control over their labour and the product of their labour, but it is also a collective struggle to take control of their destiny as a people within a reconstituted Mexican nation.
CONCLUSION
As has been shown, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN share many of the features that scholars of peasant rebellions have identified. Notably, as has been the case with many previous peasant rebellions, the MST and the EZLN frame their struggles around a moral discourse that attacks the unjust functioning of the economy confronting the various sectors of the peasantry. However, in both cases, this moral discourse does not arise as a response to the restructuring of traditional relations of subordination between peasants and landlords, but rather as a result of the neoliberal restructuring of the countryside, a phenomenon that endangers the survival of both poor peasants and rural wage labourers.
Hence, the members of the MST and EZLN come from the most impoverished sectors of the Brazilian and Chiapan peasantry that have been hit both by the drastic drop in the price of agricultural products during the 1980s and 1990s and by the reduction and growing instability of temporary wage work experiences in the countryside. In addition, most members of the MST and the EZLN have several years’ experience of wage work in the city, mainly in the informal sector, which is badly paid and highly unstable.
As a consequence, the experiences of alienation and marginalization from society are probably much more important today than they were forty or fifty years ago when Moore, Wolf, Paige, Migdal and Scott analyzed peasant rebellions. For landless rural workers, poor peasants and subsistence peasants, gaining or protecting access to land is a way to regain some degree of autonomy from the cold functioning of the market. Access to land not only allows families to produce food for self-consumption, it also represents a way to regain control over their own life and hence to be in a position to collectively practice an active
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	387
form of citizenship. In the case of the Zapatistas, the exercise of this new citi- zenship requires the recognition of their cultural distinctiveness and the reversal of their colonial subordination. Thus, contrary to what many scholars argued about previous peasant rebellions, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN are not defensive struggles, even though in the case of the Zapatistas demands include re-claiming some of the rights enshrined in the Mexican Constitution after the Revolution of 1910–1917. Both the MST and the EZLN build rural commu- nities, organized around popular and participatory political structures, which have reached significant levels of autonomy from the state. For all these reasons, the land struggle of the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas should be seen as new forms of peasant rebellions.
Theoretically, these features render inappropriate the use of analytical models that study peasant economies through the lens of quasi-feudal relationships. Marx’s concept of alienated labour appears much more fruitful to analyze the struggles for autonomy by landless and subsistence peasant families currently taking place in Brazil and Chiapas. However, it is still useful to look at the agricultural production of MST settlers and Zapatista subsistence peasants in terms of capitalist and non- capitalist dynamics. For these two movements, the existence of spaces of resistance based on subsistence agriculture, which are not completely dominated by the capitalist logic, has permitted the development of responses to the neoliberal crisis of peasant agriculture.These spaces of subsistence have also provided a material basis from which to build something more than ‘economic’ responses. They have allowed the EZLN and the MST movements to envision and implement development alternatives based on alternative models of societies and polities that are rooted in autonomous rural community (Earle and Simonelli 2005; Fernandes 2005; Robles 2000;Vergara-Camus 2007).The right to land, as a means for subsistence and social reproduction, but also as a means to regain human dignity and attain higher levels of autonomy, is at the centre of these development alternatives. Until now, the link between subsistence and development alternatives has not been sufficiently studied. In the face of the continuing crisis of peasant agriculture across the Third World, growing unemployment and the rise of peasant movements, it is bound to become a central political issue.
REFERENCES
Almeida, Lúcio Flávio de and Félix Ruiz Sánchez, 2000. ‘The Landless Workers’ Movement and Social Struggle Against Neoliberalism’. Latin American Perspectives, 27 (114): 11–32.
Barkin, David, 2002.‘The Reconstruction of a Modern Mexican Peasantry’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 30 (1): 73–90.
Barros Nock, Magdalena, 2000. ‘The Mexican Peasantry and the Ejido in the Neo-liberal Period’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 159–75. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Belik, Walter and Luiz Fernando Paulillo, 2001. ‘O financiamento da produção agrícola brasileira na década de 90: ajustamento e seletividade’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 95–120. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/UFRGS.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
388	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Bernstein, Henry, 2004. ‘ “Changing Before our Very Own Eyes”: Agrarian Questions and the Politics of Land in Capitalism Today’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 4 (1–2): 190–225.
Bobrow-Strain, Aaron, 2007. Intimate Enemies. Landowners, Power, and Violence in Chiapas. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Bryceson, Deborah F., 2000a. ‘Peasant Theories and Smallholder Policies: Past and Present’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 1–36. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Bryceson, Deborah F., 2000b. ‘Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour Redundancy in the Neo-liberal Era and Beyond’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 299–326. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Buainaim, Antônio Márcio, Ademar R. Romeiro and Carlos Guanziroli, 2003. ‘Agricultura Familiar e o Novo Mundo Rural’. Sociologias, 5 (10): 312–47.
Burbach, Roger, 1994. ‘Roots of the Postmodern Rebellion in Chiapas’. New Left Review, 205: 113–24.
Burguete Cal y Mayor, Aracely, 1999. ‘Empoderamiento indígena, tendencias autonómicas en la región Altos de Chiapas’. In México: experiencias de autonomía indígena, ed. Arecely Burguete Cal y Mayor, 282–300. Copenhague: Grupo Internacional de Trabajo sobre Asuntos Indígenas.
Burguete Cal y Mayor, Aracely, 2003. ‘The de facto Autonomous Process: New Jurisdictions and Parallel Governments in Rebellion’. In Mayan Lives, Mayan Utopias: The Indigenous Peoples of Chiapas and the Zapatista Rebellion, eds Jan Rus, Hernández Castillo, Rosalva Aída and Shannon Mattiace, 191–218. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Cadji, Anne-Laure, 2000. ‘Brazil’s Landless Find their Voice’. NACLA Report on the Americas, 33 (5): 30–5.
Calva, José Luis, 1999. ‘Funciones de la agricultura en el futuro de la economía mexicana’. In La sociedad mexicana frente al tercer milenio, eds Humberto Muñoz García and Roberto Rodríguez, 505–41. Mexico: UNAM-Miguel Porrúa.
Carvalho Filho, José Juliano de, 2001. ‘Política agrária do governo FHC’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 193–223. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/ UFRGS.
Collier, George A. with Elizabeth Lowery Quaratiello, 1994. Basta! Land and the Zapatista Rebellion in Chiapas. Oakland: Institute for Food and Development Policy.
Delgado, Nelson Giordano, 2001. ‘Política econômica, ajuste externo e agricultura’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 15–52. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/UFRGS.
Dias, Guilherme Leite da Silva and Cicely Moitinho Amaral, 2002. ‘Structural Change in Brazilian Agriculture, 1980–98’. In Brazil in the 1990s. An Economy in Transition, ed. Renato Baumann, 204–32. New York: Palgrave.
Earle, Duncan and Jean Simonelli, 2005. Uprising of Hope. Sharing the Zapatista Journey to Alternative Development. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.
Eckstein, Susan, 2001. ‘Power and Popular Protest in Latin America’. In Power and Popular Protest. Latin American Social Movements, ed. Susan Eckstein, 1–60. Berkeley, CA: University Press.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano, 2005. ‘The Occupation as a Form of Access to Land in Brazil: A Theoretical and Methodological Contribution’. In Reclaiming the Land. The
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	389
Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Sam Moyo and Paris
Yeros, 311–40. London: Zed Books. García de León, Antonio, 2005. ‘From Revolution to Transition: The Chiapas Rebellion
and the Path to Democracy in Mexico’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3–4): 508–
27. Gobierno de Chiapas-Secretaría de Desarrollo Social, 2003. Desarrollo social en cifras. Tuxtla
Gutiérrez: Gobierno de Chiapas. Goldring, Luin, 1996. ‘The Changing Configuration of Property Rights Under Ejido
Reform’. In Reforming Mexico’s Agrarian Reform, ed. Laura Randall, 271–87. Armonk:
M.E. Sharpe. Goodwin, Jeff and Theda Skocpol, 1994. ‘Explaining Revolutions in the Contemporary
Third World’. In Social Revolutions in the Modern World, ed. Theda Skocpol, 259–78.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gossen, Gary, 1996.‘Maya Zapatistas Move to the Ancient Future’. American Anthropologist, 98
(3): 528–38. Harvey,Neil,1995.‘Rebellion in Chiapas:Rural Reforms and Popular Struggle’.ThirdWorld
Quarterly, 16 (1): 39–73. Harvey, Neil, 1998. The Chiapas Rebelión. The Struggle for Land and Democracy. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press. Houtzager, Peter P., 1998. ‘State and Unions in the Transformation of the Brazilian
Countryside, 1964–1979’. Latin American Research Review, 33 (2): 103–42. Ibarra Mendívil, Jorge Luis, 1996. ‘Recent Changes in the Mexican Constitution and their Impact on the Agrarian Reform’. In Reforming Mexico’s Agrarian Reform, ed. Laura
Randall, 49–60. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe. INEGI, 2000. XII Censo General de Población y vivienda. México: INEGI. Kay, Cristóbal, 1995. ‘Rural Latin America: Exclusionary and Uneven Agricultural
Development’. In Capital, Power and Inequality in Latin America, eds Sandor Halebsky
and Richard Harris, 21–51. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Kay, Cristóbal, 2000. ‘Latin America’s Agrarian Transformation: Peasantization and Proletari-
anization’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 123–38. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Kay, Cristóbal, 2006. ‘Rural Poverty and Development Strategies in Latin America’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 6 (4): 455–508.
Leyva Solano, Xochitl, 2005. ‘Indigenismo, Indianismo and “Ethnic Citizenship” in Chiapas’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3 and 4): 555–83.
Leyva Solano, Xochitl and Gabriel Ascencio Franco, 1996. Lacandona al filo del agua. México DF: CIESAS-UNAM-Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Márquez Rosano, Conrado and Carmen Legorreta, 1999. Colonización, apropiación del territorio y desarrollo sustentable en la Selva Lacandona, Chiapas, México. Paper for the Workshop ‘Land in Latin America. New Context, New Claims, New Concepts’. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Martins, José de Sousa, 2003.‘Representing the Peasantry? Struggle for/about Land in Brazil’. In Latin American Peasants, eds Tom Brass and Henry Veltmeyer, 300–35. London: Frank Cass.
Marx, Karl, 1990. ‘Part Eight: So-Called Primitive Accumulation’. In Capital. A Critique of Political Economy. Vol. I, 873–930. London: Penguin Press.
Marx, Karl, 1992. ‘Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts (1844)’. In Early Writings, 279–400. London: Penguin Press.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
390	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Meszaros, George, 2000. ‘Taking the Land into their Hands: The Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian State’. Journal of Law and Society, 27 (4): 517–41.
Migdal, Joel, 1974. Peasants, Politics, and Revolution. Pressures toward Political and Social Change in the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Moguel, Julio, 1992. ‘Reforma constitucional y luchas agrarias en el marco de la transición salinista’. In Autonomía y Nuevos Sujetos Sociales en el Desarrollo Rural, eds Julio Moguel, Carlota Botey and Luis Hernández, 261–75. México: Siglo XXI.
Moore Jr, Barrington, 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press.
Moyo, Sam and Paris Yeros, 2005. ‘The Resurgence of Rural Movements under Neoliber- alism’. In Reclaiming the Land. The Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Sam Moyo and Paris Yeros, 8–64. London: Zed Books.
Nash, June C., 2001. Mayan Visions. The Quest for Autonomy in the Age of Globalization. New York: Routledge.
Navarro, Zander, 2000. ‘Breaking New Ground Brazil’s MST’. Nacla Report on the Americas, 33 (5): 36–9.
Otero, Gerardo, 1999. Farewell to the Peasantry. Political Formation in Rural Mexico. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Otero, Gerardo and Heidi A. Jugenitz, 2003. ‘Challenging National Borders from Within: Political Class Formation of Indigenous Peasants in Latin America’. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 40 (5): 503–24.
Paige, Jeffery M., 1975. Agrarian Revolution. Social Movements and Export Agriculture in the Underdeveloped World. New York: The Free Press.
Paige, Jeffery M., 1997. Coffee and Power. Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in Central America. Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Palmeira, Moacir and Sérgio Leite, 1998. ‘Debates econômicos, procesos sociais e lutas políticas’. In Política e reforma agrária, eds Raimundo Santos and Luiz Flávio Carvalho Costa, 92–165. Rio de Janeiro: MAUAD Consultoria e Planejamento Editorial.
Papma, Frans, 1992. Contesting the Household Estate. Southern Brazilian Peasants and Modern Agriculture. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Perreault, Thomas, 2003. ‘Community Organization, Agrarian Change, and Politics of Scale in Ecuadorian Amazon’. Latin American Perspectives, 30 (1): 96–121.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer, 2001. ‘Are Latin American Peasant Movements Still a Force for Change? Some New Paradigm Revisited?’ Journal of Peasant Studies, 28 (2): 83–118.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer, 2003. Cardoso’s Brazil: a Land for Sale. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publisher.
Robles, Wilder, 2000.‘Beyond the Politics of Protest:The Landless Rural Workers Movement of Brazil’. Canadian Journal of Development Studies, XXI (3): 657–91.
Robles, Wilder, 2001. ‘The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) in Brazil’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 28 (2): 146–52.
Rubio, Blanca, 2004. ‘La fase agroalimentaria global y su repercussion en el campo mexi- cano’. Comercio Exterior, 54 (11): 948–56.
Scott, James, 1976. The Moral Economy of Peasants. Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Skocpol, Theda, 1979, States and Social Revolutions. A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skocpol, Theda, 1982. ‘What Makes Peasants Revolutionary?’ Comparative Politics, 14 (3): 351–75.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	391
Sparovek, Gerd, 2003. A qualidade dos assentamentos da reforma agrária brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas e Letras Editora e Gráfica.
Stavenhagen, Rodolfo, 1975. Social Classes in Agrarian Societies. New York: Anchor Books. Van der Haar, Gemma, 2001. Gaining Ground. Land Reform and the Constitution of the Community in the Tojolabal Highlands of Chiapas, México. Amsterdam: Rozenberg Publisher. Veltmeyer, Henry, 1997. ‘New Social Movements in Latin America: The Dynamics of Class
and Identity’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 25 (1): 139–69. Vergara-Camus, Leandro, 2007. ‘Neoliberal Globalization, Peasant Movements, Alternative
Development and the State in Brazil and Mexico’. Unpublished PhD Dissertation,York
University, Toronto, Canada. Vergara-Camus, Leandro, 2009. ‘The Politics of the MST: Autonomous Rural Communities,
the State and Electoral Politics’. Latin American Perspectives, 26 (3). Villafuerte Solís, Daniel, 2005. ‘Rural Chiapas Ten Years after the Armed Uprising of 1994:
An Economic Overview’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3 and 4): 461–83. Villafuerte Solís, Daniel, Salvador Meza Díaz, Gabriel Ascencio Franco, María del Carmen García Aguilar, Carolina Rivera Farfán, Miguel Lisbona Guillén and Jesús Morales
Bermúdez, 1999. La tierra en Chiapas. Viejos problemas nuevos. México: Plaza y Valdés. Welch, Cliff, 2006. ‘Movement Histories: A Preliminary Historiography of Brazil’s Landless
Labourers Movement (MST)’. Latin American Research Review, 41 (1): 198–210. Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P., 2001 [1989]. ‘Winners, Losers, and Also-Rans: Toward A Comparative Sociology of Latin American Guerrilla Movements’. In Power and Popular Protest. Latin American Social Movements, ed. Susan Eckstein, 132–81. Berkeley, CA:
California University Press. Wolf, Eric, 1973. Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century. New York: Harper Torchbook. Wolf, Eric, 1975.‘On Peasant Rebellions’. In Peasants and Peasant Societies, ed. Teodor Shanin,
264–74. Wolf, Eric, 1999. Pathways of Power. Building an Anthropology of the Modern World. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. Wood, Ellen Meiksins, 1994. ‘From Opportunity to Imperative: The History of the Market’.
Monthly Review, July–August, 14–40.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
