Review: [untitled] Author(s): Miguel Carter Source: Journal of Latin American Studies, Vol. 35, No. 4 (Nov., 2003), pp. 907-909 Published by: Cambridge University Press Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3875859 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 20:05
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=cup. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Latin American Studies.
http://www.jstor.org
Reviews 907
Inthelastchapterw,ereturntothetheatreitself.MartinsdeSouzaarguesthatthe
traditionavliew- thatafterthefailureoftherealistmovementtoachieveanylasting
successon the	theatre	fell into a decadencefilled	French stage,	simply	by superficial
importsandtheirimitators- too readilyacceptstheviewsof theintellectualswho dominatedtheConservat6rioI.nfact,someoftheselocaladaptationswerevery successful:onesuchis Orfeunarofab,ytheauthor/actorFranciscoCorreiaVasques,
a	of Offenbach's	aux	itselfa	There	the parody	Otphie	enfers,	parody.	is,
'O Chico', authorargues,a local,eclectictraditionlinkingMartinsPenain the 1830sto Artur
Azevedo at the end of the century. Thisisaveryusefulbook,thoroughlyresearcheda, valuablecontributiontothe
historyofBraziliantheatre.Inmanyways,itisamodelofculturahlistory,admirably placingthe dramain its socialcontext.To my mind,some of the spotlightcouldbe turnedbackontothestage.Itisapitysomeof theworksdiscussedarenotdescribed in more detail,especiallythose dealtwith in the finalchapter,some of which
miraculouslystillexistinlibrariesI. makeno apologyforaregularcomplaint:why do theseusefulbookslackindexes?
UniversitoyfLiverpool	JOHN GLEDSON
J. Lat. Amer. Stud.35 (2003).	DOI:	Io.1oi7/Soozzzl6Xo345704o SueBranfordandJanRocha, CuttingtheIFire:TheStoryoftheLandlessMovemenitn
Brail (London: Latin America Bureau, 2002),	pp. 3o5, ?14.99, pb.
This story has been long overdue. Sue Branford and Jan Rocha, two seasoned
British journalists with commanding knowledge of Brazil, have authored the most comprehensive book to date on Latin America's premier social movement: the Movement of Landless Rural Workers, best known by its acronym MST
Movimentodos	RuraisSem	Since its first Trabalhadores	Terra).	emergence
(in Portuguese, in Brazil's southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul, in 198I, the landless movement
has developed a formidable grassroots organization, with a nationwide presence, an
estimated million members, close to 1,200 agriculturalsettlements, a network of
12,000 primaryand secondary schools, 86 ruralcooperatives and 96 food processing plants. In the last two decades the MST has prodded the Brazilian government to
distribute five million hectares - a territory the size of Costa Rica. After the mid 99o0s,the MST earned fame as a leading critic of the government's neoliberal
policies and a forceful voice on behalf of Brazil's underprivileged majority.
Branford and Rocha provide a far-reaching, lively, empathetic and thoughtful account of the MST. Their narrativebuilds strongly on scores of interviews they
conducted across Brazil with MST participants and leaders, social activists, govern- ment officials, religious authorities and scholars who have studied the movement. Their vivid illustrations and shrewd observations reflect a close familiaritywith the MST.
The book contains fourteen well laid out chapters, grouped in four parts. The first section deals with the historical formation and expansion of the movement. In three chapters, the authors briefly recount the land struggles in southern Brazil that eventually led to the establishment of the MST in 1984; discuss how the movement was organised; and depict the MST's move northwards after its first national
congress in 1985. The subsequent section reviews three moments of the MST struggle: land
occupations, agriculturalsettlements and the movement's activities in the field of
908
Reviews
education. Organising land occupations and landless camps are a crucial MST tactic aimed at pressuring state authorities for agrarianreform. These and other forms of
non-violent action help galvanise the landless struggle and provide a powerful training experience for movement activists. The authors portray this in a vivid, first-hand account of a land occupation in the northeastern state of Pernambuco. Agricultural settlements are formed once the government allocates land to the farmers.Though less dramatic,this phase presents numerous trialsas the movement strives to find ways of ensuring the survival of these rural communities amidst adverse conditions. Education has been a longstanding cornerstone of the MST and is reflected in its Paulo Freire-inspired pedagogy for consciousness-raising in the landless camps, schools for children, adultliteracyprojects and trainingprogrammes for activists.
The next section discusses the main challenges confronting the MST in recent
years: violent repression, the hegemonic pretensions of the global food industry, and the onslaught, after 1997, of the Brazilian government under Fernando Henrique
Cardoso. Two chapters offer detailed case studies of police violence against the MST in the Amazonian frontier state of Paraiand in the southern, substantially modern
state of Parani. The Para story provides a gripping account of the April 1996 police massacreof19MSTpeasantsatEldoradodosCarajaisA.notherchapterexamines
the globalisation of Brazilian agriculture, and argues that the MST's attempts to further family farming, small cooperatives and agro-ecology are threatened by the
increasing presence of large-scale, high-tech, agri-business firms. The ensuing two chapters discuss the Cardoso administration'sworried reaction to the MST's highly
successful march to Brasiliain April 1997, and consequent efforts to undermine this movement - namely, by fostering a decentralised, market-based approach to land
reform (detrimental to the movement's capacity for collective action); criminalising a number of MST's protest activities; curtailing state resources for agrarianreform;
and promoting a media campaign to discredit the MST's positive public image. The last section of the book looks at future trends and tests. One chapter exam- ines the MST's gradual, uneven yet growing embrace of agro-ecology. The other probes cultural dispositions within the movement concerning internal decision- making processes, issues of gender and sexuality, and the movement's symbolic
repertoire and mystique. The final chapter views the MST from a broader historical perspective, and compares it to utopian peasant mobilisations and Britain,the United
States and Brazil. The conclusion, though open-ended, is optimistic. It believes the MST's capacity to adapt creatively to new situations will allow it to remain a forceful voice for social change in the years ahead.
Branford and Rocha's book offers a comprehensive coverage of one of the world's
most remarkable peasant organisations. While clearly sympathetic to the MST, its portrait of the movement is honest and balanced. It openly examines a number of
internal MST debates, and presents the views of some of its leading critics. The book's main strength stems from a superb use of interviews and artful display of
testimonies from MST participants. By allowing the protagonists of the story to speak for themselves, the text enhances awareness and nurtures empathy for the
people engaged in this popular movement. Cuttingthe Wireoffers a rich, lively and clear narrative,which makes it an excellent asset for college students.
The authors' great reliance on testimonial evidence, however, makes the book vulnerable to factual slips, romanticised depictions and unfortunate omissions. This is particularly so in their reconstruction of the MST's early history, the weakest
Reviews 909
sectionof thebook.Forinstance,contraryto whattheauthorsassert:thepriestwas neverarrestedandbeatenbythepolice(p. 19);theMSTleader(notedinp. io and p. 35) was not involved in organisingthe first land mobilisations;and the MST candidatewas actuallyre-electedas local mayor(p. 219). These problemsnotwith- standing,BanfordandRochahaveproduceda remarkableaccountof the MST.
In effect,CuttingtheWirehasvigorouslyopenedfrontiersto a fascinatingresearch topic for studentsof LatinAmerica.
Centre	MIG U EL forBrazilianStudiesO,xford CARTER
J. Lat. Amer. Stud.35	(2003).	DOI:	io.ioi7/Soo0zz26Xo3467047 Stuart F. Voss, Latin Americain theMiddlePeriod,170o-1929 (Wilmington, DE:
SR Books, zoox), pp. xxii+ 296, $65.00, $22.95 pb.
Over the last five years there has been a marked increase in the publication of
concise histories of Latin America, and of specific Latin American countries. The act
of synthesising has become trendy. The rise in students in Latin American studies
has clearly created a demand for user-friendly, jargon-free and easily accessible introductory textbooks. The entire history of Latin America has thus been taken
care of by historians such as John Charles Chasteen, and Benjamin Keen and Keith Haynes. The early and middle periods have been interpreted and made accessible by Peter Bakewell among others. The modern period has likewise been conveniently simplified by Lawrence A. Clayton and Michael L. Conniff, with the added bonus, in their case, of having fictionalised dramatic moments 'to give definition to a
particularage'. This is evidently a profitable market since a number of publishers have embarked upon the ambitious project of publishing whole series of concise
histories aimed at 'first-year undergraduates' and 'non-specialists'. Cambridge University Press, for instance, has a series of concise histories dedicated to specific
countries, which has produced new volumes on Brazil (Boris Fausto) and Mexico (Brian Hamnett). In tandem the University of New Mexico Press's series Diailogos
has popularised specific periods and/or concrete themes such as Independence in
Spanish America (Jay Kinsbruner) or US Capitalism in Latin America (Thomas F. O'Brien), adopting an equally student-led approach. StuartVoss's contribution is a new addition to this recent boom in introductory textbooks. Like the rest, it aims to offer useful tips, highlight the key points of an issue, and encourage the keener student to move on beyond the synthetic introduction.
However, Voss's synthesis merits some praise for its original approach. It is a social history, not a political one. That is refreshing. It focuses on regions rather than capital cities and nation-states. That is also new. And it adopts the periodisation favoured by the most recent (and revisionist) school of historians who view inde- pendence as part of an age of 'democratic revolutions' or 'destabilisation, frag- mentation and reconstruction' rather than the end of the colonial period and the beginning of the postcolonial one. Continuities matter. Change is a slow and complicated phenomenon. Independent Latin America was not so different from Colonial Latin America, at least in terms of the 179os and I83os, and especially in terms of the way regional societies lived. It is Voss's understanding of the dynamics of regional economies, customs, traditions, cultures and geopolitics that ultimately makes this text 'with classroom use in mind' (p. ix), a particularlyinsightful and helpful aide to have at hand. Divided into three parts (The Emergence of a New
