Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
Within and surrounding the Morro do Diabo State Park: biological value, conflicts, mitigation and sustainable development alternatives
Abstract
Claudio Valladares-Padua∗, Suzana M. Padua, Laury Cullen Jr. Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), C. Postal 47, 12960-000 Nazaré Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil
Received 31 August 2001; received in revised form 20 December 2001; accepted 28 December 2001
The Brazilian Atlantic Forest in the State of São Paulo is one of the world most threatened ecosystems, as only 1.8% of its original coverage is left. With a biodiversity that includes endemic species, such as the black lion tamarin (Leontopithecus chrysopygus) a seriously endangered primate, the conservation of forest remnants has become a priority. The non-profit organization Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (Institute forEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ))hasstudiedtheforestinPontaldoParanapanemaandundertakenconservationinitiativessuchasenviron- mental education, community involvement, habitat restoration and the promotion of policies that protect natural areas while simultaneously empowering people to improve their conditions of living. Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) a movement of the land- less, has pressed local landowners and the government to distribute land for landless families, creating conflicts and diminishing the priority of nature conservation. Through transparent and participatory approaches IPEˆ has succeeded in bringing the conservationists and the land- less to work together in the planting of trees. Trees protect water, improve the soil and shield the settlers from environmental damages, while they form corridors for wildlife, buffer zones to protect forest fragments and “stepping stones” to propitiate seed dispersal. This innovative approach to conservation is already seen as an example to be followed in other contexts. © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Biodiversity conservation; Atlantic forest; Morro do Diabo State Park; Land conflict; Environmental education; Agrarian reform settlement; Community projects
1. Introduction
The Morro do Diabo State Park is located in the Pontal do Paranapanema: a wedge-shaped region bounded in the north by the Rio Paraná and in the south by the Rio Parana- panema and marking the westernmost extremity of the State of São Paulo (Fig. 1). Entirely forested, the region was de- creed a protected area, the “Grande Reserva do Pontal”, of 260,000 ha in 1942 (Leite, 1998). Despite this, however, the Pontal has suffered from serious conflicts over landowner- ship and the widespread destruction of its forests for timber and cattle pasture during the last 50 years. Today all that re- mains of the “Grande Reserva” is the Morro do Diabo State Park of 36,000 ha. It is the last significant remnant of Atlantic forest of the interior in São Paulo, where only 1.8% of the original natural vegetation is left. Despite the extensive loss of forest, the conservation of the Morro do Diabo Park and other widely scattered, smaller forest remnants is of enor- mous importance, still harboring the rich and endemic bio- diversity of the region and many of its endangered species.
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: cpadua@unb.br (C. Valladares-Padua).
The non-governmental organization Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas(InstituteforEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ))hasded- icated the past 15 years to protecting the region’s species and natural ecosystems through multidisciplinary projects and programs in research, environmental education and habi- tat regeneration. Based on the results of these programs, the over-arching mission of IPEˆ has been to influence lo- cal, regional and state policies to this end. Notable in the last 5 years has been the need to focus on the Agrarian Re- form Movement that has resulted in a major migration of settlers and small farmers to the Pontal. Many settlements have been established in the vicinity of the Park as well as nearby some other small, but important, forest fragments. The threats represented by this wave of immigrants are ob- vious and a particular challenge has been the integration of these families and the establishment of settlements within a framework that maintains the conservation of the region’s natural ecosystem as a major priority.
One mechanism, which has been given increasing em- phasis over recent years, has been the establishment of agro-forestry practices. They provide for forest regeneration and restoration and at the same time contribute to increased income and improved standard of living for the settler
1462-9011/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1462-9011(02)00019-9
70	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
families. IPEˆ has set up agro-forestry green belts around the forest fragments that provide concrete benefits for the economies of the local communities, so-called “benefit zones” (Cullen et al., 2001b). Direct and immediate benefits include firewood, timber, fruits, grains and animal fodder, relieving the pressure on the forest fragments which would otherwise be rapidly hunted-out and cut. This approach is based on the premise that stimulating the planting and use of multipurpose trees and shrubs (MPTS) along forest edges will contribute to the conservation of the forests and their wildlife. Encouraging a limited exploitation of natural products from these benefit zones will provide the means for people to live in the vicinity of forest fragments without further depleting the local biodiversity.
Agro-forestry workshops and the development of nurs- eries and tree plantations are giving local people the opportu- nities to improve their properties. They are also encouraged to participate in the establishment of regional conservation measures such as the creation of forest corridors, buffer zones and “stepping-stones” (small patches of trees planted to provide a degree of continuity between otherwise isolated forest remnants). This has resulted in a two-fold benefit, the enrichment of the regional landscape and improved pro- tection of the forests from deleterious edge effects and iso- lation. Native trees are planted together with fast-growing trees so as to rapidly provide a forest cover beneficial for the people, the wildlife and the forest fragments.
In this paper, we examine how combining ecological re- search and conservation action can provide direct benefits to both communities and wildlife: landscape conservation
being the underlying objective through the incorporation of social, economic and institutional issues and the collabo- ration of the many segments of local communities. Special emphasis is given to encouraging the participation of and empowering, the local people. Stakeholders particularly have been encouraged to make decisions that incorporate both social and environmental interests.
2. The Atlantic forest
When Europeans first arrived in Brazil in the 16th cen- tury, the Atlantic coastal forest covered more than 1.2 million km2, extending well inland in the southeast and accounting for about 12% of the entire country. These forests have been largely destroyed and those that remain are highly fragmented and total about 7% of the original extent of this biome (Fonseca, 1985; SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE, 1993). The biological diversity of the Atlantic forest is of global significance, containing nearly 7% of the world’s species, many of which are endemic and threatened with extinction (Quintela, 1990). Fifty-one mammal species and 160 birds are endemic, as are 53% of the trees, 64% of the palms and 74% of bromeliad species (Quintela, 1990).
In broad terms, the Atlantic forest can be subdivided into three major regions based on vegetation types and geograph- ical features (Caˆmara, 1993; Eiten, 1974; Mori et al., 1981). The first is the Tropical evergreen mesophytic broadleaf forest, which originally covered most of the eastern slopes of the coastal mountain ranges and lowlands extending
Fig. 1. Map of São Paulo State indicating the Pontal do Paranapanema region.
to the coastline. Mean annual precipitation is around 2000 mm and mean annual temperatures range from 16 to 19 ◦C (Hueck, 1972). Tropical semi-deciduous mesophytic broadleaf forest (Eiten, 1974), also known as the Atlantic forest of the interior or Mata de Planalto (plateau forests), extends to the west, inland in the southeast over the Brazil- ian plateau. Originally covering large areas of the states of Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Paraná, plateau forests have lower annual rainfall (1000–1500 mm) with a pronounced dry season of 5–6 months. These are tall forests despite the reduced precipitation and seasonal- ity and include both evergreen and semi-deciduous species (Eiten, 1974; Alonso, 1977). The third formation, known as mixed forest, is found at high elevations in southern Brazil, where temperatures are seasonally much cooler. The forests there are dominated by commercially-important conifers (Araucaria and Podocarpus). Today only 2–4% of theses forests remain. They are still under threat, with only 0.22% officially protected (Caˆmara, 1993).
Most of the remaining strongholds of Atlantic forest are in mountainous regions along the coast in the southeast of Brazil; very little is still to be found in the plateau region inland (Dean, 1995). Agricultural and industrial develop- ment have resulted in the loss of more than 98% of the forests there, represented today by scattered fragments and totaling a mere 280,000 ha (SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE, 1993). The majority is privately owned. Even though most of these remnants are small and isolated, they still support an outstanding diversity of flora and fauna (Quintela, 1990). Few extinctions have been documented so far, but many can be predicted for the very near future (Brooks and Balmford, 1996).
In the State of São Paulo, the large majority (84%) of the inland Atlantic forest still remaining is in the Pontal do Paranapanema (Fig. 2). In terms of biodiversity conserva- tion, the Pontal is ranked as of highest priority in the con- text of the Atlantic forest (Brazil, MMA, 2000), while also
considered one of the poorest and most underprivileged re- gions of the state and despite the legal measures in place to preserve the remaining forests, undergoing rapid depletion of its natural resources and an accelerating process of envi- ronmental degradation, aggravated by the land reform and colonization underway in recent years (Cullen et al., 2001b).
3. The Pontal do Paranapanema
The Pontal do Paranapanema is one of the poorest regions of São Paulo State. It belongs to the administrative zone of the district of Presidente Prudente, comprised of 20 munici- palities that integrate the extreme western region of the State. Located at the confluence of the Rios Paranapanema and the Paraná, the Pontal is included in the Federal Decree No. 750 of 1993 that legally defines the Mata Atlaˆntica domain and regulates its use. The region’s history is marked by land dis- putes. Still forested, in 1942 the governor Fernando Costa declared the entire extreme west of the State of São Paulo a refuge for the native fauna and flora, the “Grande Reserva do Pontal” of 260,000ha (Leite, 1998; Valladares-Padua, 1987, 1993). However, in the 1950s, the State Governor Ademar de Barros, distributed the land to his friends and allies, who rapidly initiated a wave of deforestation as a means to guarantee their ownership and forestall any future attempt to return it to its status as a wildlife reserve. Today, only 1.85% of the forest of the “Grande Reserva” remains (Dean, 1995), and mostly in a single block, the Morro do Diabo State Park of 36,000ha with the remainder being small isolated forest fragments within properties, which to this day, have no legal status in terms of ownership (Fig. 2). The Pontal was distributed among relatively few people, only 8% of the rural landowners were the illegal occupants of 75% of the former “Grande Reserva” (CATI, 1996).
This was the scenario when the second migration wave began, this time of poor “landless” people who are part of
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	71
Fig. 2. Map of the Pontal do Paranapanema region showing the Morro do Diabo State Park and some of the larger neighboring forest fragments.
72	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Rural Landless Workers’ Movement (MST)), one of the best organized social movements in Brazilian history. Cur- rently, more than 3000 families have been settled in small properties	of	15–18 ha,	totaling	80,000 ha	(São	Paulo, ITESP, 1998). Throughout Brazil, the target is to settle 50,000 families in one million ha of lands that have no legal ownership, as in the case of the Pontal (José Rainha, MST leader, personal communication).
Of necessity, our conservation group, which had been concentrating on protecting the remaining forests through research and environmental education, had to broaden its scope to take into account these new developments. It be- came imperative to address changes in land use policies defining how families should be settled near forest frag- ments. After a long negotiation, in 1998, the Instituto de Terras do Estado de São Paulo (Land Institute of the State of São Paulo (ITESP)) signed a formal agreement that assured the maintenance of a belt of 50m free of human settlements around remaining forest fragments. The aim of this measure was to protect these forests from such threats as edge effects caused by fires and the invasion of exotic species (Cullen et al., 2000b, 2001b; Valladares- Padua, 1999).
We have developed a participatory approach with the set- tlers in which we share scientific knowledge of the region’s biology and our concerns for the conservation of the re- maining forest fragments and discuss with them the means to achieve sustainable alternative development practices that can improve their quality of life without increasing the pres- sures on the natural environments. Respect and transparency have been fundamental in building the harmonious relation- ship that has made cooperation possible.
The Morro do Diabo experience is pioneer in that it has brought together two groups with objectives, conservation and agrarian reform that have been historically incompati- ble. This cooperation has generated initiatives that improve the quality of life for the settlers while at the same time guaranteeing the survival of the wildlife and forests in the region. The aim is to re-connect people to their natural en- vironments so that a more balanced and sustainable future can be possible for all.
In this process, IPEˆ and the Cooperativa dos Assentados da Reforma Agrária do Pontal (Agrarian Reform Settlers’ Cooperative in the Pontal (COCAMP)) along with other regional institutions, signed a formal partnership agreement in August of 1996, which allowed for the establishment of agro-ecological projects in the region. The challenge has been to design and adopt sustainable models for agrarian reform. Among the explicit objectives of this partnership is the integration of socio-economic development for the settlers and the conservation of the region’s biological di- versity. It is ultimately a search for a sustainable agrarian reform model based on agro-ecology, where rural settle- ments interface with the conservation of the remaining forests.
Fig. 3. The black lion tamarin (L. chrysopygus), a critically endangered primate endemic to the inland Atlantic forest in the State of São Paulo. Photo by Luiz Claudio Marigo.
4. IPEˆ and wildlife conservation in the Pontal
In the early 1980s, conservation program was set-up for the black lion tamarin, Leontopithecus chrysopygus (Fig. 3); a critically endangered primate today almost entirely re- stricted to the Pontal (Valladares-Padua, 1987, 1993). The first stages focused on biological studies of the species and its habitat. However, with human pressures increas- ing it became clear that research alone was insufficient. To reverse the historical trend of forest destruction it was deemed essential to involve the local communities. Initially, we established an environmental education program for school groups. However, also adults had to be included to encourage and empower them to participate in conservation efforts. Educational activities have since been designed for all regional audiences, with conservation-oriented music festivals, plays and sporting events (Padua, 1991, 1994, 1997; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The participatory approach of the education program is based on both biological and pedagogical sciences, making it possible to plan a more effective management strategy for the remaining natural areas throughout the region. Environ- mental education has furnished the necessary conditions for building up sustainable development alternatives that include tree-planting and the protection of forests as part of conser- vation extension practices (Cullen et al., 2001b; Padua and Tabanez, 1997; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The objectives of the interdisciplinary team of environ- mentalists were gradually modified with the widening scope of their activities. Education and participation form the un- derlying themes while working continuously for a common cause: the conservation of the Pontal’s biodiversity and the search for sustainable human livelihoods. By sustainable, we mean conditions that can at the same time improve people’s quality of life and reduce the current environmental pres- sures on natural habitats. In 1992, we founded the non-profit organizationIPEˆ.IPEˆwasalreadyactiveinthePontalwhen
the massive immigration of the landless farmers began in the mid 1990s, targeting the Pontal particularly because of its politico-geographical history.
5. Land dispute: impacts on the plateau fragments
In Brazil, as in many other Latin American countries, the struggle for land determines the fate of forests (Colchester and Lohmann, 1993). Brazil is the world’s ninth largest economy and has abundant natural resources. However, next to Paraguay, it has the most uneven ownership of land in the world. The top 2% of landowners own 44% of the land; the poorest 67% only 6% (Brazil, IBGE, 1996). A government census of rural workers in 1985 identified 4.8 million people without a plot of land to farm. The MST (landless movement of rural workers) has challenged this skewed land-ownership during the past decade. The MST is the largest Brazilian social movement of this century and won the Right Livelihood Award in 1993. Its objec- tives are land ownership, agrarian reform and a just society (Mansano (1995) for a history of the MST).
Obscure and dubious ownership, along with outright speculation, has meant that the Pontal has become an area of violent conflict and intense disputes over land. The MST has achieved the settlement of more than 3000 families and another 1200 are camped and waiting. Typically, after prolonged delays on the part of the land agency, the MST assembles a convoy of tractors and leads a squatter invasion at night, the aim being to have so many people occupying the land by dawn that the police are unable to dislodge them. Intense land disputes and the increasing concentration of hopeful landless rural workers have prompted the State and local large landowners to engage in a process of “ownership negotiation”. The trend in these negotiations so far has been for farmers to donate 30–70% of cleared land in exchange for the, till then lacking, legal title to their remaining prop- erty. The land is then officially and permanently transferred to the settlers, who divide up the area into groups of family size plots, the “Glebas Rurais”, or rural plots.
5.1. Socio-economic and cultural issues
Today, the large majority of rural people (around 70%) in southeast Brazil, including the current landless migrants living in the Pontal, are unfamiliar with lowland tropical forests. Most have no tradition as subsistence hunters and gatherers and have instead experienced only commercial agriculture, being employed as permanent farm workers, renting plots, or sharecropping. Around 20% have spent most of their lives in urban centers, alternating between menial jobs and unemployment. Most of the remainder are “opportunists”, awaiting a piece of land to own, often just to sell later.
Past and current economic, political and demographic constraints have resulted in forest patches being isolated, as
are the people who live near them. Forest patches are on private land and are mostly regarded as unproductive. While there are laws that limit forest clearing, they are often in- effective due to the lack of integration between landowner and community land management systems or because they are beyond the enforcement capability of the state. Some of the remaining fragments, however, exist due to the law that requires farmers to leave 20% of their property covered with original forests (Cullen et al., 2001b).
The social values given to forest patches are insignifi- cant, except where conservation organizations develop en- vironmental education programs and conservation training initiatives. Long-term education has shown, however, that local people can become supporters of and active partici- pants in, forest conservation once they have opportunities to be sensitized, to shift values to include ecological con- cerns and to become more knowledgeable of environmen- tal issues (Padua, 1991, 1994; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The biological value of even the small remaining Atlantic forest fragments is unquestionable. Some are gallery forests that protect watersheds and promote soil conservation. For- est patches are habitats for species that disperse and pollinate native vegetation, increasing regional genetic flow. They also serve as refuges for local and long-distance migratory birds (Cullen et al., 2001b; Powell and Bjork, 1995; Greenberg, 1996). Finally and most importantly, they are the “seed banks” for these endangered ecosystems that can be used for forest restoration programs (Cullen et al., 2001b).
Illegal hunting, erosion of the forest edges by fires, colo- nization by vines and climbers, wind desiccation, cattle graz- ing, the spread of invasive plants and the use of pesticides results in the gradual loss of biodiversity and degradation of the forests close to rural communities. Over time, these impacts modify the forest structure, adversely affecting eco- logical processes and causing significant losses of animal and plant species because of the insidious consequences of edge effects (Laurance, 1991, 1997). Forest edge perturba- tions are recognized as the main problem for the remaining forests in the Pontal.
6. Forest fragments and landless people: governance, conflict mediation and institutional responses
Currently, our main interest is in the future of the Atlantic forest fragments when the disputes for land are set- tled. The majority of remaining forest fragments are small, privately-owned and now protected by law. During the orig- inal establishment of most of the large farms, landowners cleared the forest where soil conditions were favorable for crops and cattle pasture and forest patches were intention- ally left in areas where soil was poor (Cullen et al., 2001b). Large landowners have usually “donated” marginal lands or those at the edge of forest fragments to landless families in exchange for legal ownership. Consequently, settlements
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	73
74	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
are on unproductive soils or those that can cause further threats to the natural environment.
Factors that influence the (often irrational) use of the Pontal’s forest fragments include their small size, minimal or non-existent knowledge of the involved forest types and legal impediments. Forests do provide opportunities for the commercial harvesting of certain species and even sustain- able subsistence hunting. However, as these practices are not common in the region and when they do occur they are not being carried out in a sustainable manner, most forest frag- ments are undervalued and are being ecologically depleted (Cullen et al., 2000a,b, 2001a,b).
In the face of these challenges, innovative approaches must be developed as a viable forest conservation strat- egy for the Pontal region. They must target land uses that are socially acceptable, that comply with the needs of lo- cal people and that ensure ecological sustainability, while incorporating conservation education and participation (Padua et al., 2002), adaptability analysis (Hildebrand and Russel, 1996) and a farming system framework in con- junction with agro-forestry practices (Nair, 1993). Together these strategies should enhance the conservation of the re- maining forests and the production of multiple outputs for local communities. Forest corridors, buffer zones and small forest patches (functioning as “stepping-stones”) main- tained and exploited as agro-forestry parcels can contribute to the genetic flux of many species, ease conflicts, and reduce “edge effects”, as well as help disseminate native species through seed dispersal and pollination.
Agro-forestry is a type of land management in which woody perennial plants are grown on the same land man- agement units as agricultural crops, in either a particular spatial arrangement or in a temporal sequence and with ecological and economic interactions between the differ- ent components (Fernandes and Nair, 1986; Michon and de Foresta, 1999). MacDicken and Vergara (1990) cite a number of beneficial attributes of agro-forestry compared to even-aged monocultures of annuals: improved micro- climate; enhanced nutrient cycling; increased soil fertility and soil organic matter; reduced wind effects, the develop- ment of shelterbelts and disease barriers; improved weed and pest control; increased economic sustainability; in- creased soil porosity and aeration; increased protection of soil from rainfall impact; improved erosion control and ter- race effects; exploitation of larger soil volumes; decreased fertilizer requirements and control of leaching.
However, little attention has been given to the potential of agro-forestry systems in protecting forest fragments and as sources of useful or profitable products for local people. Diversified agro-forestry belts around forest fragments have only recently been considered as potential buffers for bio- diversity reserves or as bridges for fragmented habitats in the tropics (Wilson and Diver, 1991; Gajaseni et al., 1996). Surrounding forest edges with agro-forestry buffers instead of open pasture or cropland can thus greatly reduce edge ef- fects (Cullen et al., 2000a,b). The practice of agro-forestry
can also be useful in planting forest corridors and small patches or “stepping stones”. In any of these options, one of the major challenges and opportunities lies in harnessing the enormous potential of MPTS (Nair, 1993). In addition to their potential as windbreaks and buffering belts, MPTS are recognized to provide multiple benefits. Use of MPTS has not been explored in the Pontal do Paranapanema region, and the marriage of MPTS with local needs would enhance productivity and sustainability of local cropping practices while providing the transition zone needed to promote and conserve biological diversity.
7. Drumming up public participation
We have used environmental education with a broad par- ticipatory approach in order to establish conservation ini- tiatives for environmental and social benefits. Information about local nature is continuously disseminated, together with agro-ecological principles that can be put into practice by local people. The participatory approach follows specific steps but always respects the opinions of the local people and takes into account cultural values and other contextual real- ities (Table 1). It includes a great deal of listening to ideas and working through issues in an open and democratic way so that solutions may be constructed and implemented with shared responsibilities. Such respect on the part of the educa- tor or facilitator raises the local people’s self esteem, which in turn empowers them to act and behave ethically, based on values that include a common ideal. Above all, the process stimulates a community feeling of a common goal. Once lo- cal people understand their potential in changing their reali- ties and their role in influencing decisions, it is easier to seek external input or support to stimulate local conservation ini- tiatives. This is the basis for encouraging a creative process that can be directed to designing strategies to solve local problems. A continuous evaluation and follow-up process is critical to assess the effectiveness of the different stages of a program or of its total product, to guide actions and to optimize the efforts and save energy, time and resources.
The use of a participatory approach to stimulate agro-ecological management for the Pontal region has proved effective and has resulted in the planting of trees on privately-owned plots. The idea is to introduce an agro-ecology mentality with sustainable practices such as seed preparation, seedling production, adequate planting techniques and the establishment of agro-forestry modules that can serve as demonstrations to be adapted and improved in larger scale projects.
The introduction of agro-forestry for conservation and development purposes is a challenge for traditional rural practices, and requires a shift in the local mentality. The perceived juxtaposition of human interests and the environ- ment needs to be challenged and human and environmental concerns be understood as complementary and mutually dependent. That human needs can be satisfied with reduced
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	75
Table 1 Steps to the participatory approach
Steps	Structure of program
Evaluation 6	Follow-up
Modifying strategies Disseminating results Seeking support
5	Partnerships
4	Strategies Seek local resources (human, environmental and material)
Bring external “inputs”
3	Dream or vision Goals and objectives
2	Reflection on local potentials Exchange of ideas, experiences and knowledge
1	Problem or theme identification
Observation: numbers begin at the bottom to demonstrate that the process resembles a construction, although better represent its dynamics. Based on Padua and Tabanez (1997) and Padua et al. (1999).
Corresponding values
Flexibility, altruism, renovation
Solidarity, cooperation Humility, enthusiasm, daring, persistence
Creativity, intuition, affectivity Self-esteem, ethics
Respect, empathy, receptivity
it is not a linear process. A spiral would
or no environmental impact and can often be better satisfied with the integrity of natural ecosystems is a new concept and needs to be matured and demonstrated in practice. Farmers may reject agro-forestry innovations as the learning and mastery of new technologies are sometimes challenging, especially because positive results can take time and often require some trial and error (Hildebrand and Russel, 1996). For this reason, we have been careful to discuss the choices and the means for implementing agro-forestry modules with each individual farmer. In this way we are planning with the farmers and not for the farmers (Cullen et al., 2001a,b). Through participatory diagnosis and design the farmers and our researchers are learning to work collectively and select how best to implement new crop options and how to modify and adapt them to specific local conditions.
We have been able to implement a gradual forest restora- tion program, in three context depending on the location of the settlement: (1) corridors that link one forest fragment to another; (2) buffer zones planted around fragments to pro- tect them from edge effects and (3) “stepping stones”, small patches of trees that serve to enrich the soil and increase the connectivity among forest fragments. These methods have been openly discussed with all involved, resulting in a more in-depth understanding of the advantages and dis- advantages of such practices. Regional biological diversity can be protected, while also improving soil quality and pro- tecting watersheds. The trees and other forest products can thus become a source of revenue for the settlers. Brazil’s forestry regulations have evolved in the last few years. Only until recently, the idea of planting exotic species near na- tive forests was unacceptable. Now, it is recognized as an alternative procedure when combined with the planting of nativetreesandspecificallytoprotectforestremnants.IPEˆs activities in the Pontal region have strongly influenced such
policies and its practices are proving to be a “win-win” situation, where both people and nature benefit.
Families have organized themselves into small groups and are involved in every stage of the project, from training and experimenting, to planning, implementing, monitor- ing and evaluating. We have provided initial training in agro-forestry extension through short courses where com- munity members learn and experience the various benefits of agro-forestry systems. Slides and video presentations show how agro-forestry systems can improve microclimate, en- hance nutrient cycling, and increase soil fertility and soil or- ganic matter. It is important to note that only about 10–15% of the total land area of each farmer (approximately 2.5 ha) is assigned to these agro-forestry projects, often involving a strip of land that, when possible, borders the edge of a forest fragment, while the remaining area, usually under subsis- tence/cash crops or dairy production, is likely to receive direct and indirect benefits from the agro-forestry zone.
8. Community involvement
There are many benefits of working with education and participation as the basis of a broad socio-environmental program. Community involvement has been evident in is- sues directly linked to forest protection, such as the help to extinguish forest fires, the actual work of clearing fire lanes, and support for measures that can protect biodiver- sity (Jacobson and Padua, 1995; Padua, 1991, 1994; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998). Other outcomes have in- cluded an increasing interest in environmental matters: the demandformoretrainingopportunities,andparticipationin creating nurseries and of adopting adequate planting of trees.
76	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
Fig. 4. Agro-forestry workshop with rural workers learning how to plant, what to plant and why. Photo by Laury Cullen Jr.
So far, 400 settler families, technicians and local leaders haveparticipatedincoursesandworkshopsofferedbyIPEˆs team and other local partners. As a result, there are now eleven community agro-forestry nurseries in the Pontal re- gion, each with an average capacity of 30,000 seedlings per year (Fig. 4). Many participants have acted as multipliers, so there is a clear ripple effect of the training. The nurseries have also served to initiate an agro-ecology culture, stimu- lating the participation of other settlements in the region.
The first demonstration nursery was established at the Morro do Diabo State Park, an important step in establish- ing a dialogue between the State and third sector groups or institutions. The seedlings are being planted to link the Park to forest fragments in the region. This has created concrete connections between public and private sectors in integrat- ing settled families and natural areas. A feeling of shared ownership and responsibility among participants is being constructed for an environmentally and socially improved landscape.
9. Conclusions
The Pontal experience shows that, with a continuous and systematic effort based on education and participation, trans- parency and trust, and flexibility and clarity, it is possible to integrate several segments of a complex society and apply research findings to implement conservation measures. Pro- moting agro-ecology, adaptive management, adequate mon- itoring and appropriate policies can be critical to integrate individuals and groups into prioritizing measures beneficial to human and wildlife. This approach will hopefully weaken arguments, common in Brazil, that tend to disqualify con- servation measures in the face of social needs. When one is intrinsically linked to the other, any action will lead to the protection and amelioration of life in general.
The challenges of practicing conservation in complex andunderprivilegedenvironmentsarecommoneverywhere today. Human pressures have increased even in remote areas and alternative development models that can be eco- logically sustainable, economically viable and socially just are crucial. Given the dramatically increasing population resulting from the agrarian reform movement settled in the Pontal region, it is unrealistic to expect that conservation efforts will include all families in a short period of time and with limited resources. However, our experience over the past decade has shown that community-based education and conservation has to be continuous and long-term. We intend to increase our efforts in the Pontal on all fronts and believe it will be possible in a few years to compare conditions and hopefully show that our approach has contributed to the sustainability of agriculture and wildlife in the region as a whole. We intend to increase the planting of trees and at the same time understand more profoundly those processes that have worked, in order to improve and implement ever more effective measures. For example, a comparison between families involved in agro-forestry projects with those that are not, may bring some light as to the measures and ap- proaches to be considered in the future. Surveys conducted with other segments of the local community can also be valuable to identify significant suggestions that may have been disregarded for lack of opportunity to express them.
The Pontal experience can be considered a pilot program, where testing, learning and adjusting have been predomi- nant. With limited resources it has been possible to imple- ment a program that now identifies the paths that need to be traced and expanded. Important has been the demonstration that it is possible to improve social and environmental con- ditions in a region of conflict. We believe the current pro- gram can be broadened to the entire region in the future and the methodology may certainly be replicated with pertinent adjustments in other sites where conditions are similar.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Forestry Institute of São Paulo, especially the Morro do Diabo State Park director, Helder Faria, Apoena, Cocamp and all people who have contributed over the years to make the Pontal experience so rich and promising. We thank the confidence people have deposited on us and hope to be able to show more and more that it has been worthwhile. We would like to thank Dr. Mary Pearl and Dr. Kent Redford for reviewing earlier versions of this manuscript. We are especially grateful to Dr. Anthony Rylands who has so patiently reviewed this text and helped to put it into an acceptable English. We are also grateful to UNESCO and Columbia University for inviting us to present our work at International Conference on Biodiversity and Society in May 2001. Finally, we thank the beauty of the natural environment of the Pontal region that helped inspire us to get so involved in matters related to conservation.
References
Alonso, M.T.A., 1977. Vegetação. Região Sudeste. Geografia do Brasil. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estat ́ıstica (IBGE), Rio de Janeiro. Brazil, IBGE. 1996. Atlas Fundiário. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e
Estat ́ıstica (IBGE), Rio de Janeiro. Brazil, MMA. 2000. Avaliação e Ações Prioritárias paara a Conservação
da Biodiversidade da Mata Atlaˆntica e Campos Sulinos. Conservation International do Brasil, Fundação SOS Mata Atlaˆntica, Fundação Biodiversitas, Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), Secretaria do Meio Ambiente do Estado de São Paulo (SEMAD), Instituto Estadual de Florestas. Secretaria de Biodiversidade e Florestas, Ministerio do Meio Ambiente (MMA), MG, Bras ́ılia.
Brooks, T.M., Balmford, A., 1996. Atlantic forest extinctions. Nature 380, 115.
Caˆmara, I. de G., 1993. Plano de Ação para a Mata Atlaˆntica. Fundação SOS Mata Atlaˆntica, São Paulo.
CATI, 1996. Relatório Técnico No 26. Casa da Agricultura de Teodoro Sampaio, São Paulo.
Colchester, M., Lohmann, L., 1993. The Struggle for Land and the Fate of the Forests. The World Rainforest Movement, Malaysia.
Cullen Jr., L., Bodmer, R.E., Valladares-Padua, C., 2000a. Effects of hunting in habitat fragments of the Atlantic forests. Brazil Biological Conserv. 95, 49–56.
Cullen, Jr., L., Valladares-Padua, C., Padua, S., Morato, M.I.R., 2000b. Projeto Abraço Verde: Zonas de benef ́ıcio múltiplo e a recuperação de fragmentos florestais no Pontal do Paranapanema, São Paulo. In: Diegues, A.C., Viana, V.M. (Eds.), Comunidades Tradicionais e Manejo dos Recursos Naturais da Mata Atlaˆntica. NUPAUB, São Paulo. pp. 43–55.
Cullen Jr., L., Bodmer, R.E., Valladares-Padua, C., 2001a. Ecological consequences of hunting in Atlantic forest patches. Oryx 35 (2), 137– 144.
Cullen Jr., L., Schmink, L.M., Valladares-Padua, C., Morato, M.I.R., 2001b. Agroforestry benefit zones: A tool for the conservation and management of Atlantic forest fragments. Nat. Areas J. 21, 346–356.
Dean, W., 1995. With broadax and firebrand, The Destruction of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Eiten, G., 1974. An outline of the vegetation of South America. In: Proceedings of the Symposium of Congress of International Primatology Society, Vol. 5. pp. 529–545.
Fernandes, E.C.M., Nair, P.K.R., 1986. An evaluation of the structure and function of tropical homegardens. Agric. Syst. 21, 279–310.
Fonseca, G., 1985. The vanishing Brazilian Atlantic forest. Biol. Conserv. 34, 17–34.
Gajaseni, J., Matta-Machado, R., Jordan, C.F., 1996. Diversified agroforestry systems: buffers for biodiversity reserves, and landbridges for fragmented habitats in the tropics. In: Szaro, R.C., Johnston, D.W. (Eds.), Biodiversity in Managed Landscapes, Theory and Practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 506–513.
Greenberg, R., 1996. Managed forest patches and the diversity of birds in southern México. In: Schelhas, J., Greenberg, R. (Eds.). Forest Patches in Tropical Landscapes, Island Press, Washington, DC, pp. 254–273.
Hildebrand, P.E., Russel, J.T., 1996. Adaptability analysis: A Method for the Design, Analysis and Interpretation of On-Farm Research-Extenuation. Iowa State University Press, Amsterdam.
Hueck, K., 1972. As Florestas da América do Sul. Editora Pol ́ıgono e Editora Universidade de Bras ́ılia, São Paulo.
Jacobson, S., Padua, S., 1995. A systems model for conservation education in perks: examples from Malaysia and Brazil. In: Jacobson, S. (Ed.), Conserving Wildlife: International Education and Communication Approaches. Columbia University Press. Methods and Studies in Conservation Biology Series, pp. 3–15.
Laurance, W.F., 1991. Edge effects in tropical forest fragments: application of a model for the design of nature reserves. Biol. Conserv. 57, 205– 219.
Laurance, W.F., 1997. Hyper-disturbed parks: edge effects and the ecology of isolated rainforests reserves in tropical Australia. In: Laurance, W.F., Bierregaard Jr., R.O. (Eds.), Tropical Forest Remnants: Ecology, Management and Conservation of Fragmented Communities. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 71–83.
Leite, J.F., 1998. A ocupação do Pontal do Paranapanema. Editora Hucitec, Fundação UNESP, São Paulo.
MacDicken, K.G., Vergara, N.T., 1990. Agroforestry: Classification and Management. Wiley, New York.
Mansano, B.F., 1995. Espacialização e Territorialidade da Luta pela Terra. Ph.D. Dissertation, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Presidente Prudente.
Michon, G., de Foresta, H., 1999. Agro-forests: incorporating a forest vision in agroforestry. In: Louise, E.B., Lassoie J.P., Fernandes, E.C.M. (Eds.), Agroforestry in Sustainable Agricultural Systems. CRC Press, New York, pp. 381–406.
Mori, S.A., Boon, B.M., Prance, G.T., 1981. Distribution patterns and conservation of eastern Brazilian coastal forests species. Brittonia 33, 233–245.
Nair, P.K.R., 1993. An Introduction to Agroforestry. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Padua, S.M., 1991. Conservation awareness through an environmental education school programme at Morro do Diabo State Park, São Paulo State, Brazil. Master’s Thesis, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Padua, S., 1994. Conservation awareness through an environmental education programme in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Environ. Conserv. 21 (2), 145–151.
Padua, S., 1997. Uma pesquisa em educação ambiental: a conservação do mico-leão-preto (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). In: Valladares-Padua, C., Bodmer, R. (Eds.), Manejo e Conservação de Vida Silvestre no Brasil. MCT, CNPq, Sociedade Civil Mamirauá, Bras ́ılia. pp. 34–51.
Padua, S., Tabanez, M., 1997. Uma abordagem participativa para a conservação de áreas naturais: educação ambiental na Mata Atlaˆntica. In: Milano, M.S. (Ed.), Anais do Congresso de Unidades de Conservação, Vol. 2. Curitiba, Paraná, pp. 371–379.
Padua, S., Valladares-Padua, C., 1997. Um programmea integrado para a conservação do mico-leão-preto (Leontopithecus chrysopygus) pesquisa, educação e envolvimento comunitário. In: Padua, S.M., Tabanez, M.F. (Eds.), Educação Ambiental: Caminhos Trilhados no Brasil. Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), Bras ́ılia, pp. 119–131.
Padua, S., Valladares-Padua, C., 1998. The Conservation of Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus): from research and education to landscape ecology, agrarian reform movement and policy. Second Pan American Congress on the Conservation of Wildlife through Education. Wildlife Conservation Society (http://www.wcs.org).
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	77
78	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
Padua, S., Tabanez, M., Souza. M.G., von Höeffel, J.L., 1999. Participação: Um elemento-chave para envolvimento comunitário, uma experieˆncia em educação ambiental na Ärea de Proteção Ambiental—APA Piracicaba. Revista de Educação e Ensino, Vol. 4, No. 2. Universidade de São Francisco, São Paulo, pp. 75–84.
Padua, S.M., Tabanez, M.F., Höeffel, J.L., De Souza, M. das G., 2002. Conservação da biodiversidade o envolvimento de comunidades locais na proteção de áreas naturais. In: Sauvé, L. Orellana, I. Sato, M. (Eds.), Sujets choisis en éducation relative à l’environnement. D’une Amérique à l’autre/Textos escogidos en educación ambiental. De una América a otra/Textos escolhidos em educação ambiental. De uma América à outra. Les Publications ERE–UQAM: Chaire de recherche du Canada en éducation relative à l’environnement, Université du Québec à Montréal. ISBN 2-89276-213-8. Tome I: p. 140–147.
Powell, G.V.N., Bjork, R., 1995. Implications of intratropical migration on reserve design: a case study using Pharomachrus mocinno. Conserv. Biol. 9, 354–362.
Quintela, C.E., 1990. An SOS for Brazil’s beleaguered Atlantic Forest. Nature Conserv. Magazine 40 (2), 14–19.
São Paulo, ITESP, 1998. Terra e Cidadãos: Aspectos da Ação de Regularização Fundiária no Estado de São Paulo. Série Cadernos ITESP/Secretaria da Justiça e da Defesa da Cidadania No 4. ITESP, SãoPaulo.
SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE. 1993. Evolução dos remanescentes Florestais e ecossistemas associados do dom ́ınio da Mata Altaˆntica. SOS Mata Atlaˆntica e Instituto de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE), São Paulo, Brazil.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1987. Status and Conservation of the Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). Master’s Thesis, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1993. The Ecology, Behavior and Conservation of the Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1999. A Conservação da Mata Atlaˆntica. Mundo Virtual, Ageˆncia Estado: hhttp://www.agestado.com.br/mvirtual/liana/ aspas/ htm.
Wilson, R.J., Diver, S.G., 1991. The role of birds in agroforestry system. In: Garret, E. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second Conference on Agroforestry in North America, School of Natural Resources, Springfield, MO, p. 114.
Claudio Valladares-Padua holds a PhD from University of Florida, Gainesville. He is a co-founder of Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (Institute for Ecological Research (IPEˆ)) in Brazil where he works as Director of Conservation Science. In Brazil, he is also a Professor at the University of Bras ́ılia. In the US, he is an Associate Researcher at Columbia University, New York and senior researcher with the Wildlife Trust. He is also vice-president for conservation of the International Primatological Society. He edited two books and has more than 40 articles published in national and international journals.
Suzana M. Padua is a Brazilian doctoral student with a Masters on environmental education from the University of Florida. She works for the conservation of protected areas by raising local people’s awareness and conducts courses and workshops for educators all over Brazil. She gives talks in her country and abroad and has published widely in many countries and has editted two books. She is the president of Instituto de PesquisasEcológicas(InstituteforEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ)),aBrazilian conservation organization and the director for the Brazil Program of the Wildlife Trust. Suzana is an Ashoka fellow and a member of IUCN’s Commission on Education and Communication and of the North American Association for Environmental Education (NAAEE).
Laury Cullen Jr. is conservation biologist and research coordinator with IPEˆ—Institute for Ecological Research, a Brazilian conservation NGO based in the State of São Paulo. His main interests are the ecology and conservation of large mammals in the Atlantic Forest, particularly using umblella species as landscape indicators for ecological planning. He holds a MSc degree from University of Florida and is currently a PhD student at the University of Kent, England.
