Review: Against the Current Author(s): João Roberto Martins Filho and Laurence Hallewell Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 33, No. 4, Race and Equality in Brazil: Cultural and Political Dimensions (Jul., 2006), pp. 144-146 Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27647952 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 20:08
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
Book Reviews
From	his
countryside	relationships
contribution	would	seem	to	be dynamics	of	the	landless	peasant
Against
the Current
by Jo?o Roberto Martins Filho
Translated	by Laurence	Hallewell Luca Fanelli La scelta della terra: Studio di urn insediamento rurale del Movimento
Sem	Terra	in Brasile.	Turin:	Silvio	Zamorani	Editore,
Since its beginnings	in the 1980s, the Movimento
2003.
dos Trabalhadores	Sem Terra subject	of	a	considerable	body
(Landless	Workers'	Movement?MST)	has	been	the of literature both in Brazil and abroad. Much of this research has sought to analyze
the movement	in its national	or regional	setting?its	history,	development,	and con tradictions. Other research from a wide range of specialties in the human sciences
has	analyzed	its micro-sociological	and micro-economic	aspects,	ranging	from	the soil quality of particular invasion sites to the specific social dynamic of individual land seizures. What does this book by a young Italian researcher who spent just a couple	of months	on one MST	settlement	in upstate	Paran?	contribute	to this already
rich and well-developed	bibliography? We must first of all understand that this settlement, Santa Maria, established in
1993, is, as the author admits from the start, an exceptional and nonrepresentative case within	the movement	as a whole.	It was	intended	to test the possibility	of an
innovative producer-cooperative	in a locality specially selected by the directors of the MST at the state level, with its leadership hand-picked as members who had already
played a significant role in the movement and had shown a desire to follow a differ ent path from the usual one by returning to the countryside after having lived in town.
Moreover,	it was	offered	to	the	researcher	as	a field	study	by	the MST
itself.
combining	a movement	in
perspective,	Fanelli's approach	to	the
with	a micro-sociological On	the	macro	level,	Paran?	has	undergone	many	long-term	changes	in	town
macro-sociological Paran?	in	the
context	of	city-country settle in the Fazenda Santa Maria.
relations focusing on changes in the lives of the several score of families who had come to
that attracted the attention of this Italian researcher because
Jo?o Roberto Martins Filho is a professor of political science at the Federal University of S?o Carlos and an associate editor of Latin American Perspectives. Laurence Hallewell is a retired
librarian from Columbia University, where his specialty was Latin American bibliography.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 149,Vol. 33 No. 4, July 2006 144-146 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X06289869 ? 2006 Latin American Perspectives
144
analysis
BOOK REVIEW	145
of	their	connection	with	what	has	been	happening	in	rural	areas	in Europe.	The	state is known for its tradition of coffee cultivation in the north and of small farms in the southeast and east. It is also characterized by significant waves of migration into the countryside when coffee cultivation was expanding in the 1940s, away from the
countryside and into the cities from the 1970s onward, from the countryside to new
agricultural areas being opened up in Brazil and Paraguay during the various crises of the agricultural economy, and then away from the land again when this was
appropriated for large-scale hydroelectric schemes such as that of Itaipu in the far west of the state.
It was	not	by	chance	that	Paran?	witnessed	the	creation	of	both	the Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra do Oeste do Paran? (Movement of Landless Peasants in
Western Sudoeste
Paran??MASTRO)	and do	Paran?	(Movement MASTRO	is closely
the Movimento	dos	Agricultores	Sem
of	Landless	Peasants	in	Southwest connected	with	the Comissao	Pastoral
Terra	do Paran??
da Terra
MASTES). (Pastoral Land Commission?CPT) tors of the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches, directed toward work with the
and with the militancy of the progressive sec
people displaced by the building of the ItaipuDam. MASTES	ismainly made up of the sons and daughters of smallholders who have been finding itmore and more dif
ficult to stay on the land in the face of the advance of agri-business,	ismore linked
to rural trade unions, and operates rather deliberately. The first land occupation in Paran? took place in 1984, and the state capital, Curitiba, became the venue for the First Landless Workers' Conference, marked by its supporters' camping out as a his
toric protest demonstration right in the middle of town. The author has thus chosen a state with a wealth of experience that is central to the history of the MST. At the end of the 1980s, with the rise of the Uni?o Democr?tica Ruralista (Democratic
Countryside	Alliance?UDR),	which	represents	the	landowners'	response	to MST tactics, and with the election in late 1989 of Fernando Collor to the presidency of Brazil	over	the	Partido	dos	Trabalhadores	(Workers'	party?PT)	candidate,	the	state
MST	turned	strongly	inward,	consolidating	its	settlements,	organizing	production, and securing the political space that it had already won. This is the context out of
which the idea of the Santa Maria settlement The most obvious richness of Fanelli's work lies, then, in the suggestion that these
general	processes	do	not	take	into	account	the multitude	of	pathways	and	choices	that led precisely these families and these individuals to the experience of cooperative pro
duction just outside the city of Paran?, in the north of the state. For Fanelli, it is neces sary to understand the element of planning and choice that has caused many peasants who had already left the countryside for towns to decide to go back to the country, start ing with their evaluation of the negative side of town life but chiefly the result of a con
scious political choice in which the central element has been the opportunity for an
experience	of	cooperative	production	as	a middle	way	between	small-scale	capitalist production and a wider social program that could point to an alternative to capitalism.
Hence the title of his book, "Opting for the Land." It is, however, in the intersection of these two elements that Fanelli's work finds
its natural limitations. Analyzing the paths of people's lives and the concrete experi ence of the Santa Maria settlement fills a whole chapter of this book with humanity and comes across as its greatest contribution, providing a story in opposition to the
emerged.
146 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
usual	demonization	of	these	men,	women,	and	children	fighting	splendidly	for	their survival and dignity. Over and above this, the story of Santa Maria, although atypi
cal, contradicts	the reactionary	assumption	that any type of alternative	experience	in
rural Brazil is impossible. This is, however, as far as the book's contribution goes. Without	diminishing	it, we	must	recognize	that	its	analysis	is	insufficient	to	answer the book's opening question, "Can there be any balance between town and country other than the one offered by the highly industrialized countries?" Any valid answer
would have to go far beyond the heroic experience of the Santa Maria settlers. The book could, however, be used in Brazilian classrooms to provide an alternative to
the dominant but distorted vision spread by the mass media of the rich experience of struggle and resistance undergone by those Brazilians who have chosen to swim
against	the prevailing	current.
