Journal of Developing Societies
http://jds.sagepub.com/
Globalization in a Time of Neoliberalism: Politicized Social Movements and the Latin American Response
Harry E. Vanden Journal of Developing Societies 2003 19: 308 DOI: 10.1177/0169796X0301900207
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://jds.sagepub.com/content/19/2-3/308
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Journal of Developing Societies can be found at: Email Alerts: http://jds.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://jds.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://jds.sagepub.com/content/19/2-3/308.refs.html
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM: POLITICIZED SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND THE LATIN AMERICAN RESPONSE
Harry E. Vanden*
ABSTRACT
This article examines the emergence of new, highly politicized social movements in Latin America as a response to deteriorating economic and social conditions and the related growth of neoliberal economic policies advocated by International Financial Institutions like the IMF and the World Bank and by national political elites. It argues that the decline of bureaucratic authoritarianism and the growing democratization in the region have helped to move the struggle for more equitable societies and the empowerment of popular sectors away from armed struggle toward new repertoires of action conducted in civil society by new social and political movements. An overview of the phenomenon, examines the Zapatistas in Mexico, the National Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), the breakdown of traditional parties and the rise of the Chávez movement in Venezuela, recent political move- ments in Bolivia, the rise of neo-populism in Peru, and the political and economic crisis that delegitimized governments and politics in Argentina and led to popular assemblies and demonstrations that removed succes- sive governments from power in 2001 and 2002. Finally, a case study of the Landless movement in Brazil (the MST) is offered as an example of how such movements develop and contest power.
*	Professor of Political Science and International Studies, Department of Government and International Affairs, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620-8100, USA, vanden@chuma1.cas.usf.edu.
The author wishes to thank his many friends, informants, and participants in rallies and demonstrations in Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador, and Mexico for sharing their knowledge of events and perspectives with him.
© de Sitter Publications 2003	JDS 19(2-3):308-333
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	309
“The emergence of new political and alternative movements despite their scant participation in [traditional] political life marks the start of a new way of conducting politics which responds to the legitimate demands of the marginalized majorities.”
—Juan del Grando, Mayor of La Paz greeting rise of the new political movement MAS and its leader and Coca Growers Federation head, Evo Morales (Los Tiempos July 2, 2002)
Introduction
In Latin America there is a backlash against economic neoliberal- ism and the globalization process that is growing ever stronger.1 The New York Times and other mainstream English publications such as The Economist, The Financial Times, and Newsweek have even begun to catalog the reaction. Several of these noted a resultant change in Latin American politics, but initially viewed the backlash as a resurgent populism or simply a turn to the left (Shifter 2003:51). The progression of events suggests that there is a realign- ment that is much more profound and that may well represent a significant change in politics in the region.
Ever since the Caracazo in 1989, there have been different forms of popular protest against austerity measures and elements of the conservative economic policies that came to be called neoliber- alism in Latin America. These have been manifest in diverse forms: the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico in 1994; the neopopulist Movimiento V República led by Hugo Chávez in Venezuela from the late 1990s on; the national indigenous movement led by the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (CONAIE) in Ecuador and the growth of its related party, Pachakutik; the Movement of Landless Rural Laborers (MST) in Brazil; the Asambleas de Barrios and other protest organizations in Argentina; and the Cocaleros Federation, and its linked political movement MAS, in Bolivia. The election of Lucio Gutíerrez and the emergence of his New Country Movement, and the election of Lula and the strength of the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) in Brazil can also be seen as part of a strong popular reaction to neoliberal poli-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
310	HARRY E. VANDEN
cies advocated by the IMF and other International Financial Institutions, and a further indication of a movement away from traditional politics and an authoritarian political culture to new forms of popular democratic participation.
Electoral alternatives to politics as usual have not always been present, and even progressive parties such as the PT (the Workers Party in Brazil) do not necessarily have the trust of new social movements. Though not always well or precisely articulated, new demands are being registered. These demands, however, are not always addressed to the political system per se, but to society more generally since there are growing questions about the system’s rele- vancy and legitimacy. Nor has the populace in most nations looked to armed struggles and revolutionary movements to remedy their problems (Colombia is the significant exception here). Something different is being sought. Different groups are looking for new polit- ical structures that allow for, if not encourage, their participation. Civil society is becoming the new locus of conflict and contention. Specific segments of the population are seeking forms of political organization that they can call their own. There is a search for new structures that can respond to the perceived—though not always clearly articulated—demands being formulated from below by the popular sectors.
A broad segment of the population (from the lower and middle classes) has begun to mobilize and seek new and different political involvement and responses in parties, governmental struc- tures, and social movements. They want something that works for them. Indeed, the increasing promotion of democracy and democra- tization tells them that their voices should be heard and that the political system should somehow respond to them. When it is unclear how their votes count (if at all) and whether the political class is responding to their hue and cry, many become disillusioned and angry. Similarly, the return to democracy after authoritarian military rule or the strengthening of democratic governmental insti- tutions during intense democratization convinces broad sectors of the population to expect better, cleaner, more efficient, and hope- fully less corrupt, government. In this respect, the political culture is beginning to change. If nothing else, elections are not expected to
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	311
be fraught with fraud and the resultant governments are expected to be more responsive. Similarly, the populace is generally becoming less tolerant of some of the traditional vices in Latin American poli- tics: corruption, ineffective rule, and non-substantive political discourse (politiqueo). As suggested by the following, political regrouping has begun.
Chiapas: Regional Victory
In southern Mexico, local and community organizations began to resist the dire economic consequences engendered by globalization and globalized integration through free trade and even NAFTA. It is argued that similar forms of resistance have occurred throughout the hemisphere since the region was interjected into the international capitalist economic system. Yet, these previous struggles were more akin to traditional peasant or indigenous rebellions in that they did not spawn strong national or international links and, as such, were easily marginalized or defeated. Indeed, localized resistance had bubbled to the surface sporadically since the time of the conquest. This certainly had been the case in southern Mexico and the Yucatan as well. Perhaps stimulated by this tradition of rebellion, the indige- nous rural population in Chiapas in the 1980s began to resist and organize against the traditional land inequity and the hardships that the commercialization of agriculture and Mexico’s further integra- tion into the global market structure caused. Racial identity and unequal land distribution helped to solidify the movement and led to the formation of a social movement that eventually spawned the EZLN (the Zapatista Army of National Liberation). Unlike some other groups, the Zapatistas were successful in linking their strug- gle to a growing continental indigenous identity and the disastrous effects of globalized free markets on local small farmers. Their ingenious use of the Internet, the mountain mask, public relations, marches, and mobilizations kept their cause before the Mexican nation and the international community. They were able to create a highly politicized movement with considerable regional power and national visibility. They were not, however, able to link their strug- gle to other large politicized social movements to form a national
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
312	HARRY E. VANDEN
coalition. Nor were they able to mobilize support behind a nation- wide new political party or new political movement (as would be done in Ecuador and Brazil) that would be sympathetic to their demands once it achieved national power or that would at least ensure adequate space in civil society to continue to mobilize support and pursue their demands as would be done in Bolivia.
Beyond Populism
In previous times, populism like that championed by Getulio Vargas in Brazil had offered some alleviation of similar dissatisfaction. But even traditional populism seemed unable to staunch the growing mobilizations in Ecuador, Brazil, Venezuela, or Argentina. One might even conclude that traditional populism had run its course. It had responded to a time of increasing enfranchisement, growing literacy, and increased political knowledge. Higher levels of educa- tion, ever-wider suffrage and greater female gender equality, an increasingly sophisticated political culture, and more widespread involvement in politics had called for other forms of political partic- ipation. This was beginning to develop in places like Chile under Allende, Brazil, El Salvador, and Guatemala before the onset of bureaucratic authoritarian regimes and military-run repression. Other responses included authoritarian Nasserite reformism in Peru under Juan Velasco Alvarado, and a military populist form of the same in Panama under Omar Torrejos. Although both military regimes paid attention to popular needs, both Velasquismo and Torrejismo represented top-down authoritarian movements that did not provide adequate, effective political institutions to incorporate demands from below and the growing political assertiveness and participation of large sectors of the population. Their nationalist populism did, nonetheless, mobilize segments of the masses—albeit in pro-government forms—and served to keep political expectations high in their own countries as well as in other nations. It also suggested that progressive nationalist sectors of the militaries would and could respond to the growing restiveness of the masses and at least some of the economic and social problems. These ideas would later find resonance in Venezuela from the 1992 coup attempt on
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	313
and in Ecuador after the January 2000 coup. Indeed, coup leaders in both countries were later elected president (Chávez and Gutiérrez).
Right Wing Populism in Peru
The legacy of Velasquismo was mixed in Peru. The military had retreated to the barracks by the end of the 1970s and taken much of their nationalist vision of development with them. By the 1980s, Peru was again suffering from a profound economic crisis and the populist variant of Aprismo under Alan García. Warmed-over Aprismo without Haya de la Torre proved unable to lead the coun- try out of the quagmire. This, in turn, led to the de-legitimization of the political system, with the concomitant growth of political move- ments that represented non-traditional options. Though there were social movements, they remained relatively small and did not reach national proportions. Rather, political competition developed among a violent Maoist guerrilla group, Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path); a Fidelista guerrilla group, the MRT (The Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement); and a rising political movement led by Alberto Fujimori. The latter had broken away from traditional party groupings and created his own ad hoc political coalition that later evolved into a brand of right-wing populism. As the 1990s progressed, dissatisfaction with traditional political leaders and traditional political parties became widespread, as did a growing trend to doubt the legitimacy of the political system itself.
In Peru and throughout the region, traditional personalism, clientelism, corruption, and personal, class, and group avarice became subjects of ridicule and anger, if not rage. The effects of neoliberalism and continued racism amid calls for economic and racial equality began to be felt. Traditional parties like APRA and attempts at leftist unity in Peru had fallen before political newcomer Alberto Fujimori and his ad hoc political movement, Cambio 90. Yet, the Fujimori government became increasingly authoritarian in the face of continued success by Shining Path and eventually closed down congress and altered the Supreme Court as it pursued an extremely brutal, but ultimately successful, war against the guerril- las. After experiencing some popularity for stopping the guerrillas
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
314	HARRY E. VANDEN
and restoring calm, Fujimori was discredited for corruption and forced into exile in Japan. However, by late 2003 the neoliberal poli- cies championed by the successor government of Alejandro Toledo were also under attack as economic conditions worsened and his government lost support. There were no strong, national social movements or new political groupings to offer alternatives and the legitimacy of the political system was again being questioned. Amid strikes and demonstrations, Shining Path once again became active.
Leftist Populism and the Rise of Chavismo in Venezuela
Yet, when the voting populace is presented with what they perceive as a real choice that they believe could actually generate policies that would counteract the most economically and socially damaging aspects of economic globalization and neoliberalism, voter turnout often tends to peak and reformist leaders and their parties or coali- tions regularly reap the benefits.
This was certainly the case in Venezuela with the anti-glob- alization campaign of Hugo Chávez Frias. The identification of the two traditionally dominant parties (Acción Democrática and COPEI) with the status quo and neoliberal policies connected to economic globalization led to their resounding defeat in the 1998 election (neither was able to achieve double digits in the presiden- tial election). After a spirited campaign and a somewhat demagogic appeal to the 80 percent of the population Chávez classified as poor, his Movimiento V Républica and the Polo Patriótico coalition made a strong showing in the polls and won a resounding victory in the December presidential elections (56.5 percent). Voter turnout increased for the first time in recent years to some 64 percent of the registered voters. Even more remarkable was that the main competi- tor (Henrique Salas Rómer) was from neither of the two main parties either. The popular classes had responded with enthusiasm to Chávez’s anti-neoliberal, neo-populist rhetoric and program. Although his political movement was not well organized at the national or grassroots levels, his criticisms of Venezuela’s self- indulgent, and increasingly corrupt, political elite and the neoliberal policies they were pushing on the people paid big dividends at the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	315
polls. Indeed, the political momentum of the election and the popu- lar mobilization that made the Chávez victory possible carried the new government to a majority in a Constituent Assembly (approved in a popular referendum) and the subsequent new presidential elec- tions under the new constitution in 2000. Here Chávez got 59.5 percent of the vote, though faltering confidence in his ability to actually make the promised changes and his authoritarian approach to political dissent caused voter turnout to be much lower (see Ellner and Hellinger 2003). The resonance of his attacks against the wealth, the corrupt traditional political class, and neoliberal policies that promote economic globalization can still be seen in his support among the poorer segments of the population. It was precisely the ability to mobilize these sectors in the face of growing opposition from traditional political groupings and their upper and middle class allies that thwarted a temporarily successful coup attempt in April of 2002, placing Chávez back in the Presidential palace after he had been removed to a military base by the coup leaders.
Ecuador
Southern Mexico was not the only place where the effects of neolib- eral policies and the globalization process generated innovative responses. Since Incan times, local indigenous communities have been marginalized from important decision-making processes in Ecuador. This practice was extended to virtually all indigenous people after the conquest and continued during the republic. Yet, by the 1990s the traditional struggle for land, power, and some modicum of justice for the indigenous, mostly peasant masses was gradually transformed from local community-based struggle to a national struggle coordinated by CONAIE, the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indigenas del Ecuador. The Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador had become a national organi- zation that was able to mobilize thousands of people in land takeovers and marches. It connected different ethnic and regional groups and used modern means of communication to forge a national social movement. In the process it became a major power contender that could challenge governmental action by the late
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
316	HARRY E. VANDEN
1990s. After the disastrous dollarization of the economy and the imposition of other neoliberal economic policies by President Jamil Mahuad, CONAIE was able to mobilize tens of thousands of its constituents for a march on Quito that culminated in the taking of the Congress building and—backed by a few progressive army offi- cers and civilian politics—the formation of a short-lived junta. This was the first time indigenous people hade governed substantial parts of Ecuador since the conquest. Their victory was, however, short lived. Although some horizontal contacts with other organizations had been made, the CONAIE militants were not part of a broad based national coalition that could retain power. With the support of the United States, the traditional political class was able to retake power and negotiate the exit of Mahuad by placing Vice President Gustavo Noboa in power. Once moblilized, CONAIE, learning from the experience, initiated a national political strategy, and even started an affiliated political party, Pachacutik. In the 2002 elections they continued to cultivate their highly politicized national social movement, but were also able to field successful local and congres- sional political candidates. Eventually they threw their support behind Lucio Gutiérez, the army colonel who had been part of the short-lived junta in January of 2000. Thus, they helped to elect Gutiérez to the presidency, though their support was not uncondi- tional. They maintained their autonomy, but ensured that their demands would at least receive a hearing at the highest level, and might even be received with some sympathy.
Local Struggles and New Social Movements at the Local and Regional Levels
In Bolivia, the simultaneous national mobilizations of several new social movements in the national political arena and their common alliance (and support for national political alternatives) contributed to massive popular mobilizations in 2002 and 2003, and successful regime change. However, long before such national mobilization occurred, local communities often formed their own organizations to fight some aspect of globalization that was affecting them at the most local level. This reaction can be seen in the strong grassroots
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	317
movement against the privatization of the public water supply in Cochabamba, Bolivia in 2000. The Coordinadora de Defensa del Agua y de la Vida, remained locally rooted (see Shultz 2003). Yet their struggle was always framed in an international and national context. They championed their cause through the Internet and sent delegations to international meetings like the World Social Forums in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Further, they were not only very aware of the international dimensions of their struggle and of its globalized causes, but also were equally aware of the possibilities of interna- tional links with similar struggles and the international anti-globalization movement generally. This awareness and their electronic and personal links to other movements in Bolivia and elsewhere later facilitated their integration into the broad national coalition that set forth a national agenda through support for Evo Morales and his MAS Party in the 2002 presidential election. This awareness and extensive networking with other new social move- ments allowed this and other local or regional movements to become part of a near unstoppable national mobilization that, as will be explained, toppled the Sánchez de Lozada government. By linking the local effects of the neoliberal privatization of the water supply in Cochabamba to global policies and national politics, they linked their struggle to a growing regional and international consen- sus, and to a national movement with concrete, achievable objectives.
National Social Movements and the Bolivian Crisis
The intensity of the politicization of social movements in Bolivia was demonstrated by the massive protests and the popular mobiliza- tions that rocked the nation in 2003. As had occurred in Ecuador in 2000, there was a popular mobilization of indigenous peoples and rural peasants through a newly formed peasant indigenous federa- tion that called for the blockading of roads and popular mobilizations. They had quickly been joined by the Cocaleros of the now famous Coca Growers Federation led by Evo Morales, who had finished barely a percentage point behind President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada in the 2002 elections. Other groups, like the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
318	HARRY E. VANDEN
Cochabamba movement against the privatization of water, also joined. An ongoing economic crisis and a crisis in traditional poli- tics combined with strong U.S. pressure to open Bolivian markets and virtually eliminate the centuries old cultivation of coca leaves stimulated the masses to heed the calls of the social movements for action. The precipitating event was a U.S. backed plan to sell Bolivian natural gas through a Chilean port that landlocked Bolivia had lost to the former in the ill fated War of the Pacific (1879-1881). The disastrous failure of the neoliberal model that U.S. educated President Sánchez Lozada had so strongly advocated added to the widely shared perception that this new trade deal was but one more ruse to extract wealth from the nation and leave the indigenous masses even more poverty ridden. In the words of one protester, “Globalization is just another name for submission and domination. We’ve had to live with that here for 500 years and now we want to be our own masters” (Nicanor Apaza in Rohter 2003). The indige- nous federation and the Cocaleros were soon joined by the Coordinadora de Defensa del Agua y de la Vida in Cocabamba, urban unions, and students as they mobilized in massive demonstra- tions in La Paz and then other major cities. The government futilely tried to repress the demonstrators, causing the loss of 80 lives. This enraged the opposition even more and increased the president’s isolation. Bolivian miners and their unions also joined the protests and decided to march on the capital. As his political backers dropped away in the face of the mass mobilization, Sánchez de Losada was forced to resign and leave the country. The new social movements in Bolivia were able to take politics out of the presiden- tial palace and halls of congress where traditional politics—and the traditional political class—dominated and into the streets and rural highways that they could control. They were able to forge a broad, national coalition that cemented the president’s downfall and estab- lish the viability of their social movements as key political actors whose demands had to be heeded. Unlike Ecuador in 2000 and the Bolivian revolution of 1952, they had done so without seizing power themselves, but had demonstrated just how effectively they could use and mobilize massive political power on a national scale. And they had done it from below, through a broad coalition of social
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	319
movements with strong identities and deep, democratic ties to their constituencies.
Argentine Manifestation
The strength of the reaction to neoliberal policies and the loss of confidence in traditional institutions of governance and their susceptibility to corruption and personal/corporate/small group appropriation of public resources is manifest in various contexts throughout the region. For instance, in Argentina, popular mobiliza- tions, street demonstrations, strikes, and neighborhood Asambleas Populares (or Asambleas Barriales) shook the political system and the political class to the core at the end of 2001 and occasioned the resignation of elected president Fernando de la Rúa and the rapid replacement of three other appointed presidents (the Vice President had already resigned). In early 2002, a declared anti-neoliberal Peronist president, Eduardo Duhalde was voted in office by the Argentine Congress. The unresolved economic crisis, default on the foreign debt, and Duhalde’s perceived need to make some conces- sion to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), other international financial institutions, and U.S. policy, kept the population angry and mobilized (see Gaudin 2002). Demonstrations and protests contin- ued through early 2003 as the Argentine nation groped to find a political force capable of ending the crisis. There was so little confi- dence in traditional parties or politicians that one could frequently hear a popular refrain among many Argentinians: que se vayan todos! (Throw them all out!). Both the economic and political systems were losing their legitimacy, with many of the nations’ problems being blamed on the IMF, neoliberal policies, and a corrupt and incompetent political class. The situation remained chaotic in 2003 as a wide array of candidates competed in a new presidential election amid continued demonstrations, strikes, and economic uncertainty. The different new social movements were united in their anger over economic conditions and political leader- ship, but were unable to put together a national coalition that coalesced into a national political movement or favored one politi- cal candidate. Ironically, former President Carlos Menem was seen
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
320	HARRY E. VANDEN
by some as a stabilizing force amid the chaos and managed to finish first in the first round of voting. However, as the second round developed and the anti-globalization forces united against him, his comeback faltered as the millions protesting economic and political failures remembered his identification with neoliberal policies. Ultimately, his showing was so low in the polls that he pulled out of the second round before the vote could be taken. The winner by default was the left wing Peronist candidate, Néstor Kirchner, who had been much more critical of IMF recommendations and neolib- eral policies and seemed to respond to the demands made by the highly politicized social movements that had toppled previous governments.
Initial Analysis
The nature of the massive protests that have continued to rock Buenos Aires and other Argentine cities, and which deposed Bolivian President Sánchez de Lozada in October of 2003, suggest that political change is sweeping across Latin America. Although these new movements have many new characteristics, they are also a recent and vociferous manifestation of the specter of mass popu- lar mobilization against the governing elite that has haunted Latin America since colonial times. In the last few years, a great many of the masses—and some of the middle class—seem to be hit by a feeling that the much touted return to democracy, the celebration of civil society, and incorporation in the globalization process has left them marginalized economically if not politically as well. The reac- tions in Argentina, Mexico, Ecuador, Bolivia, Brazil, and Venezuela are strong and significant and, in varying ways, suggest that the political project is not working for the common people. It is also quite possible that the democratization and celebration of civil soci- ety allow (some would say encourage) the political mobilization that is manifest in the widespread emergence of new social and political movements.
Dissatisfaction seems prevalent. Selected abstention rates are indicative of growing disillusion with government and the polit- ical system. For instance, in Venezuela, the abstention rate for local
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	321
elections had reached 55.8 percent in 1992, the year of the first coup attempt (García Díez, 1999:26). In elections in Argentina in 2001, some 41 percent of the voters abstained, or cast annulled or blank ballots (Kaufman Purcell 2001). The 1998 national elections in Brazil saw a similar phenomena, with 40.1 percent of the electorate either abstaining, or casting blank or annulled ballots (Banco de Datos Políticos das Américas 2002). In the Mexican presidential election of 2000, the abstention rate alone was 36 percent (Direccion Ejecutiva de Organización Electoral 2002).
Indicators of the growing malaise are many: not only the growing abstention rates in elections, but also the abandonment of traditional political parties for new, more amorphous, ad hoc parties; the upsurge of new, more political social movements and mass organizations; and a plethora of national strikes, demonstra- tions, and protests such as those that washed across Argentina at the end of 2001 and the beginning of 2002, and that spread across Bolivia in 2002 and 2003.
Economic Conditions and Democratization As Catalysts
Before the recent push for globalization and neoliberal economic policies, the economic slowdown during the “lost decade” of the 1980s had combined with increased political space for social and political mobilization created by democratization. The political repression that had so greatly constrained political action and the rapid development of new social movements was greatly reduced with the end of authoritarian rule and expansive democratization advocated by the United States. The result was a new political dynamic in many of the Latin American nations. The projection of an elitist armed vanguard as the spearhead of necessary change began to fade in the face of unarmed political and social mobiliza- tions. The assertion of power that had been seen in popular mobilizations like the pre-coup Peasant Leagues in northeast Brazil began to bubble up in new and different forms. By the time economic neoliberalism became more widespread in the 1990s, there were growing questions as to whether the extant political systems in much of Latin America were proving unable to formulate
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
322	HARRY E. VANDEN
economic policies that could provide some modicum of economic and social security for the vast majorities. Many wondered aloud if the much touted democratization and free elections were not, in fact, new political mechanisms supported by the national and inter- national economic and political elites to keep the masses subordinated (and not rebelling) and in an ongoing state of debilita- tion and poverty. Further, the effects of the economic contraction of the 1980s and the unbalanced economic growth of the 1990s often left segments of the middle class economically marginalized as well. The formation of a strongly neoliberal Washington Consensus among the leaders of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank and the U.S. Department of State’s Agency for International Development introduced yet another ingredient into Latin American politics (see Mander and Goldsmith 1996; Oxhorn and Ducantenzeiler 1998). As national political leaders felt increasing international pressure to adhere first to structural adjustments and then to neoliberal dictates from International Financial Institutions, they found that they were often obliged to implement policies that caused a further deterioration of living conditions for the masses and some segments of the middle class. For instance, the UNDP’s Human Development Report 1999 noted that inequalities have been rising since the 1980s and that “the past decade [the 1990s] has shown increasing concentration of income, resources and wealth among people, corporation and coun- tries” (United Nations Development Program 1999:3). This report goes on to note the new threats to human security and that problems associated with globalization and the turn to neoliberal policies have outstripped the ability of governance to remedy them (United Nations Development Program 1999:8). In its Social Panorama of Latin America 2001-2002, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean noted that as of 2001, 214 million people or some 43 percent of the population in Latin America were living in poverty and that of these 18.6 percent were indigents. The report also indicates that in several countries, including Ecuador and Venezuela, the levels of extreme poverty were greater in 2000 than they were in 1990. In Argentina, the poverty rate rose from 19.7 percent in 1999 to more than 30 percent in 2001; and it contin-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	323
ued to rise through 2002 (“Social Panorama of Latin America” 2002:1-2). Some conclude that the Washington Consensus is not holding in Latin America and the economic consequences it has wrought are causing social disintegration. As has been the case all too often in the region, the political systems have been unable to provide basic security in food, housing, education, employment, or monetary value and banking to wide sectors of the population. That is, these sectors are or have been marginalized from the nation proj- ect, and the governing institutions have been unwilling or unable to provide solutions to their situations. Indeed, in the eyes of most of the Latin American popular sectors, the structural adjustments and neoliberal reforms advocated by international financial institutions like the IMF have threatened their security and well-being. Their insecurity and dissatisfaction thus drive them to new forms of protest and to seek new and different political structures that might better respond to their needs. Traditional parties and governments are increasingly seen as unable to respond or even comprehend their needs. In the process, the traditional parties, if not the political systems themselves, are rapidly loosing their legitimacy.
New Elements, New Movements
Consequently, the current mobilizations seem to be different. The systems of mass communication and related communication tech- nologies and easy, low-cost access to the Internet have combined with higher levels of literacy and increased access to higher educa- tion and much greater political freedom under the democratization process (United Nations Development Program 1999:3-9). The result has been a new wave of highly political social movements that are often different in their organization and strategy from traditional movements and endeavor to articulate popular needs in new ways. This has occurred when ideas of grassroots democracy, popular participation, and even elements of Liberation Theology and Christian-based community organizations have been widely disseminated. Likewise, there is a growing belief that racial, gender, and economic inequality should not exist and that systems that perpetuate such inequality need to be changed.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
324	HARRY E. VANDEN
Unlike the radical revolutionary movements of the last few decades, these new movements do not employ or advocate the radi- cal restructuring of the state through violent revolution. Rather, their primary focus is to contest power by working through civil society to push for modification of the existing political system, and push it to the limits to achieve necessary change and restructuring. As suggested above, there have been some exceptions like the initial Zapatista uprising of early January 1994 and CONAIE’s very brief participation in a junta that held the Ecuadoran Congress building overnight in January of 2000. However, both movements quickly moved from trying to insert themselves as the regional or national rulers to negotiating power with existing national political elites while at the same time trying to change the composition of the national political class (see Collins 2000).
These new political movements all contest power, but do so in a political environment that is substantially different from the past. National-level political participation was quite restricted at the time of Latin America’s independence. Mass political movements like that led by Hidalgo failed, while those led by the less popularly oriented members of the criollo elite, like Iturbide, succeeded and set the stage for the elitist politics of the nineteenth and much of the twentieth centuries. Later, the voting franchise—and concomitant political participation—were gradually widened. This, in turn, chal- lenged the political elite to seek mechanisms to incorporate (if not manipulate) more of the population. This eventually led to the emer- gence of mass-based parties, reformist and revolutionary parties, and the emergence of populism as a means of incorporating the masses into a national project led by a political elite. Some reformist parties like Liberación Nacional in Costa Rica and Acción Democrática in Venezuela were able to bring about economic and political structural change and incorporate wide sectors of the masses into national society and competitive, two-party-dominant political systems. A few populist projects, such as Peronism in Argentina, were also able to achieve significant economic redistrib- ution, break the oligarchy’s economic domination, and incorporate the laboring masses and segments of the middle class into the (one- party-dominant) party system, albeit under the somewhat
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	325
demagogic leadership of Juan and Evita Perón. The Cuban revolu- tion challenged traditional elitist rule in a different way, but left little space for the development of autonomous social movements, though it did respond to the needs of the masses and developed the mechanism of poder popular that fomented active participation at the neighborhood and local levels. The widespread rebellion against Anastacio Somoza in Nicaragua helped make it possible for the Sandinista-led revolution to take power and for the FSLN-led government to begin an economic, social, and political restructuring of the Nicaraguan nation. Indeed, the strength and relative auton- omy of many of the mass organizations in Nicaragua in the early 1980s was significant and helped to show that new organizational structures and political movements that supported them could radi- cally change the way power was exercised in Latin America (See Vanden and Prevost 1993). Likewise, the strength and dynamism of neighborhood and community-based movements that began to flower all over Latin America in the 1980s (even under repressive military regimes) redefined the parameters of political activism and suggested new repertoires of action for emerging social and politi- cal movements.
New Social Movements and New Politics: The MST
The radically different nature of these new social movements and the new politics can perhaps best be seen in the largest of the new social movements in Latin America: The MST or Movement of the Landless Rural Workers in Brazil. Their ranks currently exceed two hundred thousand and on one occasion they were able to mobilize one hundred thousand people for a march on the Brasilia. Their views are well articulated. In a draft document on the “Fundamental Principles for the Social and Economic Transformation of Rural Brazil,” they note, “the political unity of the Brazilian dominant classes under Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s administration (1994- 2000) has consolidated the implementation of neoliberalism [in Brazil],” and these neoliberal policies led to the increased concen- tration of land and wealth in the hands of the few and the impoverishment of Brazilian society. The document continues
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
326	HARRY E. VANDEN
claiming, “popular movements must challenge this neoliberal conceptualization of our economy and society” (Landless 2001:153-54). In a pamphlet titled “Brazil Needs a Popular Project,” the organization calls for popular mobilizations, explain- ing, “All the changes in the history of humanity only happened when the people were mobilized.” And that in Brazil, “all the social and political changes that happened were won when the people mobilized and struggled” (O Brasil Precisa 2001:29). Their political culture and decision-making processes break from the authoritarian tradition. The movement has been heavily influenced by Liberation Theology and the participatory democratic culture that is generated by the use and study of Paulo Freire’s approach to self-taught, criti- cal education (see Freire 1960).
The MST itself was formed as a response to longstanding economic, social, and political conditions in Brazil. Land, wealth, and power have been allocated in unequal ways in Brazil since the conquest in the early 1500s. Land has remained highly concentrated and as late as 1996, 1 percent of the landowners who owned farms of over 1,000 hectares owned 45 percent of the land (Petras 2000:35). Conversely, as of 2001 there were some 4.5 million land- less rural workers in Brazil. Wealth has remained equally concentrated. In 2001, the Brazilian Institute of Government Statistics reported that the upper 10 percent of the population aver- aged an income that was nineteen times greater than the lowest 40 percent (Brazilian Institute of Statistics 2001). The plantation agri- culture that dominated the colonial period and the early republic became the standard for Brazilian society. The wealthy few owned the land, reaped the profits, and decided the political destiny of the many. Slavery was the institution that provided most of the labor on the early plantation system and thus set the nature of the relation- ship between the wealthy landowning elite and the disenfranchised toiling masses laboring in the fields. Land stayed in relatively few hands in Brazil, and the agricultural laborers continued to be poorly paid and poorly treated. Further, after the commercialization and mechanization of agriculture that began in the 1970s, much of the existing rural labor force became superfluous. As this process continued, not only were rural laborers let go, sharecroppers were
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	327
expelled from the land they had farmed and small farmers lost their land to larger family or commercial estates. This resulted in grow- ing rural unemployment and the growth of rural landless families. Many were forced to migrate to the cities increasing the numbers of the urban poor while others opted for the government sponsored Amazon Colonization program whereby they were transported to the Amazon region to cut down the rainforest and begin to cultivate the land. Few found decent jobs in the city and the poor soil of the former rainforest did not support sustained agriculture. As condi- tions deteriorated, the landless realized that they were fighting for their own existence as a group and, as such, they were the authors of their own destiny. One analyst observed that it is possible to clas- sify them, as did Eric Hobsbaum, in the context of the nineteenth century working class as one of the groups that held the conviction that its social salvation was in its own hands. She argued that “The landless become social subjects to the extent that they constituted a collectivity that brings with it...the struggle to guarantee its own social existence as workers on the land” (Caldart 1999:25). The origins of the organization are rooted in the bitter struggle to survive under the agricultural policies implemented by the military govern- ment. The landless in the southern Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul began to organize in order to demand land. Other landless people soon picked up the cause in the neighboring states of Paraná, and Santa Catarina. These were the beginnings of the MST (see Stedile 1999). The MST is built upon a long tradition of rural resist- ance and rebellion that extends back to the establishments of palenques or large inland settlements of run-away slaves, including the famous rebellion by the poor rural peasants of Canudos in the 1890s. The tradition also includes, more recently, the famous Peasant Leagues of Brazil’s impoverished Northeast in the 1950s and early 1960s and the Grass Wars in Rio Grande do Sul and the southern states in the 1970s (see Bastos 1984). When the MST was founded in southern Brazil in 1984 as a response to rural poverty and lack of access to land, wealth and power, similar conditions existed in many states in Brazil. Indeed, there were landless work- ers and peasants throughout the nation. Thus the MST soon spread from Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná in the South to states like
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
328	HARRY E. VANDEN
Pernambuco in the Northeast and Pará in the Amazon region. It rapidly became a national organization with coordinated policies and strong local participatory organization and decision-making, and frequent state and national meetings based on direct representa- tion (see Bradford and Rocha 2002). By 2001 there were active MST organizations in 23 of the 26 states (Fontes Interview 2003).
This type of national organization had not been the case with the Zapatista movement because conditions and identity were much more locally rooted. Yet, in both cases, traditional politics and tradi- tional political parties were unable and unwilling to address the deteriorating economic conditions of the marginalized groups who were suffering the negative effects of economic globalizaton. Their response was grassroots organization and the development of a new repertoire of actions that broke with old forms of political activity. Developing organization and group actions began to connect indi- vidual members through an increasing group identity. They were sometimes assisted in this task by progressive organizations concerned with economic and social justice. In the case of Brazil and the Landless, the Lutheran church and especially the Pastoral Land Commission of the Catholic Church offered their support. Although these organizations assisted the landless as did some segments of the Workers Party (PT), the organization never lost its autonomy. It was decided from the outset that this was to be an organization for the Landless Workers that would be run by the Landless Workers for their benefit as they defined it. They engaged in direct actions such as land takeovers from large estates and public lands, the construction of black plastic-covered encampments along the side of the road to call attention to their demands for land, and marches and confrontations when necessary. They even occupied the family farm of President Fernando Enrique Cardoso in order to draw attention to his landowning interests and the consequent bias they attributed to him. They were, at times, brutally repressed, assas- sinated, and imprisoned, but they persevered, forcing land distribution to their members and others. Their ability to mobilize as many as 12,000 people for a single land takeover or 100,000 for a national march suggested just how strong their organizational abili- ties were and how well they could communicate and coordinate at
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	329
the national level. They also created a great deal of national support and helped to create a national consensus that there was a national problem with land distribution and that some substantial reform was necessary.2
The Landless were well attuned to the international global- ization struggle and considered themselves part of it, helping to organize and participating in the World Social Forums in Porto Alegre and sending their representatives to demonstrations and protests throughout the world. Indeed, at least one recent work suggests that this was part of a developing global backlash against economic globalization (Broad 2002). Struggles that were once local and isolated became international and linked. The news media and growing international communications links, like cellular phones and especially electronic mail, greatly facilitated the global- ization of struggle and global awareness of local struggles and support and solidarity for them. This, and dramatic actions like massive land takeovers by the MST, also generated considerable support at the national level and helped to define what might have been considered a local problem as a national problem that required national attention and national resources to remedy it.
The interaction between the MST and the Workers party (PT) is also instructive. Although relations between the two organi- zations are generally excellent at the local level, with overlapping affiliations, the national leaderships have remained separate and not always as cordial. The MST has maintained a militant line in regard to the need to take over unused land and asserting their agenda, whereas much of the PT leadership has wanted to be more concilia- tory. Thus, the Landless supported Lula (Luiz Inacio “Lula”da Silva) and the Workers Party in most local campaigns and the national campaign for the presidency. In this way they helped to achieve significant regime change in Brazil, where Lula was elected with 61.27 percent of the vote in the second round of voting in 2002. Indeed, realizing the PT’s historic challenge to neoliberal policies and elitist rule, the landless turned out heavily in the election to join some 80 percent of the registered voters who participated in the voting in both rounds (IFES 2003). Once the election was over, the Landless did not press to be part of the government. Rather, they
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
330	HARRY E. VANDEN
continued to pressure the government for a comprehensive land reform program and a redistribution of the land and the wealth. There would be no return to politics as usual. The PT would push its “0 Hunger” program and other social and economic initiatives and the MST would press the PT government for the structural reforms (e.g., comprehensive agrarian reform) that it considered necessary.
Conclusion
As suggested by the example of the MST, as these new social move- ments grow and are politicized, they come to represent a clear response to the neoliberal economic policies that are being foisted on Latin American nations by International Financial Institutions and the U.S. government. They have become bulwarks in the resist- ance to the process of neoliberal globalization advocated by the Washington Consensus and have aggressively resisted the imple- mentation of neoliberal policies. In the process they have changed how politics are conducted in most Latin American nations. Their growth and militancy have generated whole new repertoires of actions that include national mobilizations so massive that they can topple governments and/or force them to change their policies. They have left the traditional parties far behind as they forge new politi- cal horizons and create a non-authoritarian, participatory political culture. Such movements are also using existing political space to maximum effect. In the process they are strengthening participatory democratic practice substantially.
They have vigorously resisted the corporate-led economic globalization process that many are heralding as the panacea to underdevelopment and poverty. Indeed, the economic realities that people all over Latin America are living have provided a potent empirical antidote to the universal prescription to globalize. The formulation of highly political social movements and the participa- tory democracy they practice provide a new and potent response to globalization in a time of neoliberalism. Further, these responses represent a substantial change from previous forms of political action—one that is transforming the conduct of politics throughout Latin America.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	331
NOTES
1	See most recently (Rohter 2003) for strong Bolivian reac- tions to now deposed President Sánchez de Lozada’s globalization and neoliberal free trade policies in Bolivia and the movement to force him from office. Most tellingly, Rohter notes, “Two decades of free-market reform leave many resentful.”
2	It should, however, be noted that much of the press was not always sympathetic and condemned their land takeovers as illegal actions. The rural landowners also did everything in their power to stop their actions and discredit them in the public eye.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, Sonia, Evelina Dagino, and Arturo Escobar, eds. 1998.
Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures, Revisioning of
Latin American Social Movements. Boulder, Co.: Westview. Banco de Dados Políticos das Américas. 2002. “Brazil: Eleções Presidenciais de 1998.” Retreived April 19, 2002 (http://
www.georgetown.edu/pdba/Elecdata/Brazil/pres98.html). Bastos, Elide Rugai. 1984. As Ligas Camponesas. Petópolis: Vozes. Bradford, Sue and Jan Rocha. 2002. Cutting the Wire. London:
Latin American Bureau. O Brasil Precisa de um Projecto Popular. 2001. Published by the
Secretariat of Popular Consultation of the MST. São Paulo. Brazilian Institute of Statistics. 2001 Statistical Report 2001, as cited from “Pais Termina Anos 90 Tão Desigual como Comenou,” Folha de São Paulo April 5, 2001 in Tom Lewis, “Brazil: The Struggle Against Neoliberalism.” International
Socialist Review June-July. Broad, Robin, ed. 2002. Global Backlash, Citizen Initiatives for a
Just World Economy. Laham, Maryland: Rowman &
Littlef ield. Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1999. Pedagogia do Movimiento dos Sem
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
332	HARRY E. VANDEN
Terra. Petrópolis: Vozes. Collins, Jennifer N. 2000. “A Sense of Possibility, Ecuadors’s
Indigenous Movement Takes Center Stage.” In “Adelante. The New Rural Activism in the Americas.” NACLA, Report on the Americas 33(5):40-46.
Dirección Ejecutiva de Organización Electoral. 2002 “Estadística de las Elecciones Federales de 2000.” Retrieved April 9, 2002 (www.ife.org.mx/wwworge/esta2000/gcprepcn).
Eckstein, Susan, ed. 2001. Power and Protest: Latin American Social Movements. Berkeley: University of California Press. Ellner, Steve and Daniel Hellinger. 2003. Venezuelan Politics in the Chávez Era: Class, Polarization and Conflict. Boulder:
Lynne Rienner. Escobar, Arturo and Sonia E. Alvarez. 1992. The Making of Social
Movements in Latin America: Identity, Strategy and
Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press. Fontes, Geraldo. 2003. Interview with author. São Paulo. September 17. Freire, Paulo. 2000. The Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York:
Continuum. Gaudin, Andrés. 2002. “Thirteen Days that Shook Argentina—And
Now What? In “Who Owns Knowledge?” NACLA, Report
on the Americas 25(5):6-9. García Díez, Fátima, 1999. “The Emergence of Electoral Reforms
in Contemporary Latin America.” 27th ECPR Point Sessions
Workshops, Designing Institutions, Mannheime. IFES. 2003. Retrieved March 24, 2003 (ifes.org/eguide/
turnout2002.htm). Kaufman-Purcell, Susan. 2001. “Electoral Lessons.” América
Economía (December 6):40. The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST). 2001.
“Fundamental Principles for the Social and Economic Transformation of Rural Brazil” Journal of Peasant Studies 28(2):146-152.
Levine, Robert M. 1998. Father of the Poor? Vargas and His Era. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mander, Jerry and Edward Goldsmith, eds. 1996. The Case Against the Global Economy and for a Turn Toward the Local. San
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	333
Francisco: Sierra Book Club. Moreley, Samuel A. 1995. Poverty and Inequality in Latin America,
the Impact of Adjustments and Recovery in the 1980s.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Oxhorn, Philip D. and Graciela Ducatenzeiler. 1998. What Kind of Democracy? What Kind of Market? University Park: The
Pennsylvania State University Press. Petras, James. 2000. “The Rural Landless Workers Movement.” Z
Magazine (March):32-36. Rohter, Larry. 2003 “Bolivia’s Poor Proclaim Abiding Distrust of
Globalization.” New York Times October 17, A2. Shifter, M. 2003 “Latin America’s New Political Leaders: Walking
on a Wire.” Current History (February) 102 (661):51-57. “Social Panorama of Latin America 2001-2002.” 2002. CEPAL
News 22(11):1-2. Stedile, João and Bernardo Mançaano Fernandes. 1999. Brava
Gente: a Trajetória do MST e a luta pela Terra no Brasil.
São Paulo: Fundacão Perseu Abramo. Shultz, Jim. 2003. “Bolivia: The Water War Widens.” NACLA,
Report on the Americas January/February 36(3):34-37. Vanden, Harry E. and Gary Prevost. 2002. Politics of Latin America: The Power Game. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press. ––––––. 1993. Democracy and Socialism in Sandinista Nicaragua.
Boulder: Lynne Rienner. United Nations Development Program. 1999. Human Development
Report 1999. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
