This Land is Ours Now: Social Mobilization and the Meanings of Land in Brazil
Marcellus M. Caldas
Journal of Latin American Geography, Volume 9, Number 2, 2010, pp. 173-174 (Review)
Published by Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers
DOI: 10.1353/lag.2010.0017
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/lag/summary/v009/9.2.caldas.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/16/11 12:11AM GMT
Book Reviews	173
This Land is Ours Now: Social Mobilization and the Meanings of Land in Brazil. Wendy Wol- ford. Durnham: Duke University Press, 2010. 275 pp. Photos, notes, appendices, and index. US23.95 Paperback (ISBN: 978-0-8223-4539-9).
Wendy Wolford uses her fifteen years of experience with the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem-Terra, or MST (the Rural Landless Worker’s Movement) to write This Land is Ours Now. The book is centered on extensive ethnographic research in two states in Brazil, Santa Catarina and Pernambuco. Wolford seeks to understand social mobiliza- tion within a movement. In her own words “... to understand how the movement works in particular places” (6) To achieve her goals, she presents an innovative framework by focusing on ordinary people, on everyday political economies, and common sense. Two MST settlements are compared and contrasted: the Campos Novos settlement in Santa Catarina state in southern Brazil, and the Água Preta settlement in Pernambuco in north- eastern Brazil. The settlers in Campos Novos were characterized as small farmers for generations before joining the MST, while settlers in Água Preta had almost all worked in sugarcane plantations for a wage. Consequently, the two locations represented differ- ent political economies, customs, culture, and context, or “moral economies.” Wolford shows that in mobilizing throughout Brazil, MST seeks to produce a coherent movement identity, or its imagined community of landless people. However, this is not always pos- sible.
The author argues that when settlers joined the MST, they did so with a variety of aspirations. In general terms, all settlers had similar desires such as the dream of a better life, but what they wanted depended on a whole set of specific meanings: what land meant to them, what family meant, what justice meant. Wolford argues that to un- derstand these meanings and how they influenced people’s decisions to join the MST we need to understand how the institutions that structured their lives, and the norms that shaped their behavior, were rooted in each particular place, family practices, and commu- nity traditions. In this context, in the Campo Novos settlement, small farmers joined the MST in order to continue the way of life that they had practiced for generations. On the other hand, in the northeast two factors were important in joining the movement. First, MST members were pushed into the movement by their desperate situation and lack of alternatives. Second, they were pulled into the movement by the prospect of belonging to an organization directly connected to channels of power.
Before delving into a deeper examination of each settlement, Wolford starts by conducting an analysis of historical property relations in Brazil. Three points are high- lighted. First, the historical circumstance and conditions have produced a smallholder farm-based politics in southern Brazil. Second, the author argues that any analysis of the MST official genesis story is incomplete without an accounting of structural factors and moral economies. Third, the MST ideals, strategies, and culture were heavily influenced by the moral economies of smallholders from southern Brazil. However, the influence of smallholders from southern Brazil did not transform the MST into a regional move- ment. On the contrary, the author suggests that the identity that MST created relies on a politics of scale and that the MST has privileged scale over place in an effort to national- ize the struggle for land. Consequently, this allowed the movement to achieve significant success at the national and international levels, but it has also generated contradictions in particular places. A good example of this contradiction is found in the Água Preta settlement in the zona da mata of Pernambuco state, a region characterized by sugarcane plantations. The author argues that MST took so many years to develop in this region because the moral economies of sugarcane plantations were so different from the moral economies of small family farms in southern Brazil.
174	Journal of Latin American Geography
Wolford analyzes social mobilization by providing testimony from several movement members as an example of diverse membership within the movement and she situates the decline of the movement in the zona da mata through three important issues: pro- duction, property and politics. The book concludes with an analysis of the relationship between the MST and the “Lula” government by discussing the implications of the cur- rent conjecture for agrarian reform in Brazil.
In general, this book brings together several arguments and ideas that have been published before by the author in several journal articles, but this does not make the book a mere collection of articles. A reader unfamiliar with the MST would think that this book highlights the MST failure to “conquer” other regions of Brazil. In other words, the movement failed to expand its ideology from the south (where it was born) to the northeast. Wolford shows how difficult it is to scale up from a local organization to a national one, and she does so by raising the question of why the demobilization in the northeast took hold. The book is well-written and makes a valuable contribution to the study of land reform in Brazil in an original framework. It makes good use of social movement theories and will be a valuable work for geographers who have interests in social movements in Latin America, particularly in rural Brazil.
Marcellus M. Caldas Department of Geography Kansas State University
Holiday in Mexico: Critical Reflections on Tourism and Tourist Encounters. Dina Berger and An- drew Grant Wood, Eds. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2010. 393 pp., diagrs., photos, notes, and index. $24.94 (ISBN: 978-0-8223-4571-8) ($24.95)
This rich volume is steeped in historical accounts and critical inquiries about the subjectivity surrounding the portrayal of Mexico over the past two centuries by tour- ists, government officials, and the media. Historians, a lawyer, an administrative director, and a journalist wrap their discussions around three themes: (1) how Mexicans promoted and imagined their country and culture, (2) the politics through which Mexicans and their guests interact with each other, and (3) the advantages and disadvantages of tourism. In brief, “the essays presented here offer a detailed and complex view of tourism –a critical topic which has largely been ignored by historians of Mexico” (2).
Three periods frame the volume. The first assesses tourists between 1846 and 1911, spanning the onset of the Mexican-American War to the Mexican Revolution. Andrea Boardman shows that soldiers-tourists had ample time to interact with people and landscapes while treaties were being drafted and governments were being staffed. Through their memoirs, drawings, various forms of ‘mappings,’ and the like, the Ameri- can public (newspapers, family members and kin of the soldiers) became primed to ex- plore their neighbors to the south. Although most of this soldier-tourist interpretations were filtered by gendered, ethnocentric, and religious (e.g., most soldiers were Protestants in a Catholic nation) perspectives, the seed was planted in thousands of readers to get to know Mexico. Railway completion and extensions in the 1880s made that possible for U.S. residents.
Christina Bueno’s chapter on Teotihuacán next explores how the centennial celebrations of 1910 coincided with the excavation of Mexico’s treasured pyramids. She claims that the dilapidated monuments allowed the Porfirian government to attract for-
