2008
Law
Journal of Rural Studies
‘My land, your social transformation’: Conflicts within the landless people movement (MST), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Rute Caldeira

The School of Law, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
The Brazilian Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) is one of the best-known and most prominent rural social movements. The unequal distribution of land in Brazil, and the neglect of this problem by successive Brazilian governments contributed greatly to the organisation of rural movements striving for the implementation of land reform in the country. The struggle for land therefore frames the MST collective action and legitimates its raison d’eˆ tre as a social movement. The MST framing process, carried out mainly by the movement leaders and organisers, intends to unify the social movement by articulating private beliefs, interpretations and preferences into shared values and meanings. However, this process of framing does not take place without competition or/and conflict: leaders are many times forced to compete with other institutions, with the media, or even with inherited cultural understandings which provide alternative frames. This paper focuses particularly on the conflicting process of framing internal to the MST. More specifically, the present paper looks at how the MST leaders/organisers frame, and interpret, community and land differently from the MST settlers/ followers whose lived experiences and inherited cultural understandings naturally informed their perceptions both on community and land.
r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords: Land reform; Framing; Social movement; Brazil
1. Introduction
The Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) is one of the most prominent rural or agrarian reform movements in the world. Over two decades, it has carried out hundreds of land occupations across Brazil and has succeeded in forcing the redistribution of approxi- mately 22,000ha of land to 218,000 families.1 This is particularly remarkable in an era in which agrarian reform is frequently seen as an issue which is passe ́ . Thus, the MST has attracted much attention in both political and academic circles.
The MST, as a national mass movement organisation, was formed in 1984 in the small town of Cascavel, Parana ́ state, Brazil. Nevertheless, this movement is just one in the relatively long line of ‘peasant’ struggles in Brazil. The most important and the most emblematic of these struggles
E-mail address: rute.caldeira@manchester.ac.uk 1Information based on MST’s statistics. See also www.mmst.org.br
(in Portuguese).
0743-0167/$ - see front matter r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2007.12.001
are: Zumbi dos Palmares in the 17th Century2; Canudos rebellion in the 19th Century3; cangac-o in the early 20th Century4 and Ligas Camponesas in the mid-20th Century.5
2Zumbi dos Palmares was the name of a quilombo. A quilombo is an organised free community of slaves usually set up in donated lands. The first reference to the existence of quilombos dates from 1597 (Fernandes, 2000). However, quilombos were often attacked by governmental forces or popular militias led by powerful landowners and Zumbi dos Palmares was no exception. For almost a century, the community in Zumbi dos Palmares resisted the constant attacks of white settlers who, in the end of the 17th Century murdered Ganga Zumba (the leader) and destroyed the quilombo.
3The Canudos rebellion took place in Bahia state. The rebels, all ex- slaves and landless people, were led by the Antoˆ nio Conselheiro. In 1830, they settled in Fazenda Canudos where they survived from cooperative agricultural work. In 1897, this community was massacred by the Federal army.
4In Portuguese Brazilian, cangac-o is slang for social banditry. These were groups of expelled agricultural workers who often attacked large properties, threatening the power and influence of the landlords. This was more common in the Northeast regions.
5The Liga Camponesa (or Peasant Leagues) was first formed by renters inGalile ́iaFarm,Pernambucostatewhowereresistingexpropriation. Soon after this, other leagues were formed. Their final goal was radical
www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud
The Brazilian agrarian sector, based on the capitalist model of production and dependent on large property, always tended to push people out of land, forcing them to constant physical displacement. These dispossessed people, named ‘landless’, were at the bottom of the social and economic hierarchy. In the 1960s and 1970s, with regard to political and social mobilisation, the Communist Party and the Roman Catholic Church competed for the leadership of these groups of landless people. Thus, while some landless people found support in the trade unions and peasant associations, others found comfort, organisation and assistance in Roman Catholic organisations such as the Christian Based Communities (CEBs) and the Pastoral Commission for Land (CPT). These Catholic organisations were greatly inspired and influenced by the liberation theology, a theological stream of the Catholic Church that throughout the 1960s and 1970s remained extremely popular amongst the Latin American clergy.
The peak of social tension in the Brazilian countryside was in the 1960s and 1970s, during the process of agricultural modernisation, when machinery was replacing labour and cash crops were being widely introduced. In several Brazilian states,6 especially in the south, peasant insurgent groups, supported by the Catholic Church and other religious organisations, began to come together to form movements inspired by Church organised groupings such as MASTER (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra) in Rio Grande do Sul, formed in the 1950s.7 By 1983, in just the state of Parana ́ these included the MASTES (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra do Sudoeste do Parana ́); MASTEN (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem- Terra do Parana ́); MASTRECO (Movimento dos Agricul- tores Sem-Terra do Centro-Oeste do Parana ́) and the MASTEL (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra do Litoral do Parana ́).
The leaders of these and other organised rural/peasant movements held their first national meeting in 1982. This meeting was promoted by the CPT. Back then, due to CPT’s efforts of harmonisation of the several existing movements, those present at this meeting did not feel the need to create a national social movement. However, 2 years later in a second national meeting held in Cascavel city, Parana ́ state, the rural leaders agreed that resistance to
(footnote continued) land reform. During the military government that seized power in 1964 the Peasant Leagues, along with many other peasant movements, were co- opted.
6Brazil has 26 states and one Federal District: Acre, Alagoas, Amapa ́ , Amazonas,	Bahia,	Ceara,	Distrito	Federal,	Espı ́ rito	Santo,	Goia ́ s, Maranha ̃ o, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraı ́ba, Parana ́, Pernambuco, Piauı ́, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondoˆ nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sa ̃ o Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins.
7The strong implementation of MASTER at some point eclipsed the predominance of the ULTAB-organised groups in Rio Grande do Sul. The ULTAB (Unia ̃o dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agrı ́colas) was controlled by the Brazilian Communist Party.
co-option would be more efficient if organised nationally. With this purpose, the MST was created.
Despite the federal government’s constant attempts at co-option, the MST survived. The social movement’s power of mobilisation was recognised, nationally and internationally, especially after 1997 when a national protest march was organised. The first group of followers began gathering on 17 February in Prac- a da Se ́ , in Sa ̃ o Paulo city (Chaves, 2000). At that exact moment, several other groups were doing the same all over Brazil. Two months later, and after a long, painful but peaceful journey the ‘landless’ people arrived in the country’s capital city, Brasilia, which had never looked so small as when welcoming the thousands and thousands of demonstrators. That day, the Prac- a do Treˆ s Poderes (Piazza of the Three Powers) saw only the power of the landless people. The world finally woke up to the land problem in Brazil and the MST obtained international media attention, breaking through the national isolation that in the past years had consigned them to the hands of many landlords’ ruthless violence.
The following section briefly outlines the main theore- tical influences over the analysis of social movements, and its concepts, specifically emphasising the concept of ‘frames’. The framing process is also a process internal to social movements that might imply, and usually does, some conflict due to different understandings concerning the same social ‘reality’. The last sections of this paper focus on how the settlers and the leaders of the MST construct different understandings of community and land. The paper is based on 8 months’ empirical research, undertaken in 2002 in Rio state, Brazil, in MST-run encampments and settlements.
2. Theorising social movements: from grievances to framing
For Tarrow (1998), the three main theorists who influenced subsequent theories on social movements are Marx, Lenin and Gramsci. Marx laid the foundations of what Tarrow designates as ‘grievance theory’. For Marx, conflict is structurally rooted, that is conflict emerges from within the structure of society. Collective action is the means to overcome structural grievances that affect a certain class group. However, Marx said little about leadership in particular and it was Lenin who came to conceptualise the role of the leaders in collective class movements. Lenin did not underestimate the ‘power’ of the masses but he most certainly did not overestimate the masses’ capacity of organisation. Thus, he elaborated a ‘theory of vanguard’ according to which an elite or professional group of revolutionaries would have to be formed in order to organise the masses and prepare them for the revolution. Lenin’s theory, Tarrow wrote, ‘‘was an organisational response to a historical situation in which the working class [alone] was unable to produce a revolution’’ (1998, p. 12). This theory emphasised the crucial importance of the organisational variables not only
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	151
ARTICLE IN PRESS
152	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
in the ‘making’ of revolutions but also in the process of contentious politics.
Developing these ideas, resource mobilisation theory (RMT) began to take shape in the 1960s, notably in the work of the economist Mancur Olson. Olson (1971) strived to understand why rational individuals, primarily guided by self-interest, took part in collective movements. According to Olson (1971), if individuals are primarily concerned with their individual good rather than with the collective one, to be successful social movements should be organised in such a way that everyone who is part of a movement feels individually rewarded. The few ‘believers’ in the ‘collective good’ are the social movement’s most important members, thus its leaders. Part of their task is the distribution of ‘selective incentives’ which will encou- rage other members’ continued participation and avoid the ‘free-rider’ problem. In sum, social movements should be organised in such a way that all its members feel individually rewarded for being collectively involved in something. Hence, a social movement’s existence depends greatly on the availability of resources that can be mobilised both to attract and reward its members and to perfect the social movement’s organisation. McCarthy and Zald’s (1977) work focused especially on social movements’ capacity to mobilise resources. This focus led to a new methodological approach to the study of social movements in which social movements should be analysed in the same way as other organisations are analysed, corporations included. Hence, social movement leaders would occupy an analogous position to corporate executives, and social movement militants to stockholders.
Meanwhile, Gramsci’s writings gave more flesh to Lenin’s conceptualisation of leadership. Gramsci argued for the development of a ‘cadre of intellectuals’ recruited not only from within the working class but from the opponent elites. These intellectuals would form the work- ing class’s historical bloc of forces. Their main role would be to deconstruct the dominant bourgeois culture that contributed to the cultural alienation of the working class. When no longer culturally alienated, the working class would be free to (re)discover its own culture, and its own (collective) identity. Gramsci, Tarrow (1998) states, deeply influenced ‘framing and collective identity theories’ on social movements.
Each one of the above theories emphasises different variables: grievances, organisation and resources, and culture. Completely neglected, according to Tarrow (1998) is the political variable. It was only in the political process approach (PPA) that this variable was given more analytical prominence. The PPA was a reaction to what was thought to be the shortcomings of RMT. Mobilising human and material resources was not enough to explain why ‘‘waves of movements emerge in some periods and not in others’’ and why some social movements were ‘‘more adept at manipulating cultural symbols than others’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 18). The explanation could only be found in ‘‘the variations of political structure and the
workings of political process’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 18). Depending on the particular configuration of a certain political system and context, different opportunities or threats would emerge. These could either facilitate (in the case of opportunities) or repress (in the case of threats) social movement organisation.
Tilly (1995, 2002) contributed greatly for the further development of the PPA by focusing on the dynamics of the political opportunity structure. For Tilly what stands out in social movement analysis is the interaction between the political institutions and the social movement leaders who confront, as much as negotiate with, these institutions. Confrontation and negotiation are the two faces of the same process of struggle, a process that does not exhaust itself in the immediate context of the struggle but that bears an historical weight. The DNA of any process of struggle is inscribed in its repertoires of contention. These repertoires display an array of options of strategies of struggle. Repertoires of contention are formed in and by the historical process of struggle and they are inherited allowing social movements, in certain contexts and in a particular moment in time, to decide on their strategies of struggle (for example, blockades, strikes, marches, etc.).
Nevertheless, how are these repertoires of contention updated, how do they incorporate new and innovative strategies? According to Tarrow (1998), repertoires of contention can be disrupted by ‘moments of madness’, due to the escalation of protest and/or in the context of which protest escalates. These moments of madness are tempor- ary but disruptive and transformative, and liable of changing the course of cycles of protest. For this to happen, however, it is crucial the emergence of favourable political opportunities, which vary according to different historical, political and cultural circumstances (see Zald, 1996). A structure of political opportunities is a chain of causation, which culminates in the availability of resources external to a group. These resources allow lowering the cost of collective action, disclose potential allies, reveal vulnerable elites, and facilitate the emergence of social networks and collective identities (Tarrow, 1998, p. 20). With the opening of favourable political opportunities, social movements are able not only to resort to previous repertoires of contention but also to innovate and to come up with new forms and strategies of struggle. Forms of contention depend greatly of leaders’ creativity and frame both the leaders’ and the masses’ actions. Framing allows individuals to organise, categorise and interpret social meanings in a given situation. Framing, as Tarrow put it, ‘‘not only reflects the generalisation of a grievance, but defines the ‘us’ and ‘them’ in a movement’s conflict structure’’. This is of extreme importance since the ‘‘coordination of collective action depends on trust and cooperation that are generated among participants by shared understandings and identities or, to use a broader category, on the collective action frames that justify, dignify, and animate collective action’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 21).
In general terms, frames ought to be understood as the ‘‘specific metaphors, symbolic representations, and cogni- tive cues used to render or cast behaviour and events in an evaluative mode and to suggest alternative modes of action’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 262) and social movements ‘‘actively engage in the construction of meaning, the portrayal of injustice, and the definition of pathways to change’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 269). However, Tarrow argues, ‘‘[A]lthough movement organisers actively engage in framing work, not all framing takes place under their control’’ (1998, p. 22). Movement organisers/leaders may have to compete with the state, the media, or simply with inherited cultural understandings. The framing process is a dynamic one since ‘‘frames are, on one hand, part of the world, passive and structured; on the other, people are active constructing them’’ and therefore the ‘‘vulnerability of the framing process makes it a locus of potential struggle, not a laden reality to which we all must inevitably yield’’ (Gamson et al., 1996, p. 276). When the leaders of a social movement are forced to compete with their ‘followers’’ inherited cultural understandings then conflict situations inside the social movements are most likely to arise. It is precisely on some of these conflict situations which take place inside the MST that this paper focuses on. The option to look at conflict within the social movement rests on Gamson et al.’s assumption that a social ‘‘move- ment is a field of actors, not a unified entity’’ hence being ‘‘more useful to think of framing as an internal process of contention within movements with different actors taking different positions’’ (Gamson et al., 1996, p. 283).
3. The MST: conflicts from within
The MST’s existence in Brazil is justified by the existence of an important structural grievance: the unequal distribu- tion of land. Nevertheless, the MST’s organisation as a social movement would never have been possible without the support of certain religious organisations, especially the Catholic Church-run CEBs and CPTs. Influenced by liberation theologians, these organisations, brought to- gether people subjected to the same grievances and many political opponents to the regime, especially during the military dictatorship in Brazil in the 1960s and 1970s. At the time of its formal organisation as a social movement, the MST leaders framed the movement’s collective action on the struggle for land. The right to land is still the slogan that reflects the generalisation of many landless people’s grievances and which justifies the movement’s collective action. Nevertheless, the MST leaders, in their effort to construct a coherent and cohesive social movement that clearly draws the distinction between ‘us’ (the landless people), and ‘them’ (the landowners and the government), have to compete with the landless people’s (or settlers’) inherited cultural understandings. Thus, this distinction between ‘us’ and ‘them’ may as well be internal to the MST. For the settlers, ‘us’ are themselves; ‘them’ are the leaders. Two examples of how this internal distinction is
created inside the social movement are the settlers’ and leaders’ different conceptions, or understandings, of com- munity and land. These two elements—community and land—are not a random choice. Community and land are two elements closely involved in the MST leaders’ framing process and likewise embedded in the MST’s ideology. Ideology and framing can be closely related: though ideologies ‘‘tend to be more complex and logical systems of beliefs than frames, (y) frames may be embedded in ideologies’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 262).
4. Leaders’ and settlers’ different understandings of community: ‘here the stronger ones eat the weaker ones’
The ‘right to land’ is the slogan that frames the MST collective action and justifies its existence as a social movement in the context of Brazilian society. The materialisation of this fundamental right implies the redistribution of land. Ultimately, it implies the implemen- tation of land reform in a country where such a reform, on a large scale, has never been attempted. As the MST organisers and leaders are well aware, this will not happen overnight and the government does not seem willing to cooperate. Thus, one of the MST strategies of struggle is to occupy lands which are not socially productive and to organise rural communities of landless people (sem-terra).8
Wolford argues that, through this process, the MST has engaged in the construction of an imagined community whereby ‘‘adherence to MST’s ideological and practical guidelines requires each individual to go well beyond past experiences to imagine a new social, political and economic ideal’’ (Wolford, 2004, p. 506). This social imaginary, according to Wolford, is what the leaders believe estab- lishes the link between ‘‘‘the objective conditions of
8The argument for the ‘legitimacy’ of the occupation is rooted in the Land Statutes, published by the military government in the mid-1960s, which stated that land that does not fulfill a social function shall be used for the purposes of land reform. The Land Statutes have endured until the present day and by social function is commonly understood the productive use of land, contributing to the generation of intensive-labour/employ- ment. In 1988, with democracy finally restored in Brazil, the concept of ‘productive land’ was added to this bill inherited from the military dictatorship. The concept of ‘productive land’ is not related to the composition of the soil but with the productive use that is given to privately own landed properties. Any private landed property, to be liable for expropriation, has to be considered unproductive. The assessment of the productive status of the land and the on-site technical inspection (vistoria) is due to be carried out by the INCRA’s (Instituto Nacional de Colonizac-a ̃o Agra ́ria) technicians. The vistoria is a decisive and conclusive moment in this process. If, after the vistoria, the land is considered unproductive, the INCRA initiates the negotiation of compensation with the landowner. In 2001, under Cardoso’s presidency, extra legal clauses were added to the existing legal dispositions’ corpus that regulates the agrarian reform in Brazil. One of these legal clauses stated that any landed property that is occupied before INCRA’s productivity assessment will not be inspected at all by this governmental institute. Therefore, in such situations the process of expropriation/negotiation with the landowner cannot be initiated. This means that a landed property can only be occupied after the INCRA’s productivity assessment concludes on use given to land.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	153
ARTICLE IN PRESS
154	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
exploitation’ and the subjective interpretation of those conditions as exploitation’’ (Wolford, 2004, p. 506). However, Wolford argues that the social movement’s interpretation of these objective conditions often collides with the settlers’ subjective interpretations, which are informed by the landowning class’s dominant worldview. Therefore, the first step is to deconstruct this dominant worldview that prevents settlers from seeing themselves as a class. Indeed, according to Wolford, for the MST leaders the construction of a sem-terra community is one step further in the making of a class-for-itself. Leaders believe that those who join the MST, the sem-terra, form a class- in-itself (Wolford, 2004). Being part of the community of sem-terra is becoming part of a class-for-itself.9
As was observed during the fieldwork, the MST ascribes a strong political dimension to their idea of a community of sem-terra. Indeed, as Wolford argues, the MST organisers aim to elevate the sem-terra’s consciousness to the level of a class-for-itself. However, the leaders of the MST have made clear that the cohesiveness of their ‘imagined’ rural community cannot rest exclusively on an ideological belief but instead on the sharing of common traditional (as in To ̈ nnies, 1963) and moral (as in Durkheim, 1984) values, reinforced by the symbolic (as in Anderson, 1991). These values, as emerged from interviews with the leaders, are those ‘‘shattered by the foundations and development of capitalist society’’10: solidarity, community living and family as the centre of social life. Thus, the MST leadership does not see these values as new. Instead, these values are part of a rural traditional way-of-life that was eroded by capitalist pursuit of profit. The MST leaders interviewed argued that before joining the social movement, settlers were alienated, corrupted by the capitalist values of individualism and egotism. The experience of revolutionary praxis in the MST-run encampments will, however, allow them to overcome this capitalist ‘inherited culture’. As one male leader commented:
This period we are in now is a period of pre-settlement [encampment] when everything and everyone is boiling up, but that’s good and pedagogic. Little by little, this period will revolutionise people’s mentalities and teach them how to gain control over their own lives to the point where they can form a different and new community. That’s the process through which a com- munity is built.
9Becoming a class-for-itself implies living through the revolutionary experience of struggling not only for land but also of fighting against capitalist exploitation. According to the MST leaders, this fight against capitalism does not have to be destructive. Indeed, it is constructive since it implies the setting up of a different, alternative model of production based on cooperative work and production in the rural sem-terra communities. This setting up of an alternative model of production is seen by the leaders as representing the embryo of a new political project, a new mode of organising the social alternative to capitalism and neo-liberalism.
10Quote from an interview with one male national leader.
In summary, the leaders’ imaginary countryside is depicted as peaceful, communal and communitarian, healthy, and as abiding by values of solidarity, friendship (almost brother/sisterhood) whilst ‘naturally’ inducing a strong bond between the wo/man and the land. Overall, the MST leaders’ ‘imagined community’ implies both the emergence of rural settlements based on communal/ cooperative production and on relations and networks of solidarity. This community is seen as being formed in the dialectical encounter between a new political project and old traditional (and moral) values.
One male regional leader conveyed this sense through an allegory:
Let me tell you a story. In the northeast there is an old saying that goes like this: if you eat the grain meant to be kept as a seed, in the future you will either starve or leave. Women were responsible for the seeds. And for years, people over there respected this saying. And why? Because if you eat the grain that you are keeping as a seed you won’t have anything to grow during the raining season, therefore you won’t have anything to eat. So either you starve or you migrate. We, the MST, we are like the women in northeast. We try to keep the seed. And what are the seeds? The seeds are the [traditional cultural] principles. (y) These are values and principles that structure our vision of the world and prevent us from being corrupted by the system. (y) These are the seeds that we keep. We won’t give them up no matter how hard it is to keep them. Even if we don’t achieve our goal at least we will leave this legacy to future movements and generations. Our goal is social trans- formation. We have three main goals: land, land reform, and a new society (y).
However, the leaders’ ideal of rural communities down- plays settlers’ prior experiences of the countryside. Settlers’ experiences of the countryside, as it emerged from the interviews, were not so idyllic at all. Thus, it was observed, the leaders’ mythologized idea of rural communities was not accepted and was even resisted, by many of the settlers interviewed. Prior experiences obviously influence the settlers’ perceptions and representations, and the memory of these experiences cannot simply be erased. The prior experiences that these settlers in Rio de Janeiro state had of life in the countryside were deeply associated with a past of dispossession and exploitation, often as sugarcane cutters, which led them to migrate to the closest urban centres. Their decision to return to the countryside, this time with the push from the MST, was mainly rooted in settlers’ belief that the land they would acquire would prevent them from being exploited as they had been in the past. In other words, settlers imagined their return to the countryside as a new beginning. From the interviews and informal con- versations held with the settlers, it can be concluded that for them returning to the countryside meant a sort of (individual) liberation. The land that the settlers would get was set to be their individual insurance against oppression
and exploitation. Land is for the settlers a means that hopefully will allow them to achieve food security, higher status and independence. Settlers do not expect to find an idyllic countryside that they know never existed. They simply expect to change their objective and subjective individual living conditions in order to face up to the hardships of a rural context that they have never experienced as idyllic but which, nevertheless, has some familiarity to them.
To the majority of the settlers living in the encampments where the fieldwork took place, community is linked neither with being part of a sem-terra class nor with the construction of a rural community based on communal or cooperative production. Community, instead, comprises many practical concerns that need solutions as well as of relations with neighbours. These relationships, from the very beginning when the settlers set up the encampment, are crisscrossed by close friendship but also petty conflicts based on ‘envy’, ‘jealousy’, gossip, competition for the best resources such as land, and a strong sense of inequality. Ultimately, settlers’ sense of community is associated with the degree of solidarity channelled into concrete actions that aim to improve their living conditions inside the settlements and the encampments. Daily interactions between neighbours also help to form community relations and during the fieldwork it was observed that women were more prompt to comment about these issues than were men. When living inside the encampments, women would tend to spend their days in the built up housing area. Also women are the main people who form everyday community relationships. Furthermore, because in the encampments and settlements where the fieldwork took place most women were responsible for the domestic chores they were more aware of the difficulties inherent in everyday life as well. Consequently, women were more aware of how the ‘community’ inside the encampments was developing.
Some female settlers commented:
I brought all my children here with me and when I first got here my shack was made of hay because I didn’t have money to buy plastics. I tell you, in the beginning things were tough but I could handle it. But now... In here the stronger ones eat the weaker onesy And now life goes on, from better to worst, from better to worsty You know, here there’s no unity but a lot of gossipy Here you only find people who live with difficulties. You won’t find anyone that might help to put an end to your misery or someone who will offer you something. This is my notion of companionship. Few people do this here. [female settler, 29 years old, Oziel Alves]
If we leave for two weeks to work, by the time we get back our shack won’t be here anymorey They steal things from us so we can’t leave to work anyway. Plus we have the children and no one to take care of them. I’m not crazy to leave my little eight year old girl here
alone all day. I don’t trust people herey [female settler, 24 years old, Oziel Alves]
Alternatively, in the communities of Oziel Alves and Itatiaia, two other major factors fomenting the fragmenta- tion of community relationships, besides settlers’ lack of trust of each other, were identified. Their existence feeds into settlers’ understanding of the community of landless in which they are living. These factors are processes of internal social and economic differentiation, and disputes over land.
Processes of internal social and economic differentiation often led to a greater sense of internal inequality. Some settlers, before joining the MST, had more financial resources than others. Those who had more were obviously more able to cope with the hardships of living in an encampment. Life in the encampments implied an agonis- ing wait for the legal expropriation/recognition of the possession of the land and consequently for the govern- mental subsidies/loans to start off the production. Most of the settlers approached argued the MST’s internal regula- tions aggravated and deepened the prior situation of inequality amongst settlers. According to the internal rules of the MST, families have to remain inside the encamp- ments at all times. This is, not only they have to live there; they must remain permanently in the encampments. Otherwise, when it comes to distributing the plots, non- abiding families will be penalised by getting the worst plots (for example, those far away from water resources; worst suited for irrigation; far away from the main road). Ultimately, these families may be expelled. In order to abide by the MST’s rules, most of the families were deprived of a second earner even when they could barely cope on one salary. In the case of lone-parent families, families were deprived of the only existing earner. This rule was clearly designed to suit ‘traditional’ families, often composed of a father, a mother, and children. Therefore, in the encampments, those who ended up staying were
(i) settlers who could rely on their meagre savings and/or the help of their family and relatives;
(ii) settlers who owned their own house in the city and managed to rent it;
(iii) settlers who experienced the most dramatic situations of poverty and deprivation and
(iv) settlers whose family structure allowed them to combine a paid job in the nearest city with living in the encampment.
Settlers who did not get any support from their families ‘outside’ or could not find a paid job in the nearest city fared considerably worse than the others who did and who could. Even to till the small gardens surrounding the shacks to produce some vegetables, manioc, flour and fruits for family consumption, implies having money to buy the seeds and the farming tools. Some settlers, whose objective living conditions before joining the social
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	155
ARTICLE IN PRESS
156	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
movement were better, were clearly at an advantage when compared to those who were worse-off. Those who were worse-off and who were greatly affected by this MST rule had only two options: they could either leave or stay. If they stayed, their struggle for survival would be increas- ingly difficult. The settlers in the encampments where the fieldwork took place were aware of this. They were also concerned with the fact that due to this situation, ‘good people’, people ‘who really deserved it’ were being forced to leave because they were unable to guarantee their survival. Most of the settlers interviewed often blamed the leaders for this situation and called for their intervention. However, the leaders believed the encampment period to be the period in which economic equality would eventually be restored and not exacerbated. One male regional leader argued that:
The financial question is different because those who have little [money] when they come to an encampment will lose it all after a while because the struggle takes time. So, to sustain your family here you will have to buy seeds, cattle and so even if you have a little more than the others you will lose the little you have and little by little you will try to rebuild what you lost. And that’s the process you can see here in the encampment because we are already delimiting the lots, starting to produce soy
But the settlers approached doubted this prognosis. They believed that internal problems of inequality and depriva- tion were not likely to be automatically solved. The MST is not responsible for the length of the waiting period. Instead, this is mostly determined by the functioning of the Brazilian legal system and by the delay in the bids for the governmental credits/loans/subsidies. Nevertheless, by blindly applying this particular rule according to which settlers have to remain in the encampment at all times, the MST is contributing to the aggravation of the social differentiation that exists a priori amongst the settlers-to- be. It is clear that the social movement does not have the means to support those who are worse-off. However, the compulsoriness of the rule in question considerably reduces the poorest settlers’ options for strategies of survival and increases their disadvantaged position in relation to the other (better-off) settlers.
Disputes over land, another dividing factor, are already characteristic of the encampments. For instance, veiled but heavy tension surrounding the question of the distribution of the plots was strongly felt in the atmosphere of the encampment at Oziel Alves. This tension started to mount when land in the encampment started to be measured with the purpose of being divided into individual lots. Again, the root of the question was the rule that made it compulsory for settlers to stay permanently in the encampment. Many of the settlers argued that those who had lived only a short time in the encampment were getting the best plots; while the families who by choice or by compulsion were abiding by the existing rule were being let
down by the distribution scheme. Discussions and meetings amongst family representatives within the community of Oziel Alves concerning the distribution of the plots were permeated by fear. One female representative of a group of families when questioned on how these meetings went stated that she was particularly concerned with a case of a settler who had spent most of his time in the city and who was about to be given a very well-located plot. This settler, she argued, had a reputation of being an extremely violent man and, furthermore, of having been arrested in the past. He was not threatening the leaders directly but he was threatening some of the settlers. This woman then added that she alone would not speak against him since, according to her, ‘‘you never know what might happen to you or to our loved ones afterwards’’.
In the encampments and settlements where this research was carried out, the leaders’ imagined community was not exactly coming to life. In the MST-run encampments and settlements, the community was a site of friendship but it was also deeply fragmented by internal conflicts that feed into settlers’ understandings of community. Also conflict- ing were the different meanings that leaders’ and settlers’ attributed to land.
5. Leaders’ and settlers’ divergent views on land: ‘my land, your social transformation’
According to the MST organisers, the process of the construction of ‘new’ rural communities corresponds to the initial dismantling of the way the social structure is organised in Brazil. For the leaders of the MST, social relations are deeply influenced and structured according to the way production is organised. Thus, essential to the task of ‘dismantling’, and thus of socially transforming the world, is the emergence of a new type of production, ideally based on the communal ownership of the land.
However, most of the settlers interviewed understood the conquest of the land to be a collective act but one that would allow them to become the sole owners of their plot of land. After the initial stage when land is collectively occupied, they felt the land to be their property and none of the settlers seemed willing to sacrifice that. Furthermore, they were not willing to sacrifice their independence, the control over their lives. Settlers believed that they gained this control when they, as individual households, took possession of the plots. Thus, not surprisingly, in the encampments where the distribution of the plots had taken place and where settlers were already tilling the land properly (though still without having received government subsidies), many settlers would cool off their relationship with the leaders. Often they would do this not by seeking direct confrontation but instead by avoiding frequent interaction. Leaders were seen as authorities and settlers feared they would use that authority to take away what they had conquered: land. As Wolford (2004) also observed in Flora settlement in the northeastern state of Pernambu- co, settlers were grateful to the MST for helping them to
conquer the land. However, this gratitude ‘‘did not manifest itself as allegiance to the movement because the settlers saw their land as the means to independence—even from the movement’’ (Wolford 2004, p. 164).
The settlers’ urge for land was not coming from the belief in a mythologized countryside; a demonic city; or a peasant way-of-life where the peasant naturally nourishes a great affection for the land s/he owns. Most of the settlers who were living in the encampments where the present research took place had undertaken in their past a wide range of jobs: from sugarcane cutters to builders, from truck drivers to cooks. Thus, even if they had the memory of a childhood and/or adolescence in the countryside, they never truly owned a piece of land. That is, they had not been socialised as small farmers and thus the symbolic relationship of affection with their land does not emerge instantly or easily. The land that was obtained, in this particular case, was primarily seen as a means to achieve something: an improved livelihood and an im- proved social status.11 Both an improved livelihood and an improved social status will prevent settlers, so they thought, of being exploited by the landowners. Overall, from several informal conversations with the settlers, it emerged that for them the most important thing was, not to ‘transform society’, but to ‘secure’ the land because in their minds this implies food security and an improved livelihood.
Settlers identified this improved livelihood (or ‘better life’, as often mentioned) with fewer concerns about food (in)security and with personal autonomy and indepen- dence. By food security this paper accepts Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition, according to which food security ‘‘is the state of having secure and sustainable access to sufficient food for an active and healthy life’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 825; see also Pottier, 1999). Therefore, a household is food secure only if ‘‘over a particular period of time’’ it enjoys ‘‘an acceptable likelihood that will have sustainable access to sufficient food over that period’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 828). By ‘personal autonomy and independence’ settlers understood independence from exploitive work relations such as the ones in which they had been engaged. Such independence, as it was observed during the fieldwork, implied the possibility of not being subjugated to harsh and low paid (and often humiliating) forms of work. One female settler argued this explicitly:
I worked as a sugarcane cutter all my life! When I was a little child I used to cut sugarcane and to take care of our small kitchen garden. Then I got married and
11There are some cases that the land occupied is merely used as a trade off for monetary compensations. I was told by an ex-INCRA technician that at least in a particular case where he was involved as a technician, one landlord willingly negotiated compensation with the INCRA and then, once the settlers got the land the landlord bought the land back from them but spending less money than the compensation earned. Again this situation would never happen if the allocation of loans/subsidies, technical assistance and the provision of certain infrastructures was made available earlier in the settlement process.
continued working as a sugarcane cutter. I was always working and living on others’ land and if I couldn’t live there I had to rent a small room nearby for the whole family because we had no money to eat. At least here [in the encampment] we don’t pay rent and to eat, we just grow something to eat. [female settler, 30 years old, Oziel Alves]
For the settlers, however, food autonomy entails more than household food self-sufficiency. None of the settlers interviewed excluded the possibility of selling their products in the local markets since the money they will get in return will allow them to buy other goods and to upgrade their investment. As one female settler in Ouziel Alves put it, they needed to produce ‘‘things that grow fast’’ to sell it in the market and get some money in return to, in the future, ‘‘buy a van to transport the foodstuffs to the market’’ and to buy ‘‘other things, like a proper stove and fridge’’. Hence, the settlers were interested in cash cropping and/or other trades (that is, pluriactivity) since for them ‘‘access to food derives from opportunities to produce food directly or to exchange other commodities or services for food’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 828; emphasis added).
Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition of food security is much more inclusive than that of other writers such as Barraclough, who defined food security as ‘‘the sustained and assured access by all members of a society to food that is adequate in quantity and quality to meet nutritional needs for an active healthy life’’ (Barraclough, 1997, p. 117; see also Barraclough, 1991). Barraclough is mostly concerned with (the minimal required) ‘nutritional needs’ and with direct access (via production) to foodstuffs. Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition acknowledges that access to food can be indirect and mediated (in this case by an exchange relationship). This is a conception that contex- tualises the concept of food security since it puts the emphasis on access, opportunity and mediation. These three dimensions are intimately linked to the concept of livelihoods when ‘livelihood’ is understood, as it is here, as comprising ‘‘the assets (natural, physical, human, financial and social capital), the activities, and the access to these (mediated by institutions and social relations) that together determine the living gained by the individual or household (Ellis, 2000, p. 10).
For the settlers, once access to food is considered to be secure, access to other goods and services becomes the priority and this corresponds to their desire for an improved and secure livelihood, a concept that, as pointed out above, goes well beyond nutritional sustainability. For both the leaders and the settlers, food security in the context of a desirable livelihood is seen to be achieved through democratised access to goods and services related to education, health and other commodities, as well as access to land. This ‘democratised access’ means that access is not only a privilege of the few. Ultimately, ‘democratised access’ is thought to be granted by rights that—at least
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	157
ARTICLE IN PRESS
158	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
theoretically—guarantee equal and universal access to the minimal required of goods and services that allow an active and healthy life. In other words, access, in this context, ‘‘refers to the ability to participate in, and to derive benefits from, social and public services provided by the state such as education, health services, roads, water supplies and so on’’ (Ellis, 2000, p. 9).
Nevertheless, settlers believe not only that they should have democratised access to the necessary goods and services but also that they can and must buy their way into having access to these goods and services. This can only be achieved through earning an income. These settlers’ past as city dwellers has taught them that without an income, nothing or very little is ‘secured’. Thus, for all the settlers interviewed food security and improved livelihoods were inseparable from one another and from ‘income’. For some settlers, producing food for family consumption would allow saving more money and having more money available to have access to the necessary goods and services that contribute for the improvement of one’s livelihood. For others, agriculture should be profit- able business. Thus, they should not produce only for self- subsistence. They may well invest in cash crops or ultimately sell the land.
Most importantly, for all the settlers, both food security and an improved livelihood are possible to achieve in the context of the present form of capitalist social organisa- tion. The leaders do not see this as the case. That is, whilst settlers understand their participation in the labour and food markets as sufficient to enhance their quality of life by improving it, leaders believe that the (re)production of the unequal distribution of wealth will still occur if the functioning of markets is not controlled and regulated. For the leaders, undermining the present form of social organisation is therefore imperative. In summary, there is a remarkable difference between leaders’ and the settlers’ understandings of land use.
These divergent perspectives on land generate some other important tensions. For instance, while the leaders insist on cooperative production of alternative crops and foodstuffs free from the strings of the big export multi- nationals and bio-technology companies, many settlers turn to the production of cash crops (see Wolford, 2004). After realising that agricultural self-sufficiency combined with the production of alternative (and organically produced) crops is not enough to improve their livelihoods, settlers may abandon the rhetoric of alternative food crops in favour of the actual production of cash crops. This decision is not solely individual but also influenced by the pressure exerted by the market and/or the government, which might tend to protect certain traditional production sectors (as is the case, for instance, of the sugarcane production sector in Brazil (see Valada ̃ o, 1999; Wolford, 2003, 2004).
In fact, based on this and other research on the MST (e.g., Kleba, 1992; Sizanoski, 1998; Grade, 1999; Giehl, 2002), four major factors can be said to considerably
influence settlers’ decisions concerning production.12 These factors are (i) ecological; (ii) economic; (iii) infrastructural and (iv) socio-cultural.
Ecological factors are related to the quality of and composition of the soil; to the existence or non-existence of natural water resources; to the climate and microclimate of a particular region; and so forth. Economic factors encompass the government and government agencies responsible for the monetary programmes set up to support agrarian reform initiatives and agrarian production; trade agreements; international aid policies; and the configura- tion of the international, national and regional markets. Infrastructural factors have to do with the existing infrastructures within the land available for land reform, these being from water supply systems, irrigation system, and accessibilities, to technical support—structural or temporary (provisional).
Socio-cultural factors obviously are related to settlers’ life experiences. The present research concluded that food security and an improved livelihood are extremely im- portant to settlers, so important that land is seen as a means to achieve it. The whole experience of dispossession and unemployment is very much present in many settlers’ memories. Uprooted from their extended rural families, cornered in the city favelas, and not being able to rely on the government’s reduced social welfare, most of these settlers have experienced malnutrition and material depri- vation. For all the settlers interviewed, preventing situa- tions like this from happening ever again in the future was clearly a priority. Giehl (2002), while researching influences on the processes of decision-making involved in the option for a determinate production model in the Domingos de Carvalho settlement in the southern Brazilian state of Santa Catarina, has reached a similar conclusion on the priority given to food security.13 According to this agronomist, ‘‘food security has revealed itself as a major concern very much present in the settlers’ discourses even because the majority has lived through hugely precarious situations in the encampment stage’’ (Giehl, 2002, p. 132; original in Portuguese). Socio-cultural factors include also
12To a certain extent, these factors correspond to Ellis’ definition of assets. Assets represent the five different types of capital available. People adopt and adapt livelihood strategies according to the different types of capital they have access to Ellis (2000, p. 40). According to Ellis, the different types of capital are: natural (e.g., land, water and biological resources), physical (infrastructures producers of goods), human (labour available and education, skills and health), financial (stocks of money), and social capital (social groups and networks) (Ellis, 2000).
13It is interesting to point out that the Giehl’s research and the study reported in this paper took place in two different states: mine in Rio de Janeiro and Giehl’s in Santa Catarina. In Rio de Janeiro, settlers’ had never been small landowners or peasants. Though most of them had grown up in the countryside and worked as sugarcane cutters, none of them had owned their piece of land before. In Santa Catarina, many settlers had either been renters or owners of small plots of land. Interestingly, for both—settlers from Rio de Janeiro and settlers from Santa Catarina—food security was extremely, if not, the most important goal to be achieved. In such a way that it influenced considerably their decisions about what to produce and what not to produce.
settlers’ perception of risk. That is, not only will settlers tend to produce foodstuffs for nutrition; they will produce foodstuffs whose productive process they are most familiar with. Additionally, selling the surplus in the market is not perceived as risky.14
The interaction of the four above-mentioned factors frames the context in which settlers live and their decisions are based on their perception of this context. Thus, for instance switching to the production of sugarcane is not simply falling into ‘‘temptation’’ of reproducing the capitalist mode of agrarian production. Switching produc- tion has probably more to do with the macroconjunctures (e.g., government incentives) and the settlers’ own evalua- tion of how to better improve their livelihoods in the given social, economic and environmental and ecological con- text. In the encampments and settlements included in the present research, while leaders did not manage to achieve a transformed social world, settlers kept longing for a better life in the context of the present one. In truth, they longed to become small farmers and to own a ‘house and a farm’. This is most certainly different from the leaders’ utopia of a transformed social world based not on the private owner- ship of the means of production and individualized production, but on communal ownership and cooperative production.
6. Conclusion
The unequal distribution of land in Brazil is the structural root of conflict over land. One of the main actors in this conflict is the MST, a social movement that descends from many other previous, and nationally scattered, organised rural movements. The struggle for land frames the MST’s collective action. It justifies and legitimates the MST’s existence, and it clearly defines who is who on each side of the barricade: the MST represents the landless people whereas ‘on the other side’ are the landowners and the Brazilian government.
However, in the process of framing the social movement, in which the MST leaders are of crucial importance, maintaining unity might be harder than it actually seems, especially when some of this ‘framing work’ (Tarrow, 1998) escapes the control of the leaders or movement organisers. This paper has shown how conflict is produced within the MST and how unity is challenged when the MST leaders and the settlers frame their actions, and interpret their situation, differently. As an example, it was shown how the
14Arguing against ‘moral economists’, Popkin (1979) states peasants’ capacity to take risks should never be despised, and that ‘‘revolutionaries who expect peasants to have no interest in market production as long as their subsistence floor is secure are likely (y) to have problems when peasants in liberated areas seek to enter markets with their newly recovered surplus’’ (Popkin, 1979, pp. 28–29). Nevertheless, Brazil always had, since the very beginning of its exploitation by the Portuguese colonial power, a market-oriented agriculture. Thus, once in possession of land, entering the market, for the newly made peasants, is not perceived as risky but instead, as a safe move.
MST leaders have to compete with settlers’ inherited cultural understandings of community and on land. To the leaders’ mythologized idea of rural community, settlers oppose their memories of a countryside where survival was made so difficult that they were driven to migrate. Joining the MST and returning to the countryside implies for these settlers the individual possession of land.
The constitution of a community, as imagined by the MST leaders, is definitely not the settlers’ main concern. Land is. Settlers understand land as a means to secure their food, livelihood and social status. However, despite conflicts surrounding the framing process internal to the social movement, it is interesting to point out that both parties in this dynamic internal struggle—leaders and settlers—have together actually been achieving common victories: land has been occupied and redistributed whilst lobbying for the implementation of the agrarian reform has forced incorporation of the land issue into the political and legal debates.
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful for the valuable suggestions of two anonymous referees. This paper is based on Ph.D. research entirely funded by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Portugal (Fundac-a ̃o Para a Cieˆncia e Tecnologia, Ministe ́rio da Cieˆncia e Tecnologia).
References
Anderson, B., 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. Verso, London.
Barraclough, S., 1991. An End to Hunger? The Social Origins of Food Strategies. Zed Books, London.
Barraclough, S., 1997. Food and poverty in Americas: institutional and policy obstacles to efficiency in food aid. Development in Practice 7, 117–129.
Chaves, C.A., 2000. A marcha nacional dos sem-terra: um estudo sobre a fabricac-a ̃ o do social. Relume Dumara ́ , Rio de Janeiro.
Durkheim, E., 1984. The Division of Labour in Society. Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Ellis, F., 2000. Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing Countries. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Fernandes, B., 2000. A formac-a ̃ o do MST no Brasil. Vozes, Petropolis. Gamson, W.A., et al., 1996. Framing political opportunity. In: McAdam, D., et al. (Eds.), Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements. Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Giehl, A.L., 2002. Entre o extraordina ́ rio e o cotidiano: os processos
deciso ́ rios	dos	agricultores	assentados—um	estudo	de	caso	do assentamento Domingos Carvalho (Rio Negrinho/SC). Centro de Cieˆncias Agra ́rias. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Flor- iano ́ polis, Brazil.
Grade, M., 1999. MST: Luz e Esperanc-a de uma Sociedade Igualita ́ ria e Socialista. Centro So ́ cio-Econoˆ mico. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Floriano ́ polis, Brazil.
Kleba,	J.B.,	1992.	A	cooperac- a ̃ o	agrı ́ cola	em	assentamentos	de	reforma agra ́ ria no Estado de Santa Catarina: estudo de caso de um grupo coletivo do assentamento ‘‘Tracutinga’’ Dionı ́ sio Cerqueira. Centro de Cieˆncias Humanas. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Flor- iano ́ polis, Brazil.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	159
ARTICLE IN PRESS
160	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
McCarthy, J., Zald, M., 1977. Resource mobilization and social move- ments. American Journal of Sociology 82, 1212–1242.
Olson, M., 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Popkin, S.L., 1979. The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in Vietnam. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Pottier, J., 1999. Anthropology of Food: The Social Dynamics of Food Security. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Sizanoski, R., 1998. O novo dentro do velho: cooperativas de produc-ao agropecua ́ ria do MST. Possibilidades e limites na construc-a ̃ o social. Centro de Filosofia e Cieˆncias Humanas. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Floriano ́ polis, Brazil.
Tarrow, S., 1998. Power in Movement: Social Movements and Con- tentious Politics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tilly, C., 1995. Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758–1834. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Tilly, C., 2002. Stories, Identities, and Political Change. Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham.
To ̈ nnies, F., 1963. Community and Society. Harper and Row, New York. Valada ̃ o, V., 1999. Assentamentos e sem-terra: a importaˆ ncia do papel dos
mediadores. EDUFES, Vito ́ ria. Wiebe, K., Maxwell, D., 1999. Land tenure and food security: exploring
dynamic linkages. Development and Change 30, 825–849. Wolford, W., 2003. Producing community: the MST and land reform
settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change 3, 500–520. Wolford, W., 2004. Of land and labor: agrarian reform on the sugarcane plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 31,
147–170. Zald, M., 1996. Culture, ideology and strategic framing. In: McAdam, D.,
et al. (Eds.), Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements. Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings. Cam- bridge University Press, Cambridge.
