2008
Political Science
Comparative Political Studies
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press Maureen Donaghy 

Comparative Political Studies 2009 42: 847 DOI: 10.1177/0010414008329921
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://cps.sagepub.com/content/42/6/847
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Comparative Political Studies can be found at: Email Alerts: http://cps.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://cps.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://cps.sagepub.com/content/42/6/847.refs.html
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	847
important is that the boundary between the rationalist approach and social–construc- tivist approach is not always clear. True, according to both the qualitative study and the quantitative study, firms seem to consider social ties, historical advantages, and international agreements when making investment decisions. However, these could be interpreted as factors that influence a firm’s calculations about the likelihood of prof- its given the risk of starting a venture in another country. Put another way, these social features of FDI could be seen as ways of reducing transaction costs. Perhaps firms do go where the profits are greatest, but their cost-benefit calculus includes fac- tors such as the risk of doing business in an environment where social ties (and the informational benefits they afford) are absent. This is a substantial issue for the argu- ment. Bandelj’s response to it is based largely on the distinction between uncertainty and risk. When expected utility cannot be calculated, actors make decisions based on reason but infused with routine, emotional reaction, normative commitments, and tacit knowledge. This is “practical rather than rational action” (p. 192), and prac- tice is a process. For this answer to be convincing, one must accept the unknowable and constructed qualities of the socioeconomic world. The payoff, however, involves shifting to a conception of action as a process that evolves over time and is shaped by situations; as such, it is a much thicker understanding of the process of decision making than that offered by the rationalist account.
The book offers compelling arguments and evidence that a socially and cultur- ally contextualized theory of action is necessary and possible without its falling prey to the usual objection that cultural approaches are too heavily interpretative to be of general use. It will have an impact on economic sociologists, and it should be read by political scientists who are interested in theories of rationality, economic trans- formations, and economic aspects of globalization.
Roger Schoenman
University of California, Santa Cruz
References
Stark, D., & Bruszt, L. (1998). Postsocialist pathways: Transforming politics and property in East Central Europe. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stark, D., & Vedres, B. (2006). Social times of network spaces: Network sequences and foreign investment in Hungary. American Journal of Sociology, 111(5), 1367-1412.
Ondetti, G. (2008). Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. DOI:10.1177/0010414008329921
Past social movement research primarily examines why movements begin and end, without reviewing the shifts in intensity that inevitably occur within the life span of
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
848	Comparative Political Studies
long-lasting movements. In Land, Protest, and Politics, Gabriel Ondetti seeks to rem- edy this gap by applying theoretical concepts of social movements to explain the evo- lution of the landless movement in Brazil during the past three decades. The author provides a thoroughly researched and thoughtful examination of the Brazilian land- less movement, acknowledging the prominence of the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Workers’ Movement) while situating it within the range of actors involved in the struggle for agrarian reform in Brazil. His application and evaluation of five theoretical approaches to explain one movement should serve as a model for future scholars. The analysis falters, however, in its defining the variables that make up the political opportunity structure (which, Ondetti argues, largely explains the movement’s trajectory) and in its supporting claim that the landless movement’s exceptionalism can be explained by its ability to overcome the free-rider problem. Despite these criticisms, the book not only provides an invaluable resource in English on the landless movement in Brazil but contributes to our understanding of how theoretical approaches can be successfully tested using empirical evidence.
Ondetti seeks to address two questions: First, what explains changes in movement activity over time? Second, why did the landless movement increase in intensity while other movements in Brazil waned in the late 1980s and early 1990s? He begins with a chapter explaining the theoretical approaches from the social movement liter- ature; then, he relates in chronological order the major activities of the movement, as well as the broader political changes, throughout the following five chapters. At the end of each chapter, he assesses how these events can or cannot be explained by each of the following theoretical approaches: grievance/discontent, organizational capac- ity, activist strategy, and political opportunity. To a more limited extent, Ondetti reviews and applies Mancur Olson’s theory of collective action (1965) to the second question of why the landless movement increased in intensity when other movements declined.
For the first question, Ondetti argues that the political opportunity approach best explains the shifts in the landless movement’s intensity over time. He finds “political shifts that affected the receptivity or vulnerability of governing authorities to the movement’s protest actions played a critical role” (p. 221) in the movement’s trajectory. He also presents evidence in great detail that largely appears to support this argument. As such, he explains how the movement began with land occupations in the late 1970s during the opening of the military dictatorship and how it strengthened with the implementation of the 1988 constitution, which specified that land not used for a social function could be expropriated and used for agrarian reform. The author also explains how two massacres in the late 1990s, both involving members of the land- less movement, led to public sympathy for the landless plight and so intensified the movement’s efforts to press for reforms. At the beginning of the 21st century, a crackdown by the Cardoso government on occupations weakened the viability of occupations; but by 2003, the election of Worker’s Party President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva reinvigorated the movement, with the promise of a government more recep- tive to its claims.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	849
Regarding the second question, Ondetti argues that both the activist strategy approach and the political opportunity perspective explain why the landless movement became stronger while other movements declined in the postdemocratic transition period. Ondetti argues that whereas other movements formed around the struggle for public goods, such as human rights or improved educational and health resources, land occupations (as an activist strategy) provided direct benefits to only those who participated. The landless movement therefore surmounted the free-rider problem, which according to Olson (1965), leads to a movement’s decline. Although other movements attempted to overcome the free-rider problem by appealing to individuals’ ethical or ideological concerns, these selective benefits (postdemocratization) were not enough to sustain the movements’ momentum. However, poor agricultural workers and farmers without secure land tenure were still motivated to participate in land occu- pations by the promise of a plot of land. Here Ondetti differentiates the goal of rural land reform based on the political opportunity structure created by the constitutional guarantee for land. He states that no other benefit holds this same status of legal legit- imacy. Through the legitimacy of its claims, the landless movement sustained broader public support, even with the use of radical tactics.
Overall, this book presents a strong contribution to the literature on the landless movement, as well as to empirical literature on social movements. It is clear that the author spent a considerable amount of time in the field listening to movement partici- pants and interviewing important leaders; he has intricately woven their stories into the narrative. His broad knowledge of Brazilian politics is complemented by his detailed understanding of the Landless Workers’ Movement, generally accepted as the largest social movement in Latin America. Rather than focus exclusively on the Landless Workers’ Movement, however, Ondetti includes rural unions and other movements organizing land occupations, in his analysis of the broader “landless movement.” In doing so, he provides a complete picture of the actors involved and the dynamics of their interests. By focusing on numerous movements within one larger movement, he also avoids some of the usual criticism of social movement scholars for concentrating too narrowly on one movement when it is clear that these actors do not exist in a vacuum.
Ondetti’s primary contribution to social movement scholarship, more broadly, is his evaluation of competing explanations for the rise and decline of movement intensity. Rather than propose one explanation and pick events from the movement to support a theoretical claim, Ondetti presents a narrative for each period, regarding the movement and the political environment, and then assesses how well each theoretical perspective explains the movement’s rise or decline during that period. Although other studies have presented similar details about the trajectory of the Landless Workers’ Movement (Branford & Rocha, 2002; Wright & Wolford, 2003), none have systematically evalu- ated competing theoretical claims from the social movement literature to explain shifts in movement activity. Studies of other movements have also tended to present one theory, rather than pit various approaches against each other for explanatory power. Ondetti offers an example for social movement scholars to follow in bringing existing approaches to bear on a new question and in carrying the comparison of each approach’s explanatory strength throughout the narrative chapters.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
850	Comparative Political Studies
Despite the book’s considerable strengths, however, the analysis suffers from two major flaws: First, the author fails to concretely define the variables of the polit- ical opportunity structure; second, he does not carry through his argument regard- ing the free-rider problem to address the full dynamics of occupations. Regarding the first point, Ondetti begins with a discussion of Tarrow’s basic definition (1994) of the political opportunity structure as “dimensions of the political environment that provide incentives for people to undertake collective action by affecting their expectations for success or failure” (p. 85, as quoted on p. 34). From this perspec- tive, movements arise when there are shifts in political conditions, of which Ondetti notes a few examples—the opening up of authoritarian regimes, the realignment of alliances, and the changes in elite preferences. Ondetti also answers criticisms of the political opportunity approach’s “conceptual stretching” by using what he sees as Tarrow’s “mainstream” definition while being mindful of the two-way dynamics of influence between movements and external events. Although none of this analysis is problematic on its own, the author does not clearly identify instances of political opportunity shifts, which would be useful for either accepting or rejecting the expla- nation for movement changes throughout the book. It is clear from the analysis that external events matter, but it is less clear which types of events matter for either increasing or decreasing movement intensity and by what measure the author judges the political opportunity structure to offer explanatory power greater than that of the other approaches. Although I am not suggesting the need for quantitative analysis, a clearer definition of events constituting the political opportunity structure and a framework for judging the relative impact of various events would strengthen the author’s conclusions regarding the relative weight of one explanation over another.
Regarding the trajectory of the landless movement as an anomaly in the early 1990s, as compared to other movements, Ondetti cites several sources in agree- ment that movements generally declined during this period. However, he provides little support for his argument that the rural landless movement was unique in its ability to overcome the free-rider problem (Olson, 1965) through the strategy of land occupations. In his discussion of activist strategy in the early 1990s, he quickly dismisses the effectiveness of urban land occupations as a legitimate strategy for pressuring the government; then, he acknowledges in the conclusion that urban occupation movements across Latin America actually do overcome the free-rider problem. Extending the analysis across periods and assessing the rise and decline of other movements would strengthen and clarify the author’s argument regarding the uniqueness of occupations as a strategy to overcome the free-rider problem.
In sum, the book offers a significant contribution to social movement studies, through the use of empirical evidence to refute and support various theoretical expla- nations for movement trajectory. Social movement scholars should use this work as a model for applying detailed empirical evidence to assess alternative arguments.
Maureen Donaghy
University of Colorado, Boulder
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	851
References
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To inherit the earth: The landless movement and the struggle
for a new Brazil. San Francisco: Food First.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
