2008
Sociology
Canadian Review of Sociology
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’ Movement: Ten Hypotheses on Successful Leadership
HENRYVELTMEYEaRnd JAMEPESTRAS~t. Mary’s University

Cet article met I’accent sur Ie caractkre social ainsi que sur la dynamique sociale de l’autoritd politique dans ce qui est gkndrale- ment considere comme les caractJ5ristiques de classe ainsi que les carac- tbristiques sociales du leadership, B l‘interieur d’un mouvement que nous et d’autres auteurs considdronscomme le mouvement social le plus dynamique de nos jours en Amerique latine, le Mouvement des Sans Terre (MST)au Bresil. Nous fonderons notre discussion de cette dynamique sociale sur dix hypotheses qui tracent, en effet, un por- trait sociologiquedu leadership du mouvement.
This paper focusses on the social character and dynamics of political leadership in what is widely regarded asthe class and social character of the leadership of a movement that we and others regard as the most dynamic social movement in Latin America today-the	Rural Landless Workers’Movement (MST)in Brazil. Discussion of these social dynamics is made with reference to ten hypotheses that pro- vide, in effect, a sociological portrait of this movement’s leadership.
SOCIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF SOCIOPOLITICAL MOVEMENTS in recent years have addressed a number of questions related to the social base of these movements, the issues around which collective action is mobilized, the form of struggles involved, and the context in which these struggles take place.‘ What is generally missing in these studies, however, is an analysis of the role and social dynamics of political leadership, a curi- ous omission given the saliency of this factor in earlier studies and the non- or post-structural “social actor” approach taken by so many social movements analysts today (Calderh, 1995; Escobar and Alvarez, 1992; Esteva and Prakash, 1998).
One possible explanation of this is the emergence of a	ostmodernist sensibility among sociologists and historians in this area.8The effect of
This manuscript was first submitted inJanuary 2001 and accepted in September 2001.
1.	For examples orthese studiesee,inter alia. Burgwal(1990);Calder6n(1985); Calder4nand J e l h (1987); Camacho and Medivar (1989);Eckstein (1989);Latin American Perspectives (1994);Zapata (1987).
80	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
postmodernism generally has been to turn attention away from structural factors and to eschew a comparative and objective analysis of these move- ments. Indeed this lack of comparative analysis, together with a focus on contextualized and well-described but largely unexplained collective actions of a single movement, is a notable feature of sociological studies in the 1980s and 1990s (Munck, 1997).
Another feature of these studies is an orientation towards a post- structuralist form of discourse analysis and, in this new intellectual con- text, an abandonment of structuralisms, particularly Marxist class theory (Howarth, Norval and Stavrakakis, 2000; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001a; Veltmeyer, 1997). This essay is written as a’counterpointto this post- structuralist form of analysis and associated postmodernist and post- development theory. In this context it is argued, with reference to the political leadership factor, that the dynamics of sociopolitical movements in Latin America can best be understood in structural terms and on the basis of a reconstituted form of class analysis.
This argument is structured as follows. First, we establish the emer- gence of what we have termed new peasant sociopolitical movements (NPSMs).We then explore the dynamics of these movements in terms of a structuralist form of discourse analysis, which we contrast to the more dominant poststructuralist form. We then discuss the class and social character of the leadership of a movement that we and others3regard as the most dynamic social movement in Latin America today, This discus- sion is made with reference to ten hypotheses that we constructed for the purpose of interpreting our field research data on the leadership of the Brazilian Rural Landless Workers’Movement and for drawing a sociological portrait of these leaders4With reference to these hypotheses, derived not from any general theory but from prior studies by the authors into diverse social movements and on the basis of field research data, we argue that what is distinctively “new” about the peasant-based movements that dominate the contemporary struggle for social change in Latin America is precisely the class character of their leadership as well as the organic ties of this leadership to the social base of the movements. We draw out various theoretical-and	political-implications	of this argument in the conclusion.
2. Onthispointsee,interalia,Brass(1991;2000);Haber(1996);Mallon(1995);Slater(1985);Veltmeyer (1997).
3.	See, for example, Roblea (2000). 4.	The data for this study were derived from three sources: 1) systematic observation, over a ten year
period(1992,1995-1996,1998-2001). ofbehaviouratanannualSchoolforLeademhipCadresinSanta Catarina. periodic coderences, workshops and meetings, and various encampments and settlements (11) and co-operatives (8) in S.Catarina, Rio Crande de Sul. Parana. Ceara. and SBo Paul0 State; 2) a survey conducted of thia movement’s leadership cadre: 32 regional and national leaders representing every state where the MST operates (conducted at a seminar on May 12-14.2000, in SAo Peulo);and 3) a series of in-depth interviews with Pedro Stedile, the leader of the MST,several regional leaders and activisb, and a caucue-of women leaden.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movernent The Emergence ofNew Sociopolitical Peasant Movements
(NSPMs)inLatin America
81
In the post-SecondWorldWarcontext of a large-scale development project initiated in the late 1 9 4 0 ~an~d a globalization project initiated in the 1980sunder very different conditions, it is possible to trace three waves of social and political struggles against the capitalist system in Latin America.‘ In the 1950s through 1970s the social and political forces of change were mobilized in three ways: via leftist political parties and the use of the electoral mechanism, a strategy exemplified in the success of Salvador Allende in bringing the working class to state power in Chile; via the unionization of labour and the struggle of the organized working class against capital and the state for higher wages, improved working condi- tions and greater social benefits; and, in the wake of the Cuban revolution, via a guerrilla form of armed struggle against the state.
Each modality of political struggle helped incorporate elements of the working class and rural producers into the political and economic development process. But none of these antisystemic struggles and strate- gies managed to overcome the array of forces ranged against them and the project of social revolution or societal transformation ultimately ended in defeat. In the 198Os, however, in the context of a democratization process, a regionwide debt crisis, and the implementation of a new project based on a neoliberal program of policy measures designed to structurally adjust the economies in the region to the requirements of a new world economic order,’ protest against the new economic model of neoliberal capitalism and the project for social transformation was taken up by a second gen- eration and a new form of social and political organization-a	popular movement protagonized by the urban poor and a proliferation of non- governmental organisations that manifested a burgeoning “civil society” and the emergence of a social, as opposed to the political, left. But the forces mobilized by these civil society organisations were subsequently- in the 1990s-demobilized under conditions generated by a neoliberal pro- gram of economic and political reform measures implemented by govern- ments in the region.’
6. On this project see, inter alia, McMichael (1996). In the optics of postdevelopment (Esteva, 1992; Embar, 1995;Rahnema and Bawtree, 1997;Sachs. 1992) this project is viewed as an imposition of an idea (development), which is “at the centreof an incredibly powerful semantic constellation” (“mod- ern mentality”), able to exert a most powerful force in “guiding thought and behaviour” (Esteva, 1992).
6. On the theoretical and practical postulates of these two intellectual and political “projects” and the processes to which they gave rise, see,inter alia. Veltmeyer (2001b). A periodization and analysis of these waves of struggle to bring about change and implement an emancipatory project in Latin America can be found in Petras (1997).
7. On this new project-globalization-see,	inter alia, Bulmer-Thomas (1996); Green (1995); and Petras and Veltmeyer (2001b).
8. On the diverse strategies implemented by governments against antisystemic movements see, inter a h . Veltmeyer (2001a).
82	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
In the 199Os,the region was hit by a third wave of social and political forces ranged against the system in place. The labour movement was in disarray, its forces and organizational and mobilizing capacity decimated by the forces of a “silent revolution’’wrought by the capitalist class under the agency of the state. The new social movements that had dominated the political landscape in the 1980s suffered a similar fate. With very few exceptions, the forces that they had mobilized were dissipated. But in the same context there surfaced a new wave of rural activism protaganized by a number of peasant-based sociopoliticalmovements-the	Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) in Mexico; an indigenous uprising and social movement led by the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities (CONAIE) in Ecuador; the Rural Landless Workers’ Movement (MST) in Brazil; and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). These movements, all except the FARC organized in the 1980sand all but the EZLN operating on a national scale, took centre stage in the 1990sand dominated the popular struggle for social antisystemic change.
Currently, these movements constitute the most dynamic forces for social change in the region, as well as opposition to the economic and polit- ical system everywhere in place. However, these movements are still not that well understood, raising more questions than answers and generating a scholarly-and	political-debate as to the nature of their social base and the dynamics of struggle involved (Brass, 2000; Bernstein, 2001; Foweraker,1995;Haber,1996;Petras, 1997;PetrasandVeltmeyer,2001a).
The Question of Leadership-Ten	Hypotheses
The debate on the nature and dynamics of the new peasant-based socio- political movements in Latin America has generally focussed on the social base of the movements and the dynamics of their organization and mobi- lization-the	general form of their struggles, the particular strategy and tactics involved, and the associated ideology. However, the character and form of leadership seems to be an equally important factor in explaining the relative success of these movements in organizing and mobilizing the forces of resistance and opposition-of social change. Forexample, the FARC is the only peasant-based guerrilla army that not only survived the forces of counterinsurgency in the 1970sand 1980sbut that has actu- ally increased its mobilizing capacity. The one striking difference between the FARC and the other guerrilla armies of national liberation and social change formed in the first two waves of post-Cuba insurrectionary activi- ty is the social character and form of its leadership. In terms of their social base and operating ideology these guerrilla armies were very similar, if not identical (see, for example, Wickham-Crowley,1993);the FARC, however, is the only such movement that was not only peasant-based but, like the NSPMs, peasant-led.
In the 1980s,the emergence in the region of what was conceived to be “new social movements” whose social base could not be reduced to or
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
83
understood in class terms led to a widescale abandonment of class analysis and the adoption of poststructuralist forms of discourse analysis (Calder6n and JBlin, 1987; Camacho and Menjivar, 1989; Escobar and Alvarez, 1992; Mallon, 1995;Slater, 1985;Zapata, 1987).In the 199Os,class analysis vir- tually disappeared from the map of social movements being drawn and redrawn by political sociologists,leading the authors of this paper to seri- ously reconsider the class origins and character of the leadership of the peasant-based social movements in the region today.
In this context, and with the aim of sparking a return to a reconsti- tuted form of class analysis, the authors chose to conduct a case study of the MST leadership in Brazil. To inform and direct this study, the authors formulated a number of hypotheses, each of which is discussed below in terms of observations made and data collected on the basis of several research visits; conversations on site with, and in-depth interviews of, sev- eral MST leaders and activists; and a formal survey conducted of a cadre of 37 leaders representing every state where the MST is represented. These hypotheses were derived not from any general theory but from an understanding that resulted from field work on a number of peasant-based social movements in the region (see, for example, Petras, 1997; Veltmeyer, 1997). Given percentages relate to a statistical analysis of the data gener- ated by this survey.
Hypothesis 1: The MST leaders have deep and continuing roots in the countryside and among the constituencies that they are organizing.
One of the most striking characteristics of the MST relative to other Latin American rural movements in the past is the high proportion of leaders with long-standing ties to the rural poor who are the social base of the movement. First, close to two-thirds are sons and daughters of peasants- small producers (37.640.6%) or landless rural workers (18.2-21.9%). Although there are no systematic data or studies for comparable move- ments in earlier waves of peasant movements, most analysts of these movements over the years have commented on the urban middle-class ori- gins of the leadership. In the case of the MST, however, most leaders (79%) originate in families of small farmers, members of producer co-operatives or landless workers.
There is an ongoing academic debate as to how to conceptualize these various categories of “peasants” in the context of an advanced process of capitalist industrialization, social decomposition and class differentiation, but the subjects of this debate generally see and define themselves both as “peasants” and as “landless workers,” creating problems of objective cat- egorization, if not self-definition (Bernstein, 2001; Brass, 2000; Kearney, 1996;Mallon, 19951.’
9.	In the context of a p m s s of industrial capitalist modernization, a part of the ”pensantry” isconvert- ed into D class of rural capitalists who most oRen invest their accumulated capital in the purchase of
84	CRSAIRCSA, 39.1	2002
From our converaations with diverseMSTleaders it is clear that they not only tend to have deep roots in the countryside but they maintain and cultivate their rural ties. They return to the countryside whenever possible, usually in the context of mobilizing a land occupation, and work actively to ensure a lack of social distance from the rank and file in the field by identifying with their struggles and way of life. Furthermore, there is little to differentiate these leaders from the rank and file in terms of material conditions, including housing, eating, modes of transport and personal possessions. In this connection, it is well known that leaders who share the same material conditions as their followers are more likely to engage in struggles that relate to their common interests, as opposed to bureaucrats ensconced in hierarchies who tend to be focussed on and to defend their own particular privileged position. Although there are no comparable data for other rural social movements in the past, both in South and Central America and in Mexico, there are clear indications that relative to the MST these movements were characterized by a significant social distance between the leaders and the rank and file. On this see, inter alia, Wickham-Crowley ( 1991).
Hypothesis 2: The leaders are relatively well educated and committed to continuing education, thus securing the learning and teaching shills to diagnose social realities and develop appropriate strategies.
Successful movements of the popular classes require leaders who are well trained and capable of articulating and formulating grievances, devising appropriate strategies and diagnosing social situations. In many, if not most, situations, social movements have tended to rely on well-educated leaders from the urban middle class or rank and file leaders with little formal education. However, the MST is possessed of a large cadre of grassroots leaders from the popular classes who are relatively well or highly educated. Over half of the MST leaders have some post-secondary education (either technical school or university). In addition, another third (27.9%) have completed or attended high school. Only 12% have never attended school or failed to complete primary school. In addition, the MST invests a large part of its budget in education and has developed ties with a number of universities that provide extension courses for leaders and activists (Caldart, 1997; 2000). Women leaders, who constituted 31% (9/29)of our survey sample," are particularly well educated: twice as many women as
land, new technology, export production and transportation. Another part u converted into a claaa of indqmndent, medium-sized proprieton and pmducen and a large part, nt Ieut 60% ir converted into a rural p r o h r i a t and a rrmiproirtariat of jornaleron, landleu or near lrndlau workers, many of whom migrate to and are abiorbed into the burponing rlumr and the informal wcton of Braril'n cities. On the bash ofcensun d a b , the rural E X ~ U Bfrom 1986 to 1996 in eitlmatrd to have reached a level of 6.6 million, leavlng an entimated 4.6 million landlean workrrn or peuants in the countryride, many of whom am expected to migate to tho cities in the next few yearn (INCRA, 1999; Petraa and Veltmeyer, 2000).
10. In its second to last Conpeaa (in 2000) the MST adopted a resolution to increase the current repre- wntation of women in the regional delegations of lenders from a current level of around 4 0 4 to parity with men.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement	85
men have some university education. Thus it is clear that the MST has a cadre of popular leaders with both the formal training and class experi- ence to develop successful national organization drives. In this regard they differ significantly from the leaders of an earlier wave of guerrilla move- ments formed in the 1970s,most of whom, particularly those who were well educated, had no organic ties to their rural constituency. With thc exception of FARC’s leader, Marulanda (Tirofijo), these leaders, like those of the Central American guerrilla movements of the 1970s and 198Os, were reliant on a much smaller leadership cadre that, with few exceptions, was drawn from the middle strata of the class structure. On this, see Johnson in Dominguez (1994).
Hypothesis 3: The primary loyalties of the leaders of the MST are to that organization. They do not have any conflicting loyalties to other political groups that could lead to ideological divisions and undermine their unity of purpose.
One of the perennial and divisive scourges of popular movements in Latin America is sectarian political conflict. Since many of these movements’ leaders tend to come from political parties whose prime purpose is to use such movements to build their parties, the movements are often canni- balized and immobilized in the process.” In contrast, the MST is a sociopolitical movement that has fraternal relations with other parties, particularly the Workers’Party (PT),but its leadership insists on retaining the autonomy of the movement and its capacity for independent action (Stedile, 2000). Most leaders joined the movement through participation in MST-organized land occupations and/or through attending meetings and discussions. Having been introduced to the movement through direct contact with its activities rather than “party intermediaries,” their ideo- logical formation and practice is essentially a result of social interactions within the movement. This shows up in their political attitudes: large majorities, ranging from 65to loo%, are in agreement on the major issues of the day-the	negative influence of Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s regime on effective agrarian reform and the negative impact of the policies designed and sponsored by the IMF and the World Bank. This internal consensus allows the Movement to focus on building outside support and to channel available resources in the direction of organizing, and mobilizing, direct action. Again, this is not a conclusion drawn by the authors as much as a point made in as many-or	few-words	by Pedro Stedile himself and other leaders whom we interviewed. Indeed, it is clearly a matter of inter- nal policy as well as general strategy that conflicting loyalties and other conditions that might undermine a unity of purpose be avoided, if possible and counteracted, if not.
11. This relationship of social movements topolitical parties is well knownand is one of the key issues on the agenda for debate and discussion at the annual Foro de Slo Wulo where, for the past 11yenrs. rep- resentatives of leftist or Marxist political parties and associated social movements have met.
86	CRSAIRCSA, 39.1	2002
Hypothesis 4: The main source of recruitment is based on practical problem solving that attracts “doers”rather than ideologues.
Most of the political organisations that recruit their members on the basis of ideological polemics at the leadership level tend to create “armchair” revolutionaries given to spinning theories and discovering ideological dif- ferences-highly	ideological “purists” divorced from the language and interests of the people at the social base of the movement (on this see, inter alia, Liss, 1991; Wickham-Crowley, 1991).
As for the MST, leaders generally joined the movement through par- ticipation in land occupations and public meetings. By their own accounts, their attraction to the movement was based on its history of success in solving practical problems, including their own. In this regard, a majority of leaders (69%)have participated in ten or more land occupations and over two-thirds believe that land occupations are the most effective way to bring about agrarian reform and translate theory into practice. While the MST as an organization is acutely aware of the need for both theory and practice, and to unite the two, its emphasis on continuing political educa- tion needs to be understood in the context of a concern for practical problem solving. As a result, the MST tends to recruit “doers” rather than “ideo- logues”-a	perception confirmed by the leaders themselves.”
Hypothesis 5: The leaders have accumulated practical experience via con- tinuing direct actions that enhance their capacity to organize and carry out successful actions that can, and do, attract new members and supporters.
MST leaders do not engage in successful action to then rest on their lau- rels. They are, as it were, in continuing action. Despite their relative youthfulness (88%are under 40 years old and over one third in their 20s) many have been involved in multiple land occupations. These occupations frequently involve prolonged experiences in which squatters are organized to administer the settlement, negotiate with the government, and pres- sure for a favourable resolution. Through these multiple and varied experiences the leaders of the MST have developed the know-how to secure land appropriations in such a way as to benefit their main con- stituency-landless	or near landless workers. This continuing, cumulative practical problem-solving type of leadership, and the emphasis on contin- uous, if limited, gains, appears to be a key factor in the success of the MST. At least, this is the view expressed by the leaders themselves in various discussions on this point. In this connection, the MST has settled over 300,000 landless families over fifteen years of struggle and, from 1995 to 1999, at the height of the struggle for land and land reform, the MST
12. Notwithstandingthir perception, M pointed out by a reviewer of thia w y , the key to mccae.~in build- ing a social movement i i an ability to theorize politicel practice and to convert theory into practice- tocombine theory and practice. On thin point, one of the very few truism of sociological thought on social movements, all of the MST leaders are in agreement.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement	87
mobilized 363,053 families of landless “peasants” or workers for land occupations (Robles, 2000: Table 5; Petras and Veltmeyer, ~ O O ~ CIn) .t’h~e first six months of 1999 the MST organized 147 occupations involving 22,000 families, a level of mobilization maintained in subsequent years under conditions of a major counteroffensive launched by the Cardoso government. No other sociopolitical movement in Latin America has demonstrated anything close to such dynamism and relative success in making practical gains to the benefit of so many of its members.
Hypothesis 6: The leaders tend to be self-reliantand less dependent on elec- toral politicians, thus able and willing to engage in bringing about change via direct action.
Unlike movement leaders in other contexts (particularly the ex-guerrillas in Central America) the leaders of the MST have what could be regarded as a healthy distrust of electoral processes and politicians.“ For one thing, they have seen many popular leaders over the years enter parliament and abandon the struggle. For another, they have seen the success to be achieved via direct action.“ Both in terms of their own recruitment and in terms of evaluating the best strategy for bringing about agrarian reform, over two thirds (70%) favour land occupations over the electoral process as a means of bringing about change. And the pressures to opt for what the government and the international community of development assistance organizations term “forms of peaceful and civil struggle” (including use of the “electoral mechanism”) are considerable.16Although political condi- tions were radically different and perhaps not comparable, this finding dif- fers markedly from findings related to sociopoliticalmovements for agrar-
13. Not all “occupations”have led to permanent settlements;the conversion of land occupations into set- tlements requirea a process of negotiation with the government, which has its own land reform agen- daNevertheless. from1990to1999theMSTmanagedtocreate2,194permanentsettlementsinvolv- ing 368,325 families of peasantsnandless workers (Robles, 2000: Table 6). To appreciate the scope of the problem-and	success of the MST-it	is estimated that there are in Brazil upwards of 1.5 million landless workers or peasants.
14. On the penchant of Central American ex-guerrillas for electoral politics, and their accommodation and absorption into the “political class” see, inter alia, Vilas (1995) on Nicaragua and Zamora (1995) on El Salvador, as well asJorge Castafieda (19931, who explains (or constructs his theory ODthe widespread abandonment by the Latin American leR of what he regards as its utopian quest for transformative or revolutionary change, largely in terms of the shift in political orientation and behaviour of these and other such ex-guerrilleros.
15. Apart from their own experience, this is also the lesson that the MST leadership (Stedile, 2000) has drawn from the history of other movements in the region such en the EZLN, CONAIE and FARC. as wellaspeasant social movements in Bolivia,Paraguay and Central America.Onthis point e m Petras (1997).
16. Inthis connection the MST has. for over a year at the time of writing (June 2001), been subject to a major government offensive based on a multipronged stategy that includes outright repression, a major public-relations media campaign and concerted eITorts to channel grievances and land claims into the World Bank-sponsoredLand Bank program. On the political dynamics of thin process, see Veltmeyer (2001a).Aspart of the intellectual weaponry marshalled by the World Bank, the Brazilian government has a	h turned towards the ”sustainable livelihoods approach (SLA)to tackling the prob- lem of entrenched NIUI	poverty Basedon the agency of civil society organizations (CSOs) in partner- shipwith thegovernment,theSLAispredicatedonempowermentofthepoor,increasingtheiraccess to society’a productive resourceti, and enmuraging the use of the “market mechanam” (land titling. land banks) and the “electoral mechanism” (Amalric, 1998; Chambers and Conway, 1998; Liamzon el. al., 1996; UNRISD. 2000).
aa	CRSNRCSA, 39.1	2002
ian or land reform in Central America (see, inter alia, Edelman, 2000). In addition, a significant minority (23%)of MST leaders believe that a com- bination of direct action and electoral campaigns provides the best route to social change. Only one leader prioritized the electoral path towards social change and development, again in contrast to what analysts have found with regard to other land reform movements in the region. In this context the MST does support progressive politicians who support their program (mainly from the Workers’ Party) but always from a position of the autonomy of their social movement; they do not, for example, suspend land occupations during election campaigns.
Hypothesis 7: There is a common understanding or consensus of the lead- ers as to who are their common enemies, the nature of state power and the impact of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other international financial institutions (IFIs) on their followers and the process of agrarian reform.
MST leaders manifest a high level of consensus regarding their adver- saries and the nature of state power: 75% perceive the Cardoso regime as completely opposed to agrarian reform; over two thirds see the govern- ment and landlords as acting in concert against agrarian reform; over 75% perceive an increase in repression over the years of the Cardoso presiden- cy; there is unanimous agreement that the World Bank and IMF program of structural acijustment are designed in the interests of the rich and the well-to-doaswell as the large corporations that dominate the economy. Its impact on the producing and working classes of Brazil are perceived as very negative. Specifically on this issue, 90% think that IMF-WB policies largely benefit foreign investors and Brazil’s rich and powerful; 94% believe that with reference to the operations of transnational corpora- tions, foreign direct investment and neoliberal policies mandated by the IMF and the World Bank, the impact of the US. on Brazil has been totally negative. In this connection, almost two thirds of MST leaders are orient- ed to one form or another of socialism and 84% are optimistic about the future. It is difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain the precise source of this ideologicalorientation-class background, experience or political edu- cation-but	there is no question as to its saliency in defining the MST.
Hypothesis 8: The leadership has a “realistic” view of the international and national conJigurationor structure ofpower and whose interests it serves.
Unlike the Central American ex-guerrillas (see Vilas, 1995) the leaders of the MT!	have no illusions about the international configuration of power.	For one thing, they have a clear understanding of the imperial
17.AquestionmightberaisedPItowhatmightconrtitute“politidredim.”Wedefiieit,M doprop nenb of the realist school of political science, in tornu of the wntnlity of power nlationi In politics andthetendencyforpowerholdrntopunuetheiro mC~AMintemsb.However,itirnotunusualfor thole without p o l i t i d power who wek to advance their own intareatr to harbour 111lorto of illusions about the motives ofpower holders.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil‘s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
89
nature of US. policy and interests; and, as a result, they are generally hos- tile to IFIs and have a clear understanding of the class alignments organized against them. This is evident in several survey questions in which MST leaders were asked to define their ideological orientation and to report on their views regarding the World Bank, the IMF and other international financial institutions, which are almost universally viewed by the national and regional leadership as “agents of US. imperi- alism.” As a result, these leaders are generally resolved to mobilize internal support rather than appeal to “outside organizations” for support or con- dition their action to accommodate the interests and demands of such organizations. Both the interviews that we conducted and our survey pointed towards this conclusion.
Hypothesis 9:The movement leaders have a common vision of an alterna- tive social system that informs their actions, thus motivating the organiza- tion and providing guidelines to action.
Many former leftist parties, especially but not only in Central America, have adapted to neoliberal realities, shedding their former socialist views in the process. On this see, for example, Castefieda (1993) as well as Petras (1997). This could in part explain the divorce of so many of these move- ments from the mass struggle and their electoral pragmatism. In contrast, the leaders of the MST and their actions continue to be guided by a socialist vision of an egalitarian, participatory society based on Brazilian realities. Unlike Central American revolutionaries (see Halebsky and Harris, 1995; Liss, 1991; Vilas, 1995; Wickham-Crowley, 1991) their socialist vision rejects the Soviet model and thus was not affected by the downfall of the USSR and the collapse of “actually existing” socialism. Of the MST’s 37 leaders, 27% favour socialism as practised in Cuba; 33% favour the demo- cratic socialism advocatedby Brazil’sWorkers’party (PT);and 33% project anew form of Brazilian socialism.That is, 90%are oriented towards social- ism in one form or another but not as practised in the former USSR.’*
At a different level, that of practice rather than ideology, the MST leadership is clearly committed to the principle of substantive or popular democracy. This is evident in the decision-making related to both the for- mulation of political strategy and in the social organization of production. Our observations of actual practice in diverse contexts (small meetings and congresses that bring together up to 10,000 rank and file members, popular assemblies, consultations and open discussions with the rank and file in the encampments and on permanent settlements-and	their con- stituent communities) point towards a very substantive or egalitarian form of “participatory democracy.” Discussions are open, voting is direct
18. This supports similar findings about the ideology of other peasant-based and -led social movements in the region such asFARC, CONAIE and the EZLN. On this seeFARC-EP (2000) with regards to FARC; Macas (2000a. 2000b) with regards to CONAIE; and Harvey (1994) and Veltmeyer (2000).
90	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
but secret and decisions, even on matters of fundamental strategy and policy, are generally reached, and made, on the basis of popular participation. For example, after a year of “occupation,” “encampment” and %ettlement”- and successful negotiations with the government on the legal expropria- tion o f the occupied land-peasant	families are free to choose whether or not to form a production co-operativeand collective, the strategy preferred and promoted by the national leadership, or to work the land on an indi- vidual household basis.
Hypothesis 10: The leaders have the klan and mystique required in bring- ing about change in the future, thus providing the motivation to sustain action in times of repression and opposition by formidable adversaries.
Unlike the leaders of so many left-wing parties and movements who tend to be sceptical about large-scale change and pessimistic about socialism, the leaders of the MST manifest a high degree of optimism (&%I,	based on their own practices and successes, as well as faith in the righteousness of their cause. It is difficult to operationalize the concepts of “Blan” and “mystique” as critical factors in the mobilizing capacity of a social move- ment. But with regard to the former (“Blan”)we took cognizance of the degree of enthusiasm and positive spirit exhibited by the leaders in their response to questions about what the movement means to them and their sense of its future prospects. The degree of enthusiasm and optimism about the future was striking, much greater than that exhibited by leaders of various urban-centred social movements whom we have interviewed over the course of research visits undertaken over the last four years. To some extent this enthusiasm and what we have termed dlan is generated and maintained via the movement’s anthem, flag carrying and other rituals that precede and accompany each official act or daily training session at the MST’s leadership training school in Santa Catarina. Asfor “mystique” it defines the particular relationship that most peasants have to the land and is exhibited in the quasi-religious spirit of solidarity (the reference here is to Durkheim) generated by ritualized events such as the annual gatherings of leaders and activists at regional and national congresses and the national meetings of regional leaders, such as the one in Sho Paul0 where we conducted our interviews. The mystique of the movement is also reflected in the many symbolic representations of the movement’s historic struggle against the forces of reaction: banners, insignias, and songs of struggle and conquest written to lift the spirits of the movement’s members and to mobilize them to collective action. The use of such sym- bols is a characteristic feature of events staged by the MST,including meetings and daily openings of sessions of lectures and classes at the Leadership Cadre School in Santa Catarina.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
Class asa Dynamic Factor in Political Organization and Leadership
91
Despite the propensity of recent sociological analysts armed with post- modern theory to downplay, if not ignore, the class factor in social movements, viz. the objectivityand subjectivity of class conditions, there is little question about the centrality of class in regards to the social base of the most significant and dynamic sociopolitical movements in Latin America, including the MST (Veltmeyer, 2000; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001a). But when it comes to leadership, the issues that surround the con- cept of class are more clouded. A number of peasant- or worker-based sociopoliticalmovements in the region draw much of their leadership from the urban-centred middle class, particularly its intellectual stratum. In the case of the MST, however, the movement is peasant-led as well as peasant-based; class is a salient feature of leadership as well as the social base of the movement.
As to the role of class as a factor of analysis, our research suggests that the principles of class analysis established by Marx, and generally used by Marxists, continue to be useful as a guide to analysis and practice: that is, the dynamics of social movements such as the MST are based on a dialectical interplay between the objective and subjective-between the objectivity of the structural conditions shared by the MST leadership with their members and the corresponding subjectivity of shared awareness as to these conditions. This is not to say that the radicalism and orientation towards direct action exhibited by the MST is directly attributable to the class origins of the leadership and the rank and file. The political land- scape in Latin America and elsewhere is littered with counter-examples. However, the leadership of the MST exhibits a high degree of class- consciousness of the socially shared conditions generated by the economic structure of Brazilian society. The mobilizations and direct actions taken by the Movement clearly reflect this class-consciousness as well as the class origins of the leadership. This consciousness is also reflected in the political education programming at the MST’s leadership training school. Also, the responses of the MST leaders whom we surveyed and inter- viewed to the questions put to them clearly establish the centrality of class as a dynamic factor in both the social organizations of the Movement and the strugglesinvolved,aswellasthe subjectiveconsciousnessof the leaders and activists. Class, defined as both a relationship to the means of social production and to the instruments of political power, is clearly a central factor in the thinking, and actions, of these activists.
Summary and Conclusion
Our case study of a successful leadership group is based on a leadership whose social origins are proximate to their organizing constituency, that
92	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
is, who have organic ties to the social base of the movement; and that have achieved a higher education than the norm and are directly involved in practical struggles that engage supporters and are independent of other political organizations. These leaders have a unified political vision of the future and have a positive view of the emeacy of their action and are highly motivated regarding future success.
The antithesis of this positive profile of successful leadership would be a leadership drawn from social classes that are distant from their con- stituency (part of the rural elite or urban professionals) or who are from the same class but poorly educated, drawn to the organization for purely ideological rather than pragmatic reasons, remote from the actions taken (leaders ensconced in central headquarters) and relying on the electoral process for solutions. Leaders who have illuaions about concessions and reforms from established regimes or international donors are likely to lack both vision and initiative and to misdirect the organization with false expectations that tend to lead to internal divisions, ideological conflicts and political demoralization-a	sense that there are no alternatives.
The bane of many popular movements is the “prodigal son” pheno- menon: leaders who are renegades from their class, usually in the middle strata of the class s t r u c t ~ r ew, h~o~identify with the lower classes but who, upon achieving institutional positions, return to a middle class “centrism” and shift their politics accordingly, thus undermining or derailing collec- tive actions in the direction of fundamental and sustained social change. Drawn, to a large extent, from a class of landless or near-landless workers in the rural sector, the MST leadership has shown no propensity toward accommodation to the status quo as a means of feathering their own nests. While the organization has grown and to some degree has become institu- tionalized, with its national headquarters in a two-story building in Sio Paulo, as well as a network of professional accountants and agronomists, it still depends heavily on the voluntary actions of lawyers, clerics and, above all, its own members to carry out daily operations. Institutionalization without bureaucratization seems to work well in providing regularities and order while supporting a decentralized and innovative style of leadership that is very responsive and accountable to the membership. Arguably, the small material differences that separate top leaders from rank and file members is a critical factor in the MST’s successful mobilizations. At least weforwardthisasatentativesuggestionthatwarrantshrther comparative study. The idea is that a relative equality of material conditions, a simi-
19. On the role of the middle Btrata or c l a u in Latin American m c i d movementr we Johnson (Dominguez, 1994). A characterintic feature of the new psaunt rociopolitid movementr that have swept acrou Lath America’n political landscapa in the 1 9 9 0 ~ir that they are pennant-led a# well M peuant-bMed (Petran, 1997). Although thir factor need# to he examined more c l o ~ l yi,t might very well explain the fact that FARC 1 the only peaaant-bad guerrilla movement of the many formed in the wake of the Cuban revolutlon that not only ~ u r v l v dtha counterinrurgency movrmentr of the 19708 and 19801, but that has actually continued to build loeial and political force8 of rmistanw b the point that it now controls up to 40 percent of the countryride in Colombia (FARC-EE 2000).
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movernent
93
larity in social origins and shared social perspectives make for long-term commitments and sustained struggles.
Land occupations are a key element in the MST’s strategy for effecting agrarian reform. The success of this strategy is based on democratic par- ticipation by the mass of beneficiaries in the planning, organization and execution of the occupations and in resisting repression by local gunmen and the military police. The importance of the land occupation strategy in the thinking and actions of the MST leadership is closely linked to the par- ticipatory style of social change practised by this movement.
The centrality of the MST in the lives, beliefs and practices of the leaders is a critical factor in the creation of the high degree of cohesion that sustains their activity. The MST is the social, political and economic organization for realizing activity.There is no separation between “party,” “trade union” and “enterprise” with concomitant parallel and competing loyalties, as is the case in most Latin American countries. A unified and combined sociopolitical movement provides both social practice and ideo- logical direction, thus avoiding the typical problems of social movements dependent on political parties, and subject to their separate agendas. Over the years, we have come across innumerable complaints by activists of being used or manipulated by their political or guerrilla leaders, the prac- tical and essential goals of the organization sacrificed for supposedly higher ends. However, the self-reliance of the MST leaders has guaranteed that the fundamental issue of interest to their constituency-land reform-has	remained in the forefront of their program, struggles and negotiations with political authorities.
In conclusion-and	this is the theoretical point of our analysis- successful leadership seems to coincide with material equality within the organization, social solidarity as an outreach strategy and participatory democracy in the realization of organizational goals. The fact that there is no gap between the goals of the movement and everyday practice means that cynicism and pessimism do not take root. Furthermore, the coinci- dence of everyday realities and idealism fuels optimism, faith and a belief that people can change the world-and	that this change can benefit “the people.”
References Amalric, Frank. 1998. “Sustainable livelihoods, entrepreneurship,political strategies and
governance.”Development, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 3144. Bernstein, Henry.2001.“‘Thepeasantry’ in global capitalism:Who, where and why?” In
Socialist Register 2001. L.Panitch & Colin Leys (eds.).London: Merlin.
Brass,Tom. 1991. “Moral economists, subalterns, new social movements and the (re) emergence of a (post) modernized (middle) peasant.”Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 18, No. 2.
Brass,Tom.2000.Peasants, Populism and Postmodernism: TheReturn oftheAgrarian Myth. London:FrankCaas Publishers.
94	CRSNRCSA. 39.1 2002 Bulmer-Thomas, Victor. 1996.The New EconomicModel in Latin America and its Impact on
Income Distribution and Poverty. New York St. Martin’s Press.
Burgwal, Gerrit. 1990.“An introduction to the literature on urban movements in Latin America.” In Structures of Power, Movements of Resistance: An Introduction to the Theories of Urban Movements in Latin America. Willem Assies et al. (eds.). Amsterdam: Centre for Latin American Research and Documentation.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1997.Educqcio em Mouimento. Formaqciode educadoras e educadores no MST. Petr6polis: Vozes.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. 2000.Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra. Petrdpolis R.J.: Vozes.
Calderh, Fernando.1995.Movimientossocialesypolftica. Mexico: SigloXX1.
Calderdn, Fernando and Elizabeth Jelin. 1987.Clases y movimientos sociales en AmCrica Latino:perspectivasy realidades. BuenosAres: CuadernosCEDES.
Carnacho, D. and R. Medivar (eds.). 1989.LQSmouimientospopulares en AmPrica Latina. Mexico: Siglo XX1.
Castededa,Jorge.1993.Utopia Unarmed: TheLatinAmericanLeftAftertheColdWar.New York: Random House.
Chambers, Robert and Gordon Conway. 1998.“Sustainable rural livelihoods: Some working definitions.” Development, Vol. 41,No. 3.
Dominguez, Jorge (ed.). 1994.Social Movements in Latin America. The Experience of Peasants, Workers, the Urban Poor, and the Middle Sectors. New York: Garland Publishers.
Eckstein, Susan. 1989.Power and Popular Protest: Latin American Social Movements. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Edelman, Marc. 2000. Peasants Against Globalization: Rural Social Movements in Costa Rica. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Escobar, Arturo. 1995.Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Escobar, Arturo and Sonia Alvarez (eds.). 1992.The Making of Social Movements in Latin Americo: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Esteva, Gustavo. 1992.“Development,” in Wolfgang Snchs (ed.) The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledgeand Power. London, Zed Books.
Esteva, Gustavo and M.S. Prakash. 1998.Grassroots Postmodernism. London: Zed Books. FARC-EE 2000.Historical Outline-International	Commission Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia Peoples Army. Toronto: FARC-EE International Commission.
Foweraker, Joe. 1995.Theorizing Social Movements. Boulder, Colo.: Pluto Press.
Gledhill, J. 1988.‘Agrarian social movements and forms of consciousness.” Bulletin of Latin American Research, Vol. 7,No. 2.
Green, Duncan. 1995.Silent Revolution: The Rise of Market Economics in Latin America. London: Cassell.
Haber, Paul Lawrence. 1996.“Identity and political process: Recent trends in the study of Latin American social movements.” Latin American Research Review, Vol. 31,No.1, pp.171-87.
Halebsky, Sandor and Richard Harris (eds.).1995.Capital, Power and Inequality in Lutin America. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Harvey, Neil, 1994.Rebellion in Chiapas: Rural Reforms, Campesino Radicalism and the Limits to Salinismo. San Diego: Center for US-Mexican Studies.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
95
Howarth, David, Aletta J. Norval and Yannis Stavrakakis(eds.).2000. Discourse Theory and Political Analysis: Identities. Hegemonies and Social Change. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
INCRA-Instituto Nacional de Colonizaqio e Reforma Agriria. 1999. Balanfo da Reforma Agraria e da Agricultura Familiar 1995-99. Brasilia: Ministerio do Desenvolvimento Agrijrio.
Kearney, Michael. 1996. Reconceptualizing the Pernuntry. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Latin American Perspectives. 1994. “Social movements and political change in Latin
America.” Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 5. Liamzon, Tina et al. (eds.). 1996. Towards Sustainable Livelihoods. Rome: Society for
International Development (SID). Liss, Sheldon. 1991. Radical Thought in Central America. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Macas, Luis. 1999. “Los desafios del movimiento indigena.” Boletin ICCI, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Macas, Luis. 2000a. “Diez ~	o desl levantamiento del Inti Raymi de Junio de 1990: Un bal- ance provisional (Ten years of the Inti Raymi uprising of June 1990: A provisional assessment).”Boletin Mensual (Instituto Cientifico de Culturas Indigenas),June 15.
Macas, Luis. 2000b. “Movimiento indigena ecuatoriano: una evaluaci6n necesaria.” Boletin ICCI, Vol. 3, No. 21.
Mallon, Florencia. 1995. Peasant and Nation: The Making of Postcolonial Merico and Peru. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Markoff,John. 1996. Waoesof Democrucy:Social MouementsandPolitical Change.Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Pine Forge Press.
McMichael, Philip. 1996. Deoelopment and Change: A Global Perspectioe. Thousand Oaks. Calif.: Pine Forge Press.
Munck, Gerardo. 1997. “Social movements and Latin America: Conceptual issues and empir- ical applications.” Paper presented to the Latin American Studies Association, Guadalajara,April 17-19.
Petras, James. 1997. “Latin America: the resurgence of the left.” New Lefr Review, No. 223, pp. 1747.
Petras, James. 1998. “The political and social bases of regional variation in land occupations in Brazil.” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 25, No. 4.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2000. B r a d de Cardoso : Expropriapio de un pais. Petr6polis: Editorial VOZES.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2001a. “Are Latin American peasant movements still a force for change?” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 28, No. 2.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2001b. Unmasking Globalization: The New Fuce of Imperialism. London: Zed BookdHalifax: Fernwood Books.
Rahnema, M. and I! Bawtree (eds.). 1997. The Post-Development Reader. London: Zed Books. Robles, Wilder. 2000. “The rural landless workers’ movement in Brazil,” Canadian Journal
of Development Studies, Vol. 22, No. 2. Sachs, Wolfgang (4.19)92.. The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge and Power.
London: Zed Books.
Slater, David. 1985. New Social Movements and the State in Latin America. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Stedile, Joao Pedro. 2000. Interview, May 14.
96	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002 Stedile, Joao Pedro and Sergio Frei. 1993.A lutapela terra no Bmil. SBo Paulo: Scritta.
UNRISD-United Nations Research Institute for Social Development. 2000. “Civil society strategies and movements for rural asset redistribution and improved livelihoods.” UNRISD-Civil	Society a n d Social Movements Programme. Geneva: UNRISD.
Subcomandante Marcos. 1994.‘Atourist guide to Chiapas.” Monthly Review, Vol. 46 (May), pp. 8-18,
Veltmeyer, Henry. 1993.“The landless workers’ movement in contemporary Brazil.” Labour, Capital and Society, Vol. 26,No. 2, pp. 20425.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 1997.“Classand identity: The dynamics of new social movements in Latin America.” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 25, No. 1,pp. 139-69.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 2000.“The dynamics of social change in Mexico and the EZLN.” Latin American Perspectivea, Vol. 27,No. 5, pp. 88-110.
Veltmeyer, Henry, 2001a. “Civil society and social movements in Latin America: The dynamics of intersectoral linkages and alliances.” Thematic Paper. Geneva: UNRISD.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 2001b.“The politics of language: Deconstructing postdevelopment dis- course.” Paper presentedaakeynote address at meeting of the Canadian Association for the Study of International Development (CASID),Quebec City, May 27.
Veltmeyer, Henry and James Petroe. 2000. The Dynamics of Social Change in Latin America. London: Macmillan PresslNew York: St. Martin’sPress.
Vilaa, Carlos. 1995.Between Earthquakes and Volcanoes: Market, State, and the Revolution in CentralAmerica. New York Monthly Review Press.
Wickham.Crowley, Timothy (ed.). 1991.Exploring Revolution: Essays on & f i n American Insurgency and Revolutionary Theory. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharp.
Wickham-Crowley, Timothy (ed.).1993.Guerrillas and Revolution in Latin America: A Comparative Study of Insurrection and Regimes Since 1956. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Zamora, Ruben. 1995.“Foreword.” In Free Trade and Economic Restructuring in Latin America, Fred Rosen and Deidre McFadyen (eds.).New York: Monthly Review Press.
Zapata, Francisco. 1987.“El nuevo cardcter de 10s movimientos socialesenAmdrica Latina.” Estado y Sociedad, No. 3.

2006
Political Science
Political Ethnography
The Difference Ethnography Can Make: Understanding Social Mobilization and Development in the Brazilian Northeast
Wendy Wolford

Abstract	Ethnographic research is invaluable for social movement research. Ethnographies of everyday participation in mobilization help to counter the popular image of social move- ments as coherent, well-bounded entities consisting of individuals committed to the goals of the collective. In this study of the Movimento Sem Terra (the Landless Movement, or the MST) in northeastern Brazil, I establish a more complete continuum of movement member- ship by analyzing two interviews (one conducted in 1999, the other in 2003) with a former plantation worker named Cicero who considered himself a member of the MST in 1999 but “didn’t even know what to say about the movement” three years later. Cicero’s interviews are noteworthy because he is not the sort of person typically featured in studies of social mobilization: he did not join the MST because of a passionate commitment (more because the movement showed up and he couldn’t see a reason not to), and he was never convinced of the MST’s primary ideals or methods. Cicero’s interviews provide what Lila Abu-Lughod calls a “counter-discourse,” in which people make decisions that are contradictory, and in- complete, often made without explicit articulation or even understanding. Ultimately, I argue that incorporating this broader continuum will help us better explain movement personalities and trajectories.
Keyword Social movements . Ethnography . Brazil . Landless Movement . Common sense
The decade of the 1990s was a difficult one for the sugarcane region of northeastern Brazil. Local producers were hurt by falling international prices for sugar: from a high of almost one dollar per pound in the early 1980s, the price fell to an average of ten to twelve cents a pound throughout the 1990s (World Bank Report No. 20754-BR 2002: 34). Price decreases were exacerbated by changes in the nature of state support: in 1989, the newly-democratic Brazilian government began dismantling and progressively withdrawing its generous safety net for northeastern sugarcane producers (de Andrade & de Andrade, 2001). Subsidies that had
W. Wolford (􏰎) Department of Geography, UNC Chapel Hill, CB3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu
Springer
336	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
previously (since 1975) allowed northeastern producers to compete with their more efficient counterparts in the South were cut by more than sixty percent in 1989 (Buarque, 1997). By 1995, fifteen of twenty-six sugarcane distilleries in Pernambuco—the state responsible for a majority of the total sugarcane produced in the Northeast at that time—were either shut down or on the verge of bankruptcy (Lins, 1996, p. 2). Production in the state had fallen from twenty million tons in 1989 to 14 million in 2000–2001 (de Andrade & de Andrade, 2001, p. 147, and plantation and distillery owners were leaving their land for healthier industries elsewhere (particularly tourism on the coast). Common laborers were badly hurt by the crisis: in an industry heavily dependent on manual labor, an estimated 350,000 workers were unemployed in 1996 and considered unlikely to find work even during the harvest season.
Crises such as this one are not uncommon in sugarcane. As with most mono-cropped agri- cultural commodities, sectoral crises are a regular response to shifts in international supply and demand. In one important way, however, this crisis was different from the past: economic conditions combined with the increasing presence of the largest grassroots social movements in Brazilian history, O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (The Movement of Rural Landless Workers, commonly known as the MST). As the crisis deepened, the MST began effectively mobilizing former rural workers to occupy idle plantations and pressure the government to distribute the land. The MST’s methods centered on purposeful civil disobe- dience, particularly the occupation and symbolic appropriation of spaces such as large farms or plantations, government buildings and public thoroughfares. The movement’s ideology reflected its leadership’s roots in the peasant culture of southern Brazil, and also brought together an eclectic mix of leftist radicals such as Karl Marx, Antonio Gramsci, Paulo Freire, Mao Tse-Tung and Mahatma Ghandi. Formed in southern Brazil in 1984 to fight for agrar- ian reform, movement leaders considered mobilization in the country’s poverty—stricken Northeast to be a particularly important step to transforming the regional movement into a national one (see Branford & Rocha, 2002, p. 21; also see Fernandes, 1999; Navarro, 2000; Petras, 1997; Robles, 2001; Stedile & Fernandes, 1999; Wright & Wolford, 2003).
As sugarcane elites went bankrupt and MST leaders militated for land reform, the state government of Pernambuco expropriated 27 former plantations and distributed them among former workers and MST squatters (Buarque, 1997; MEPF, 1998). Seemingly overnight (although in fact it took much longer than that), sugarcane plantations were transformed: rural workers whose very identity had been produced through the hierarchical spatial and social segmentation of sugarcane production were given ownership of equal areas of land and theoretically turned into small farmers.1 On one settlement, which I call Flora, in the municipalityofA ́guaPreta,46familiesweregivenaccesstolandin1996.2Thebeneficiaries included the wife and son of the former patra ̃o (literally translated patra ̃o means patron or boss; in Flora’s case, the boss was renting the land from a nearby sugarcane factory), the elite administrative workers, the common workers, both legal and undocumented (the latter being those who were employed on the plantation without their legal working papers, an occupation category increasingly common after stricter labor compensation laws were passed in 1963), house servants, and the MST squatters who had occupied the property months before to
1 Spatial location was a very good indicator of occupational position on the plantation. At one end of the hierarchical spectrum were the plantation owners who lived in the Casa Grande (Big House) and had the run of the plantation (Freyre, 1978). At the other end were the moradores (common laborers) who lived in row houses on the plantation, and the clandestinos (illegal workers) who occupied the most insecure positions because they were forced to reside in town and look for work on a daily or seasonal basis (Sigaud, 1979).
2 I do not use real names in this paper, unless they are political figures who spoke “on the record.” Research was conducted in the region in 1999, 2001, and 2003.
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	337
press for its expropriation.3 A ́ gua Preta is in the heart of the southern sugarcane region in the state of Pernambuco and in 1999 had both the highest concentration of land ownership and the highest number of land reform settlements in the state.4 The municipality is almost entirely dependent on sugarcane (and largesse from the mayor’s office) for employment and production, and the economic crisis of the 1990s hit everyone hard.5
When I first visited in 1999, national, state, and local MST leaders considered both A ́ gua Preta and Flora to be strongholds of MST support and membership. When asked where I ought to locate my field research in Pernambuco, MST leaders suggested Flora as exemplary of the movement’s success in the region.6 The entrance to the small grouping of houses that marked Flora’s center boasted a bright red MST flag, and movement activists were leading the monthly association meetings and organizing public demonstrations.7 One such demonstration in September of 1999 brought over 200 rural settlers together from around A ́guaPretatoprotestlongdelaysinthereleaseofstate-subsidizedproductionloans.The settlers were trying to move away from the regional specialty, sugarcane: at the urging of MST leaders, they were planting subsistence crops as well as bananas and coconuts for the market.
Four years later, however, the political and economic landscape looked very different. The price of sugarcane had increased to more than twice its low in 1999 and local factories were now paying approximately R$35 for a ton of cane, as opposed to between R$12 and R$15
3 The renter still lived on the settlement because his wife and grown son had both accepted plots of land from the government, being eligible according to the government law that gave priority to people with some (any) former association to the land. As extraordinary as it seems, the renter—a well-off man in his late fifties—would also have received a plot if he had not been actively renting out another mill down the road. The renter was almost universally hated, even by people who had liked previous renters (one worker had worked for three renters since he arrived on the plantation in 1962).
4 Between 1992 and 2000, 12 former plantations in the municipality were expropriated and distributed among 926 families.
5 In 2001, an official report written by the Mayor’s office (of A ́ gua Preta) listed the municipality’s Human Development Index at .354, less than half the HDI for Brazil as a whole (with an HDI of .742 in 2001) and significantly lower than Pernambuco (with an HDI of .572).
6 Over the course of fourteen months (in 1998–1999), I worked in the southern state of Santa Catarina (SC) and the northeastern state of Pernambuco (PE). In both regions, I interviewed settlers on three different settlements according to the following criteria: one MST settlement with a history of collective production, one MST settlement with no history of collective production, and one non-MST settlement. In all of the settlements, I interviewed at least one representative from each family, for a total of roughly 200 interviews with rural settlers. In both regions, I asked MST leaders beforehand where I should work. I did this for four main logistical, strategic and political reasons: (a) I am not a member of the MST, and I was dependent on the leaders’ goodwill for access to the settlements; (b) I believe in the right of social movements to limit or manipulate access to their activities: representation is their most important asset and they need to control it in certain ways; (c) the leaders were asked to suggest settlements as research sites, they did not control who I talked to, what people told me, or what I wrote; (d) finally, knowing that I was on settlements that MST leaders considered successful constituted an important part of my research: it enabled me to ask, how does the MST evaluate success and why?
7 Because of the strong relationship between agrarian reform and social movements in Brazil, settlements created after 1985 are usually affiliated with a political representative: a social movement, trade union, or religious organization. These political organizations help to lead the settlements’ association and mediate the relationship between settlers and the state. In 2001, numbers issued by the Mayor’s office for settlements created in the 1990s listed five settlements with the MST (including Flora), three with the state federation of agricultural workers (FETAPE), four with a non-governmental organization, and one autonomous settlement.
Springer
338	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
in 1999.8 Most of the settlers on Flora had gone back to work in sugarcane. The projects for bananas, coconuts, and cattle had not been very successful, and when the opportunity to work with sugarcane came up, they took it. The settlers were, in the words of one settlement president “dying of hunger” as they planted sugarcane again—either on their land or in the millsaroundA ́guaPreta.TheMSTwasnolongerFlora’sofficialpoliticalrepresentativeand the movement generally regarded its position in the region to be in crisis.
These changes that took place on Flora could be understood as rational responses to the changing price of sugarcane: the former rural workers left the movement because they no longer needed it, they could now earn their living planting sugarcane for the regional market. Or the changes could be understood (as the MST leaders understood them) as examples of false consciousness: the settlers were pulled back into sugarcane production because they could not free themselves from the hegemony of the plantation system. In some ways, both of these arguments are valid—planting sugarcane could be considered a rational response to changing prices, particularly in the context of the generalized dominance of sugarcane in the region. The difficulty with both of these arguments (and in fact, with the theoretical frameworks used to understand political consciousness), is that they rest on two problematic—if sometimes correct—assumptions. The first assumption is that the MST was in crisis because people who had formerly belonged to the movement subsequently dropped out. Movements are generally believed to consist of members who join and drop out with precision (such that the movements succeed and fail in the same fashion). In fact, many people who “join” movements do so with some skepticism or even reluctance, ignorance, and bad faith—and many “leave” the same way: we cannot read political beliefs off of group membership. The rural workers on Flora had all believed they were part of the movement in 1999, but they were far from “ideal” members: they participated in demonstrations and state meetings, but they didn’t always understand that the movement was supposed to be composed of landless rural workers, not simply for them. In the same way, although none of the rural workers I interviewed on Flora in 2003 said they still belonged to the MST, not all were convinced that the movement’s withdrawal from local politics had been a good thing. The thick lines between inside and outside that social movements draw for strategic reasons (and that observers sometimes draw for political or solidarity reasons) are rarely—if ever—mirrored on the ground.
The second problematic assumption is related to the first. Both rational choice and Marxist attempts to understand consciousness assume an intentionality (people do things because they mean to) that is common of social movement theories in general. Although social movement scholars are bringing people, agency, and emotions back into the analysis (Auyero, 2003; Jasper, 2004; Wood, 2003) and correcting for what has been called the structuralism of classical social movement studies (Goodwin & Jasper, 1999; McAdam, Tarrow, & Tilly, 2001, p. 18), the focus on intentionality draws new lines in the sands of liberal subjectivity: people either join (and leave) social movements because they want to, usually because they decide it is in their best interests (they get fed up, they want to maintain their reputation, they believe in the cause), or they join and (more often) leave because they are manipulated or swept away against their will by people who decide it is in their best interests. Both of these positions assume a market-place of ideas and decision-making that invokes Liberal economic theory: believing in agency has come to mean believing in intentionality. At the risk of being cited for bad puns, one could say: the path to social mobilization has been paved
8 The Brazilian currency is the real (R$). In October 1999, one real was equivalent to roughly 50 cents and in October 2003, one real was equivalent to roughly 34 cents (from the Brazil currency exchange calculator: http://wwp.brasil-br.com/currency.htm).
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	339
with intentionality. Whether the focus is on the “people” who engage in collective action or on some set of hegemonic representatives (in this case, the sugarcane elites) who manipulate others, someone is making decisions with access to perfect information and in competitive political markets.9 When we come across “informants” who contradict themselves, or who can’t explain their own motivations, we think of it as “noise” and it gets edited out: nonsense, by definition, does not make sense.
Instead of editing out these “unreasonable” answers, we need to add what Lila Abu- Lughod calls a “counter-discourse,” where people are “confused, life is complicated, emo- tional and uncertain,” (2000, p. 263) to our analyses of social change and mobilization.10 In addition to bringing culture into studies of social movements (Rubin, 2004; Wolford, 2003, 2005), we need to explicitly incorporate that aspect of culture best described as “common sense.” Following others, culture can be conceived of as a continuum running from informal to formalized expressions: common sense, tradition, ritual, and ideology, where ideology is expressed in (and demonstrated by) highly developed, well thought out declarations (textual and oral), and common sense is “the simple truth of things artlessly apprehended,” (Swidler, 1986).11 It is, in the Gramscian sense, contradictory, fragmented, and never autonomous from hegemonic ideologies. It is the realm of culture most fraught with internal difference, most fluid (rather than contained within a recognizable group of people) and most read- ily changing in order to make sense of—and take advantage of—new situations (rather than rooted in tradition). The move to incorporate common sense does not mean structure, agency, and explanation should be abandoned in studies of social movements.12 Rather, our ability to explain movement trajectories over time depends on our ability to incorporate common sense into the analysis.13 When asked in 2003 why they left the MST, the land reform settlers inA ́guaPretarespondedinwaysthatwerecontradictory,incomplete,attemptstojustify post hoc a set of decisions that had often been made without explicit articulation or even understanding. Incorporating this “noise” into our analysis of political consciousness helps to explain that the question one might ask in returning to the sugarcane region, ‘why did theMSTfailinA ́guaPreta,’istooblackandwhite:infact,theMSTdidnotfailentirely
9 Elisabeth Wood’s (2003) insightful study of insurgents in El Salvador stresses the causal power of what she calls the “pleasure of agency,” where agency is defined as acting purposefully to change life’s circumstances. Jasper (2004) argues for more attention to agency, defined as or through strategic choice-making in social movement settings.
10 See Javier Auyero (2003) for an excellent example of this.
11 See Ann Swidler’s 1986 article on “Culture in Action,” where she argues that ideology can be defined as highly articulated, self-conscious aspects of culture, tradition as the articulated cultural beliefs and practices, and common sense as the set of unselfconscious assumptions that are taken for granted or seen as natural (p. 279). Clifford Geertz also outlines the ways in which ideology, religion, and common sense form a cultural whole. Antoˆnio Gramsci of course suggests that common sense (as opposed to ideology, philosophy, and good sense) is the un-critical, perhaps immediate, sense that people make of events, ideas, and social relations.
12 In a well-argued paper, Charles Kurzman (2004) suggests that understanding why people do things will ultimately undermine our ability to build post hoc explanations. He focuses on events characterized by what he calls “confusion” (to differentiate it from simple uncertainty), such as the 1979 Iranian Revolution: “In this case, and by extension in other cases like it, explanation aspires to make actions expected, after the fact, that even the actors did not expect at the time” (p. 332). In this paper, instead, I argue that a close understanding of why people joined the MST in A ́ gua Preta is necessary to explaining the movement’s subsequent trajectories, both local and national.
13 This parallels a Foucauldian appreciation for contradiction and contingency in building genealogies instead of neat, linear histories (also see Gupta & Ferguson, 1997 on the need to incorporate contradiction into studies of governmentality). Diani and McAdam (2003) who argue that qualitative analyses can—and is needed to—explain some of the issues or problems raised by the significant quantitative (and structural) work already done over the past thirty years.
Springer
340	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
(just as it did not succeed entirely), and the movement may even have planted the necessary conditions to rebuild its presence again. There was enough uncertainty and mixed emotions among the land reform settlers to suggest that if the movement becomes a strong political actor again in the region, at least some settlers would swear they never left (and perhaps they never did).
This sort of study requires an appropriate methodology: an analysis of contradiction, silences, and confusion can only be done through what Gillian Hart calls “advancing to the concrete” through “critical ethnographies (2004, pp. 97–8) and what Abu-Lughod calls an “ethnography of the particular,” simultaneously localized and global. This attention to location (rather than the local, see Gupta & Ferguson, 1997, p. 39), to lived experiences (rather than rhetoric, see Burdick, 1995; Edelman, 2001, pp. 309–310) and to (un)intentions (as opposed to simply action, see Ortner, 1995; Wolford, 2003) will enrich our ability to understand and explain social movements. In the body of this paper, I use the textual tools of Pierre Bourdieu’s (1991) Weight of the World to work through two interviews conducted witharuralworkerturnedlandreformsettleronFlora,inA ́guaPreta,Pernambuco,Brazil.14 He was formerly a “common worker,” not an administrative (elite) employee or an MST squatter. I call him Cicero although that is not his real name. The interviews were conducted in 1999 when Cicero said he belonged to the MST and in 2003 when he no longer “knew what to say about the movement.” The first interview was situated within the context of my seven months in A ́ gua Preta. I also visited the area and met informally with the settler in 2001.
Cicero is not the kind of social movement member who usually finds his or her way into a study: he was not vocal in his opinions, he was not the “model” member on the settlement to whom researchers were told to speak, nor was he a contrarian who walked away from meetings (or the MST) in disgust and waited for his chance to “tell all” to the American researcher on the settlement. To the contrary, Cicero was quiet, he was uncertain what to think about the movement, and he rarely picked sides in a disagreement. In this, he was perhaps representative. His reasons for joining and leaving the MST resonated with the silent majority of settlers on the settlement (silent because they do not speak out or are not asked).
Analyzing Cicero’s discussion of why he joined—and then left—the MST leads to four key points. First, the confusion and contradiction Cicero presents cannot be easily dismissed as mistakes or unimportant, they are part of his attempt to reconcile his personal circumstances with the way he imagines the world ought to work. Second, the uncertainty Cicero feels about leaving the MST highlights the fuzziness of movement membership more generally— within any given movement, there are varying degrees of engagement, and interviewing along the continuum provides us with a more representative picture of movement politics than simply interviewing movement addicts and elites. Third, the pride that Cicero feels in owning his land has to be situated in a longer history of “captivity” on the plantations: as a former plantation worker, he feels a new freedom. For movement leaders, this freedom means freedom from the dominance of sugarcane, plantation elites, and the state, but for Cicero, freedom means being able to allocate his own labor time and to work where he wants. Freedom, for Cicero, means the right to reject the MST’s advice and ultimately to withdraw from the movement. Fourth, and finally, Cicero’s discussion of politics on the settlements highlights the extent to which participation in the MST laid the groundwork for
14 In the collected volume of essays edited by Bourdieu (1991), researchers present interviews with minimal introduction and ask readers to “see [the interviewees’] lives as necessary through their reading” (1).
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	341
future political participation. Even if the movement itself never regains its political strength in the region, the tools of participation that movement activists laid down will certainly be used again. Social movements may come and go, but they build on and generate broader repertoires of contention; these repertoires are easily missed if we privilege the movement as a bounded, easily defined object of study.
In presenting and analyzing Cicero’s interviews, I am not suggesting that he “speaks” in a way that is representative or original and therefore authentic or necessarily insightful. I am using his words to highlight the fluidity and contradictions of social movement membership and identity. He spoke for himself in our interview but he does not necessarily do so in this text. The interviews have been structured both by my presence and by the interview format, and the text was structured afterwards through analysis and academic publishing conventions.
Cicero, July 31, 1999
Cicero is a short, sturdy black man, perhaps the darkest man on Flora. He was singled out for his color in the casual, even affectionate way that people are in Brazil. People called him the ‘little black one,’ and when Cicero worked in the neighboring mill before receiving land on Flora, the other men knew him as ‘Amaral,’ the name of a nationally-known soccer player who was as dark as he. Cicero was very friendly, with a quick smile; and unlike many of the former rural workers, he always looked me in the eye when I talked to him. I interviewed Cicero on the porch of his new house inside Flora, a fast but dirty walk along a red clay path from the settlement’s center. Cicero did not live in the house where we sat; he and his family had a little house in the town (na rua) of A ́ gua Preta. When he received the government funds earmarked for housing, he built the brick house by the small stream that ran through his property. Cicero had planted manioc along the hillside behind his house, and he grinned broadly as we walked around his plot of land. Cicero’s wife and children were not with us during the interview; he had been walking alone to his house when I caught up with him. He said his wife weeded with him, but only occasionally. If the settlement ever got electricity, as the mayor had promised, Cicero said he would move the whole family into the new house.
Cicero remembered his life before the present without details. He was born on a sugarcane plantation, in the mill where his parents lived. When asked “what was it like,” he seemed uncertain of the question and answered as someone who did not feel they had the luxury of choosing the broad strokes of his life: “It was what we had to do, wasn’t it? What else were we going to do?” The family didn’t have land of their own, though they were sometimes allowed to plant garden crops on the land near their house. Access to land for planting had once been a regular condition of tenancy, or moradia, where workers lived on the plantation and worked a certain number of days per week in return for land to plant and a house to live on. The tenancy relationship was severely eroded after the 1960s when national legislation extended formal labor rules to the countryside and informal “gifts” such as access to land were increasingly unavailable (de Andrade, 1988; Julia ̃o, 1972; Pereira, 1997). In the 1970s, new government subsidies increased production, and it became even harder for workers to find land for their own subsistence.
After the transformation in tenancy norms, Cicero’s family displayed a mobility that has since become common to the sugarcane region: people exercise their “right” to leave a plantation when working conditions are deemed unbearable. From the point of view of the workers, this mobility offers some freedom in their otherwise highly circumscribed lives. When he was very young, Cicero’s family moved around from mill to mill in the southern
Springer
342	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
sugarcane region of Pernambuco until they ended up at a mill called Jotoba ́ where his parents both cut and weeded cane. His father always liked their old bosses and never made trouble. Cicero said the boss at Jotoba ́ was a good man because when his father died, his mother was hired to work in the Big House. Workers in the Big House were often treated “just like family,” in the region’s paternalist system of labor relations. Cicero’s mother eventually re-married and the whole family went together to yet another mill named Barro Branco.
From Barro Branco, Cicero began working in the mills on his own. He was seventeen years old when he began gathering sugarcane (cambitando) in the large trucks to take to the distillery. He liked working with the trucks because it was easier than working in the fields, “the cane cutter or sharecropper is more beaten down, he has to cut a ton of cane just to earn four or five reais.15 For people who are good with a scythe, you can cut two or three tons a day. And I can make this much money with just one or two trips with the truck, depending on the truck. If the truck was well-built, well, there were trips when I would earn R$5.00 just on one.” Cicero always lived on the mills where he worked and remembered his bosses giving him land to plant. He liked his bosses well enough, saying cryptically that “I don’t want to see a boss for any reason when things are going well, I only want to see them when someone in the family is sick.” By the time I met him, Cicero had a world-weary sense about him, having already been “all around this world, my god! I’ve already lived in Jotoba ́, Pamosca, Ferra ̃o, in Alagoas, Espinheiro also in Alagoas, Japaranduba, which is next to Palmares, and other places too.” He had been married for more than 20 years (he said with a grin, “I love my little old lady a lot,”) and he hoped to stay put for a while: “Now that I have this little househereinA ́guaPreta,I’vesettleddown.Here,whatIhaveismine:thiswasmydream. And thank god I will stay here for the rest of my life.”
WhenCiceroarrivedinA ́guaPreta,heworkedonthemillthatwouldbecomeFlora.He worked as an undocumented worker (clandestino), hired by the man who had been renting the property—about 450 hectares of land, since 1982. “In those days,” when Cicero first arrived, the fields were well-planted: “It was full of cane here, some 100 people worked here. . .. [The former renter] was planting, and all these mills around here were full of cane.” After six years of working illegally, Cicero received his working papers. He began working with the cattle, planting cane for feed and tending to the animals. This was roughly when the plantation “began to go bankrupt, [the boss] brought himself down. He went under.” In 1993, most of the settlers on Flora agreed, the renter stopped planting sugarcane. He harvested a second and third growth from the cane already in the field (called ratoons), but was unable to maintain production in the face of reduced government subsidies and falling worldsugarcaneprices.Thiswasthebeginningoftheindustry-widecrisisinA ́guaPreta.It was also the beginning of the demand for agrarian reform and the MST’s political presence in the region. The MST was only one of several organizations pushing for land distribution, but they were the most committed to aggressive action and arguably forced the rural trade unions, the Catholic church, and other social movements to take up the cause. The MST had actually begun organizing in 1989, but local leaders initially had trouble mobilizing support among rural workers who were embedded in very different land-labor relation than the family farmers of southern Brazil where the movement began (Wolford, 2003).
In the mid 1990s, MST leaders and members joined the state agricultural workers’ federation, FETAPE, in a massive occupation of the largest sugarcane operation in Latin America. The distillery, Catende, had been a site of political dispute since 1993 when 2300 people were summarily laid off. In 1994, the mill stopped paying its still-employed workers
15 Brazilian currency, approximately one to two US dollars at the time. Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	343
their legally-mandated “rights” (direitos) which included back pay, bonuses, fines for late payments, unjust termination rewards and holiday pay. By 1995, political protest had resulted in the expropriation of several mills belonging to Catende, but most of the squatters affiliated with the MST were not eligible for land (the unemployed former workers were given first priority), and they moved on to occupy new plantations. In 1995, thirteen families arrived on Flora after having occupied other mills nearby and camped out alongside the street under their black plastic tents. On Flora, they occupied a small riverbank in the interior of the plantation. At that time, the land was not actively productive: “Not at all,” Cicero said, “they weren’t planting anything here at all.” The National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform (hereafter INCRA) had actually evaluated the property during the faint-hearted agrarian reforms of the 1970s. The property was slated for expropriation then, but nothing happened for over twenty years. The owner remained in debt to the state for nonpayment of loans received, and the land was rented out to medium-sized sugarcane suppliers. After three non-violent (but difficult) expulsions, the federal agrarian reform agency (INCRA) expropriated the property on March 7, 1996. Cicero learned late that the expropriation was finally going to go through: “I didn’t even know about it, I only came to know after they had already signed everyone up. But then there were three people who didn’t want the land, and so I threw myself into the middle, thank god. I am very grateful to the administrator here. He gave a push for me to get this land.”
Cicero had never owned his own land before, and he thought that the expropriation was a good idea: “I thought that I would have a little piece of land to plant on. I said to myself that I wouldn’t have to live any more on anyone’s back (a`s custas de seu ninguem). Because we used to spend all of our time battling for other people. You arrive one day, and that day they have work, the next day you go back, and then there isn’t any. When I got my piece of land, I considered myself a man rich in the grace of god. Because here I work when I want, no one is going to look at me, whatever I want to plant, whatever I want to do here in my house, no one is going to beat me up, because it’s mine. They gave this to me free and clear.” Cicero repeatedly expressed his relief in no longer having to beg for the handouts that are a common feature of the paternalistic and poverty-ridden political culture in the Northeast:“AfterIarrivedhereinA ́guaPreta,Iworkedinthesummerforthepersonwho rented the mill, but in the winter I was always unemployed. I got tired of always standing in the doorway of the city council, abusing this person or the other, or the mayor, getting money to do the weekly shopping from one person, getting R$100 from another. Today, thank God, I don’t need this.”
After receiving his land, Cicero considered himself a member of the MST (“yes, I am”) because “if it weren’t for the good will of the movement, I would not be here on the settlement.” When I asked if he had participated in a mobilization or a march, he said yes, but could not elaborate further. He believed that “until now the movement has been helping me a lot. Because all of these credit projects that come out, it’s because of their work, isn’t it? The money that comes out, all of these projects, it’s the will of the movement.”
Even though Cicero was fairly representative of the MST members in A ́ gua Preta, he was by no means an “ideal” MST member, mostly because he spent very little time actually planting on his land. He did not see farming as a practical means of ensuring his subsistence and in the way of most rural workers in the region, he believed that money generated food rather than the other way around (meaning that he valued paid labor over subsistence farming). The MST had developed in southern Brazil in the 1970s and 1980s before moving up the coast into the Northeast and North, and the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Parana ́ are well-known as the center of small family farming in the country (see Cazella, 1992; Paulilo, 1996; Wolford, 2003). Immigrants from Germany, Poland, and Italy,
Springer
344	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
primarily, had settled there in the 1800s and early 1900s looking for land of their own to farm. This farming ideal—where land sits at the center of production and social reproduction—is attheheartoftheMST’svisionforanalternativefuture.16InA ́guaPreta,themanifestation of this peasant vision was the focus on eradicating sugarcane from the settlements and the drive to teach the settlers how to plant a diversified portfolio of crops, from which they would derive the majority of their subsistence. Local MST leaders were particularly insistent that the settlers not plant sugarcane (as opposed to other commercial crops), as this crop seemed to both epitomize and maintain the settlers’ dependent conditions in the region. In 1999, local MST leaders and agronomists were trying to convince the settlers that they should plant food crops on their land. They oversaw the preparation for, and distribution of, the government-subsidized production projects, which specified three alternate products for production and sale: bananas, coconuts and milk. When I first spoke with him, Cicero had planted some of his bananas and a field of manioc, but he spent most of his time away from his land “taking care of the family.” In our discussion about work, he went back and forth, arguing that taking care of the family meant finding a job and then arguing that survival meant working on his land. This “multi-dimensionality” is, of course, common to peasant production more generically but it was difficult to reconcile with the MST’s vision of a good settler and good MST member. The following quotes are taken from different segments of his interview; they are not taken out of context so much as they are taken out of the larger interview:
Cicero said he did not spend much time on his land because he “finished the house, looked to one side, looked to the other, didn’t see anything. . . and we have to battle constantly to give our family something to eat. Even this winter now, I have not been on my land, I have already lost a lot of weeks of work now. If not, I would already have a lot of stuff planted here. To do this, I want to be working on my land. Because in there, with the little bit of manioc that we have, digging out a little pool for fish, and then when things get tight, we have fish in the pond, we throw some manioc on the stove and we keep on fighting. If I had been in here all the time, I would already have a lot of things planted.”. . . .“There are days when I leave here with my legs only moving by force. I get back to the house late at night and all I can do is drink some coffee and fall into bed. I had a [temporary work contract] there in the sugarcane mill, Santa Maria. I spent four or five months there, only coming home at the end of the week. If I spend time here inside the settlement without having anything where would I end up? At the end of the week, I have to arrange some milk for my son, and a little bit of change to buy even just a kilo of couscous, beans and flour, which is what we most need in the house, and so we have to fight on.”. . ..“When the summer comes around and the cane-milling begins, then if I can do some work on my land, I will really stay there. I am going to buy some pesticides and kill the weeds so that when the rains come, the land will already be ready. It all depends on when I have to leave to go take care of my family (pra segurar o meu) you know? One has to leave to work the season of the milling and that way I can eat again this winter.”
Even as he rationalized his detachment from the land in the settlement, Cicero distanced himself further from the movement by unselfconsciously rejecting the movement’s main strategic tool: the land occupation. MST leaders throughout the country view the occupation as the fundamental formative moment and ongoing process through which landless workers become members (for themselves). A prominent MST leader from Santa Catarina (who
16 The MST’s “agrarian populism,” as I call it in other work (after Gupta, 1998, see Wolford, 2005), is less evident in political discourse than it is on the ground, in the settlements.
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	345
moved up to the Northeast when the movement began mobilizing there) put it this way, emphasizing the movement’s focus on land and the occupation process: “we picked an issue that united everyone—the land. [Land] is a necessity. Land is the word that unifies. Land became the element of the struggle. You offer the workers the opportunity to have land—but through an occupation [that they participate in].”
But Cicero, like many of the former rural workers on Flora, had learned to appreciate the law (through the formalization of rights after the labor victories of the 1960s and 1970s), and he distrusted methods that seemed so clearly illegal. His reasoning, however, was, to paraphrase Abu-Lughod, “confused, complicated, emotional and uncertain”: “I am against land occupations. If the government has already evaluated the land and decided to put people on top of it, that’s ok. Because not everyone is equal, you know? One time these people [several MST leaders] went to Recife, and they left there ruining the car they were driving. I am against that. If the head of the movement came and put people inside a property, this then I agree with. Now, to invade—this business where they don’t even know if they will be able to get that land—well then, I am against that. But if the business is already all set, they’re already entering into negotiations, and they throw people inside there, well then, that’s correct. Because many people have already said—even the state said the same thing - that INCRA was buying land very expensively, land that had been invaded. Over there there was even a mill and the owner himself was the one who got people together, even gave them a house to invade, so that he would get more than the land was worth. If we have a little piece of land, a farm, and we arrive and find it invaded, we won’t feel very good. Now, if we already owe money, and we’re not producing anything, well then I agree with it.”
Even on Flora, where the land had been designated for expropriation in the 1970s, Cicero didn’t agree with the occupation and was unsure if the original MST squatters had full rights to their plots of land: “Because this whole business of invading here, invading there, the men who kick them out.... And so we didn’t know anything about the movement or the occupation [before they expropriated Flora]. We found out when they were negotiating, you know? And we still don’t know whether they’re settled already absolutely correctly and everything - as they say in the history books.”
By our next conversation, in 2003, these disagreements over what the settlers should plant, where they should work, and who had the right to land (what can be summarized as the relationship between land and labor) had contributed to a significant divide between the settlers and the MST.
Cicero, February 19, 2003
I interviewed Cicero again almost four years after our first interview. We met in the screened- inareaatthefrontofhishouseinA ́guaPreta.Itwasthesamehousehehadbeenlivingin in 1999. The settlement still did not have electricity and Cicero would not move his whole family there until there was running water and light. Cicero was hot and out of breath from having run up the hill to meet me. It was late summer in the zona da mata, the very end of the harvest, and nothing much was happening. Cicero wasn’t planting because the fields were dry; he was waiting for the winter rains that usually began falling in May or June. This year he thought he might plant manioc again, even though he had lost almost all the manioc he had shown me four years earlier: “That time when you came around [my house on the settlement], didn’t you see a lot of manioc?” “Yes, I have a picture of it.” “Well, I lost all of that.” The rains had come and the manioc rotted before he could pull it all up. Cicero’s attempt to produce bananas did not go well either: “The bananas didn’t do well at all (na ̃o
Springer
346	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
deu nada), they’re over there, those little trees, they’re only this tall. . ..” Cicero, like many others, now said they had only planted bananas in the first place because they were told they had to: “It was just a waste of time and work. It was wasting money like a fool, this business of investment in banana, [and other tropical fruits]. None of it did well. We only planted that banana because Antoˆnio [the agronomist and MST leader] told us to—and the president and the extension agents too. Because if you didn’t plant it, you wouldn’t get the rest of [your government-subsidized loans]. A lot of people were turned off (desligou-se), as you saw. They turned away from the association and the movement after that.”
Cicero said the government-subsidized project for banana had gone awry because the settlers had not received sufficient technical advice from their agronomist-cum-MST leader and because “salvation has to be sugarcane.” “I planted lemon, orange, banana, I planted my land, you know? Well, what I really planted was just banana and maracuja ́, I didn’t plant the rest. Because Antoˆnio is coming today, he’s coming tomorrow, he’s coming this or that day and so time went by and in the end, the material that was supposed to come never came. The banana came, and I got 200 trees, but they kept saying the rest will arrive in the next batch and so they kept dividing it up for each one a little bit, and saying that when the next batch comes, you will get the rest. Today I have two cows, one horse, the fence, the pond that I built, it was all part of the government project. But the rest of it all disappeared (foi tudo pro Belele ́).”.... “But, if I could have, I would have invested everything in sugarcane. If I had planted at that time the R$7500 that I took, I would have put at least R$5000 in sugarcane, and maybe my land would at least have energy and I wouldn’t be owing the bank. . .. We all went along with the talk (conversa) of Antoˆnio and the settlement president because if you don’t plant all of this that the bank asks for and the movement asks for then you won’t get the other bit of the money. I know that there are others who did not do [what Antoˆnio said] and they got their money.”
With the recent increase in the price of sugarcane, Cicero was planning to plant his fields again in the crop. “Sugarcane sustains agriculture because in the summer we have a little bit of change, you know?”. . .. “[If I could do it again,] I wouldn’t invest so much again in what they made me invest in. I know that I am never going to be able to pay this debt off.” . . .. “If the state liberated this money and said, ok the money is in your hands, I want to see you all make progress in some things, I am certain that only people who don’t want something will have nothing because we would plant what the land will support (o que a terra dava). . .. Salvation has to be sugarcane, we have to push more for sugarcane.” Cicero was planning to plant at least a hectare of sugarcane, which he estimated would produce 50 tons of cane. He had taken 18 tons to the Treze de Maio mill the previous harvest and said it was easy to find a place for the crop: “All of the distilleries are accepting cane, what they want most of all is sugarcane, the more that arrives for them, the better.”
When I asked him if the MST was helping on the settlement, despite the failure of the bananas project, he said,
Cicero: I don’t even know what to say about the movement. Because the only meeting we have participated in until now was this past week and so I don’t know what to say.
Wendy: The movement doesn’t come around here anymore? The militants of the movement don’t come around?
Cicero: They only showed up here when that money came out. And at the time when they built that office that they were going to put there, seems like INCRA condemned it.
Wendy: Yeah. Cicero.: So it was stopped and everything ended, and no one has seen anyone from the
movement again. Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	347
I asked Cicero to explain what had happened with the office building that MST leaders had hoped to locate on the settlement. Local movement leaders had held a meeting with the settlers to ask if the MST could renovate the nearly-abandoned stables that sat at Flora’s entrance. The movement wanted to house its regional headquarters there, on the settlement closest to the center of A ́ gua Preta as—up until then—a source of support for the movement. The settlers had voted yes, but subsequently there was confusion and disagreement and several of them went to the state capital, Recife, to get federal agrarian reform agents (from the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform, INCRA) to stop the move. I said to Cicero:
Wendy: The settlers didn’t want the movement to build that house? Cicero: They did want it, but there were many who went to INCRA. [The former president]
himself went, several of them went, they said that it was going to turn into a rowdy bar (baderna).
But Cicero did not agree with this interpretation of the MST’s intent, although he said he did not bring his disagreement up with others:
Cicero: The more that INCRA, the state, the movement, no matter who, wants to invest in the settlement, well, that’s an advantage for us, but they (the other settlers) think that it is going to turn into a rowdy bar where the whole world will come and want to boss us around. And so it’s their problem, they only want to go downhill, they don’t want to see things get better.
Wendy: They think that the people who go to the office will want to boss people around? Cicero: More or less. . .. at least that’s what [the former settlement president] said. I live there inside the settlement, I fight to see all of that looking good, but then they said that there had been an act that was signed incorrectly without anyone knowing about it.
Because the will of the majority was that they shouldn’t build [the office]. Wendy: It should not have been done or it should have been? Cicero: No, it should not have. Wendy: This was what the majority of people wanted?
Cicero: Yes. That building was going to be the settlement’s postcard. It was going to be more attractive every time, more organized, it was an advantage for us! And so they think that it’s better to go down than to come up. For INCRA, the movement could build whatever building they wanted, at least the whole business was well-organized, giving us one more attractive thing. But many people think that it’s going to turn into a baderna, they are going to make a mess, with the whole world there coming in and out. And so what are we going to do? Stay quiet and just watch.
I then asked Cicero whether the settlement was still affiliated with the MST. He began his response with a comment about collective disengagement, but when pressed returned to his discussion of private property rights that had colored his evaluation of the MST in 1999.
Wendy: So the people here don’t like MST any more? Cicero: I don’t see anyone here talk about the movement. Wendy: Because in the beginning the settlement was part of the movement, right? Cicero: Yes. Everything we have today we owe to the movement. I too owe everything
to it. I just don’t agree with this business of invading land. Who wants to have what is theirs and arrive to find it has been invaded? I have this house here and say I leave and when I get back, it’s been invaded? What am I going to do? I don’t agree with this. Now,
Springer
348	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
the way the law is today, where no one invades anything, because if there is an invasion
it is expropriated only two years later, I think this is correct. Wendy: What if they carry out an occupation on a large farm or mill that is already indebted
and everything? Cicero: Yes, and so the movement goes and negotiates and the owner of the property—after
they negotiate, I agree with putting people inside the property. To this day I have already fought a lot, but I would never fall inside an occupation, no. I got this land because I worked in the mill, but for me to invade what belongs to other people, I never had the desire to do this. I would be afraid.
Wendy: Really? Cicero: Yes. Can you imagine, a guy is at home in his house full of children like I am,
and then a group of people come, whether it’s with guns or not. If you run you will see your family be beaten down. You have to react and if you react you end up dying. I have never lied. That time when they went to that other mill, they were camped out four different times. There on my land there is a little piece of land where they camped out. Over there (he said, pointing) there’s another place.”
Even though Cicero did not see any one talking about the movement and didn’t try to talk to any of the leaders still in the region, he was discouraged by the disorganization on the settlement, and wished there was more cooperation. He described a settlement in the neighboring state where “you can see that things work differently, I don’t know if you have already been to Alagoas but there is a settlement close to a sugarcane factory there. It’s a very beautiful thing, it’s just like a city, there’s a bakery, there’s everything.” Cicero said they had achieved all of this because they had a cooperative and worked together. On Flora, Cicero said, there was too much mistrust to allow people to work together: “I have already told many of them that the guy who likes things doesn’t trust anyone. When a guy trusts another person it is because he doesn’t like to take what belongs to other people. But people who don’t trust anyone are people who already know what went on.”
When Cicero encountered a political problem on the settlement he wanted to organize the other settlers again to protest, just as they had that evening in front of the city council building. Cicero blamed the mayor for not delivering the electricity that he had promised back in 1999. He called on his memories of the demonstration from 1999 to argue that “if we did this again, I am certain that the mayor would already have given us our electricity. And when we do get together—well, there was that time when we wanted the councilman Armando Souto to sign for us, about three years ago. That was the reason our credit projects were approved. Armando didn’t want to sign [our papers], and I know that we got together Elias, the other Elias who was the president, everyone got together with the mayor’s men, because Armando Souto was against us. Do you remember?”
He tried to convince some of the other people on the settlement to organize another demonstration like that one, “and so I said to them: ‘Now, is the time for you to turn over the mayor’s car.’ And they said ‘no, because. . ..’ And I said: ‘look, you guys don’t mobilize for anything; the mayor said the electricity here in Flora was a priority of his, even if there wasn’t enough money to finish it all, he would take it out of his own purse and finish it.’ I said this to them, because it was time for them to turn over the mayor’s car to make this happen, just like they did with Armando’s car.” Cicero remembered this demonstration with triumph, “because then the money came out, Souto signed the papers! But the mayor’s being a fool, and everything’s left the way you see it. . ..”
I said, “It’s a lot of bureaucracy, isn’t it?” And he replied, still amiably, “Yes, and the only one who gets screwed (is forced to dance) is the little guy.” Cicero said that the mayor
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	349
did help with some things, but through the traditional patronage channels, which meant that it didn’t always trickle down. His wife, who had joined us on the porch, explained: “He helps the presidents [of the settlement] because he’ll give a job to their children and then the presidents are trapped without being able to ask for anything because the mayor will take them to task—‘but you have a child, your wife, they’re all working in the mayor’s office. . .”’
In the end, though, even with the disorganization on the settlement and the difficulties with the movement, Cicero still thought that he was better off than he had been before he was awarded a place on the settlement. When I asked him directly if he was better off, his answer began with a discussion of material position and ended with a seemingly unrelated story about personal honor:
My life is quite a bit better now. Before [I got land] I had to wake up at dawn out of my head working in the middle of nowhere (no meio do mundo, a common expression having no perfect translation but meaning ‘somewhere out in the world’) on top of a sugarcane truck, and I would get home at ten or eleven at night. Today I leave the house at 7:30 in the morning and on Sunday I played soccer with some friends at night, then I watched a movie and went to bed at 1:00 in the morning—when I looked at the clock in the morning, I had already overslept! And if I were working for others? Now I can get to work at 7:00, at 8:00 or 9:00 and [my boss at the auto shop] doesn’t say anything. One time, about three years ago, I worked in a mill around here. I worked in a job preparing the land. I would leave here around 5:30 in the morning—you’re supposed to be there at 5:00 a.m. to work. One time I went to the entrance of the hospital and I came back ashamed because the guys there said: ‘Well, boy, at an hour like this!’ Because that was what I have been most afraid of in my life: complaining about something.
Conclusion
So, what then, is Cicero’s place—or the place for ethnography—in critical studies of devel- opment and social mobilization? The close reading of the way in which “banal geographies of everyday life” weave their way in and out of social mobilization advances our theoretical understandings in at least four directions:
1. Cicero’s strong assertions of statements that contradicted one another—even well after the fact—illustrate a “clear-headed confusion” (Abu-Lughod’s “counter-discourse”) that rarely comes through in studies of social movements. Instead of trying to make sense out of everything that happened and treating contradiction or uncertainty as “noise,” common sense should become a key epistemological tool for understanding political consciousness. Contradictions are not always contradictory: they are windows onto the messy relationship between agency and structure. Or rather, they reflect the ways in which people reconcile their personal circumstances with a view of how the world ought to work. These tensions are evident in the way that Cicero defended private property (referencing the pain he would feel if people invaded his own house) even as he attributed his property rights to the MST members who squatted on the plantation and pushed through the expropriation. He held onto the notion that the law should be respected, even as he legitimated the MST’s tactics of invading unproductive land by referring to a general situation of injustice. These contradictions reflect both Cicero’s own sense of confusion and deeper contradictions in Brazilian notions of property and the political subject. Within the Brazilian legal system, one can find simultaneous support for the rights of squatters (based in an individual’s right to their labor and the fruits of their labor), the rights of property owners (based in an individual’s right to own commodities once purchased) and the collective right of society to property as a social good, property that satisfies some sort of vaguely specified “social function.” In this way, Cicero’s confused stance vis-a`-vis
Springer
350	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
property reflects an attempt to reconcile historical notions of property rights embedded in the plantation system with his own multi-faceted understanding of who deserved land and why. By naming Cicero’s confusion as such and situating it up-front in this way, I argue that we get a better appreciation for the relationship between structural factors, such as political context, material conditions and cultural “endowments,” and the actual path that any given social movement takes. Cicero’s qualified support for—and equally qualified rejection of—the MST help to explain why the movement had such strong membership numbers in the sugarcane region but struggled either to generate active displays of support or to maintain ongoing participation.
2. AnalyzingCicero’sinterviewemphasizestheimportanceofindividual-grouprelationsand the social construction of knowledge—both of which have been recognized as important for the study of social mobilization. Peer pressure, group expectations, intra-group leaders, and the will of the majority are all difficult to see without compelling ethnographies (Watts, 2001, p. 286). Cicero joined the MST in part because everyone else did, and he left the same way. But underneath these decisions lay a whole continuum of opinions of the MST and of collective action. Some of the people who left the MST did so with relief because they had never been comfortable as members while others left without really thinking about it—they were busy and the movement never forced anyone to vote up or down. Still other rural workers were not sure at all that they wanted to leave the movement, but when others did, they went along. These opinions could shape the future trajectory of the movement: people who left the MST reluctantly could re-join the movement or start a new social movement or engage in new forms and moments of collective action, all of which would be difficult to understand if we accepted actions and decisions at face value.
3. Cicero’s interview also sheds light on the relationship between material goods and dignity. Many people have argued against the dichotomized treatment of material conditions and identity in social movement studies, and this case illustrated both their mutual constitution and subjectivity. Cicero was grateful for access to land because he was no longer held captive (cativeiro) to demands on his labor through his relationship to the land (see Martins, 1998). He could plant sugarcane or not, he could sell the cane where he wished or he could choose to not work on his land at all. This is what the MST activists did not understand: they believed that access to land would generate a certain, well-defined political subjectivity. In much the same way as neo-liberal projects of land titling, made famous by the Peruvian economist Hernando De Soto (1989), are established under the assumption that access to title will generate hard-working, independent citizens who steward their property and make greater personal investments in law and order, the MST’s projects of land occupation and settlement operate under the assumption that access to land will generate community-oriented, politically-motivated small-holders who produce with traditional agro-ecological methods and make greater personal investments in civil disobedienceandradicalpolitics.Infact,accesstolandinA ́guaPretadidsymbolize material reward and freedom, but freedom meant freedom from control (even the MST’s control) rather than freedom from the state or the market. Cicero was not significantly better off in 1999 or in 2003 than he was before gaining access to land. He still worked temporary contracts in neighboring mills and put odd jobs together to make it through the winter. He harvested some manioc and caught fish that he was able to eat or sell. But more importantly, his land gave him a sense of material wealth that allowed him to hold his head up high and at least imagine that one day he would have time to plant it full of money-producing crops.
4. Finally, Cicero’s interviews illustrate the dynamic nature of social mobilization. Depend- ing on when and where we stand, we get a very different picture of the MST’s position
Springer
Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352	351
in the sugarcane region. When I first conducted research in A ́ gua Preta in 1998–1999, I assumed that the MST had introduced long-term change into the region. By 2003, it seemed as if the old saying was true: the more things change, the more they stay the same (Eisenberg, 1974). Brief snapshots of political activity are never sufficient because people add to their repertoire (or their toolkits, see Swidler, 1986) of collective action and deploy them under particular circumstances. In the case of Cicero, involvement in the MST influenced his belief in the value of contentious behavior. He held onto the sense that politics were not fixed, that they could be changed through collective action. He anticipated the need for such action (the need for electricity and the fear that the mayor would no longer honor his promises to the settlement without some sort of organized pressure) and he encouraged his fellow settlers to mobilize and “get ahead.” The fact that he has not deployed it either outside of his movement activities or within does not mean that he will not some time soon—just as the MST may regain its position as political representative of Flora in the future.
Acknowledgments	The author would like to thank Javier Auyero, Charlie Kurzman and Jeffrey Rubin for their advice and collegiality as well as the members of the Aspen Collective, particularly Scott Prudham, for their comments on issues relevant to the paper.
References
Abu-Lughod, L. (2000). Locating ethnography. Ethnography, 1, 261–267. Auyero, J. (2003). Contentious Lives: Two Argentine Women, Two Protests, and the Quest for Recognition.
Durham: Duke University Press. Bourdieu, P. (1991). The Weight of the World: Social Suffering in Contemporary Society, translated by Pricilla
Parkhurst Ferguson. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London:
Latin American Bureau. Buarque, S. C. (1997). Proposta de reestruturac ̧a ̃o do setor sucro-alcooleiro e negociac ̧a ̃o de divida por
terra para assentamentos de reforma agra ́ria. Paper prepared for the workshop, Reestruturac ̧a ̃o do Setor
Sucro-Alcooleiro e Reforma Agra ́ria na Zona da Mata de Pernambuco, Recife. Burdick, J. (1995). Uniting theory and practice in the ethnography of social movements: Notes toward a
hopeful realism. Dialectical Anthropology, 20, 361–385. Cazella, A. A. (1992). Assentamentos Rurais e Cooperac ̧a ̃o Agr ́ıcola: Pol ́ıticas Conflitantes. Master’s Thesis
in the Center for Research in Agriculture and Development with the Federal Rural University of Rio de
Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro: Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro. de Andrade, M. C. (1988). A ́rea Do Sistema Canavieiro. Recife: Superintendencia do Desenvolvimento do
Nordeste. de Andrade, M. C., & de Andrade, S. C. (2001). As usinas de pernambuco e a crise atual. Recife: UNTEPPE. De Soto, H. (1989). The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. I.B. Tauris and Company
Ltd. Diani, M., & McAdam, D. (2003). Social Movements and Networks: Relational Approach to Collective Action.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Edelman, M. (2001). Social movements: Changing paradigms and forms of politics. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 30, 285–318. Eisenberg, P. (1974). The Sugar Industry in Sa ̃o Paulo: Modernization Without Change, 1840–1910. Berkeley:
University of California Press. Fernandes,	B.	M.	(1999).	MST,	Movimento	dos	Trabalhadores	Rurais	Sem	Terra:	Formac ̧ a ̃ o	e
Territorializac ̧a ̃o. Sa ̃o Paulo: Editora Hucitec. Freyre, G. (1978). The Masters and the Slaves. New York: Knopf. Goodwin, G., & Jasper, J. (1999). Caught in a winding, snarling vine: The structural bias of political process
theory. Sociological Forum, 14, 27–54. Gupta, A. (1998). Postcolonial Developments: Agriculture in the Making of Modern India. Durham: Duke
University Press.
Springer
352	Qual Sociol (2006) 29:335–352
Gupta, A., & Ferguson, J. (1997). Anthropological Locations: Boundaries and Grounds of a Field Science. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jasper, J. (2004). A strategic approach to collective action: Looking for agency in social movement choices. Mobilization, 9.
Julia ̃o, F. (1972). Camba ̃o—the Yoke: The Hidden Face of Brazil, translated from the Portuguese by John Butt. Hammondsworth: Penguin Press.
Hart, G. (2004). Geography and development: Critical ethnographies. Progress in Human Geography, 28, 91–100.
Kurzman, C. (2004). Can understanding undermine explanation? Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 34, 328–351.
Lins, C. (1996). Programa de Ac ̧a ̃o Para o Desenvolvimento da Zona da Mata do Nordeste. Recife, PE: Superintendent for the Development of the Northeast.
Martins, J. D. S. (1998). O cativeiro da terra. Sa ̃o Paulo: Editora Hucitec. McAdam, D., Tarrow, S., & Tilly, C. (2001). Dynamics of Contention. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press. MEPF (Ministe ́rio Extraordina ́rio da Pol ́ıtica Fundia ́ria). (1998). Programa Integrado de Reforma na Zona
da Mata Nordestina. Recife. Navarro, Z. (2000). Breaking new ground: Brazil’s MST. NACLA Report on the Americas, 33(5),
36–39. Ortner, S. B. (1995). Resistance and the problem of ethnographic refusal. Comparative Studies of Society and
History, 37, 173–193. Paige, J. (1975). Agrarian Revolution: Social Movements and Export Agriculture in the Underdeveloped
World. New York: The Free Press. Paulilo, M. (1996). Terra a vista. . ..e a ̃ o longe. Florianopolis, SC: Editora da Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina. Pereira, A. (1997). The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast Brazil, 1961–1988.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. Petras, J. (1997). Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left, New Left Review, 223, 17–47. Robles, W. (2001). The landless rural workers movement MST in Brazil. Journal of Peasant Studies, 282,
146–161. Rubin, J. (2004). Meanings and mobilizations: A cultural politics approach to social movements and states.
Latin American Research Review, 39. Sigaud, L. (1979). Os clandestinos e os direitos. Sa ̃o Paulo: Editora Duas Cidades. Stedile, J. P., & Fernandes, B. M. (1999). Brava Gente: A trajeto ́ria do MST e a Luta Pela Terra no Brasil.
Sa ̃o Paulo: Editora Fundac ̧a ̃o Perseu Abramo. Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51, 273–
286. Watts, M. (2001). Development ethnographies. Ethnography, 2, 283–300. Wolford, W. (2003). Families, fields, and fighting for land: The spatial dynamics of contention in rural Brazil.
Mobilization, 8, 201–215. Wolford, W. (2005, January 21). Every monkey has its own head: Rural sugarcane workers and the politics of
becoming a peasant in northeastern Brazil. Paper presented at the Yale Agrarian Studies colloquium. Wood, E. (2003). Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. World Bank Report No. 20754-BR. (2002). Growth and poverty reduction in Pernambuco: Developing a
sustainable policy framework. Brazil Country Management Unit of the World Bank. Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New
Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First! Publications.
Wendy Wolford is Assistant Professor of Geography at UNC Chapel Hill. Her work has focused on social mobilization in rural Brazil, with a co-authored book published in 2003, To Inherit the Earth (Food First Press) on the Rural Landless Workers’ Movement in South and Northeast Brazil. She has published several articles in journals such as Environment and Planning A, Mobilization: An International Journal of Sociology, and the Journal of Agrarian Change. Her research interests include social movements, the political economy of development and political ecology. Recent awards include a fellowship at the Yale Program in Agrarian Studies and a three-year grant from the National Science Foundation to study institutional aspects of land distribution in Brazil.
Springer

2009
History
The Americas
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil
Peter M. Beattie

The Americas, Volume 65, Number 4, April 2009, pp. 625-627 (Review)
Published by The Academy of American Franciscan History
DOI: 10.1353/tam.0.0125
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/tam/summary/v065/65.4.beattie.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/16/11 2:42AM GMT
BOOK REVIEWS	625
In his most substantive contribution, Lara’s focus on ritual provides an authentic entry into how native cultures retained and communicated knowledge. As much as friars subscribed to the view that liturgical practices and public spectacles were a mechanism for religious inculturation and social solidarity, they ignored or, more likely, suppressed the degree to which it could open up resistant notions and inten- sify difference. Lara adopts some of these mendicant blindspots, insulating the activities he describes as though monasteries were self-contained universes immune to outside pressures and asymmetries of power. Thus, Lara restates his earlier con- clusion, that is, worship had a more profound impact than political hegemony on the native population, without noting, in my view, that they are inseparable. Aware that native Americans were co-opting popular festivals to assert their own ethnic ances- try and claim certain prerogatives, colonial authorities were constantly on their guard that rituals not devolve into unseemly behavior, or worse, help instigate heretical or subversive activity. Although the dynamism of intercultural dialogue has been notoriously resistant to labeling, Lara has chosen to reinstate Hugo Nutini’s “guided syncretism,” a term that seems to underscore the unilateral inten- tionality of the European friar. And what of the unguided and random, the inadver- tent and surreptitious, surely components that also characterize the high passions aroused by ritual activity?
In the end, this work is a monumental achievement, as hefty in content as in weight, and luxuriously illustrated. A host of readers will benefit from the author’s insightful scholarship and the intertextuality of his sources, from murals and codices to morality plays. Lara has achieved his goal, that is to “visualize and bring to life Christian worship” for the indigenous proselytes in the New Spanish world.
University of California, Santa Barbara	JEANETTE FAVROT PETERSON Santa Barbara, California
RURAL SOCIAL HISTORY
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. By Gabriel Ondetti. University Park: Penn State University Press, 2008. Pp. xviii, 281. Maps. Tables. Figures. Notes. Appendix. Bibliogra- phy. Index. $60.00 cloth.
The Landless Movement (Movimento Sem Terra, MST) became one of Brazil’s most influential grass roots social movements at a time when similar organizations struggled to survive. The end of authoritarian military rule in 1985 produced a new environment in which social movements strained to maintain the attention and sup- port of constituents and policy makers alike. Gabriel Ondetti seeks to explain the emergence and rise of the MST from 1978 to 2006.
To make his case, Ondetti surveys four schools of social movement theory that seek to explain why and how these organizations emerge, thrive, and/or dissipate:
626	BOOK REVIEWS
Grievance/Discontent, Organizational Capacity, Activist Strategy, and Political Opportunity Theory. He then provides a cogent narrative of the MST’s history through the first mandate of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (Lula). The narra- tive approach is suited to his efforts to understand why MST experienced growth while many other social movements experienced decline from 1985-1994. He then explores three other periods in MST’s history: takeoff (1995-1999), decline (2000- 2002), and resurgence (2002-2006). Each chapter concludes by evaluating the explanatory capacity of the four schools of social movement theory. He concludes that a modification of Political Opportunity Theory offers the best explanatory model for the rise, decline, and ressurgence of the MST.
Rather than simply champion one school of thought, however, Ondetti uses this case study to test and borrow elements from different theoretical schools as well as add his own insights. One example can be found in Ondetti’s analysis of the MST’s main activist strategy: the development of settler camps on or adjacent to unpro- ductive land to pressure officials to settle workers there. The isolated camps pro- vided activists with a privileged opportunity to create strong bonds among rank and file members, indoctrinate them in MST’s philosophy, discipline them by requiring them to participate in camp actions and governance, and groom and recruit talented leaders from the organization’s base. Here Activist Strategy Theory helps to explain why the MST was able to grow in an environment where many social movements floundered. The success of this strategy for most MST campers made them loyal to the organization even after they won a land title.
For Ondetti, however, MST was most successful when the political opportunity structure changed in their favor. The election of President Fernando Henrique Car- doso in 1995 led to an acceleration of MST land occupations. Cardoso had prom- ised to increase the settlement of landless workers, and MST mobilized on an unprecedented scale in response. The MST gained favorable media attention and public sympathy after two massacres of landless protestors in Corumbiara, Rondô- nia in 1995 and Eldorado de Carajás, Pará in 1996. These massacres pressured the Cardoso administration to jump start efforts to settle landless workers across Brazil. MST mobilization and government efforts to settle landless workers mushroomed from 1996 to 1999. By 2000, however, the number of occupations and the rate of landless workers given title to land abruptly dropped. MST responded by adopting new confrontational protest strategies, such as the looting of stores and the occupa- tion of government buildings which garnered negative press for the MST. This facil- itated Cardoso’s ability to put policies in place in May 2000 “that rendered land occupations useless, if not counterproductive, as a means for obtaining land” (p. 199). Still, by the end of his administration, Cardoso claimed to have settled 608,000 landless families, more than all previous administrations combined.
From 2003 to 2006, MST augmented the number of its land occupations, and for Ondetti, this came about in part because President Lula, a longtime sympathizer of the MST, had not enforced the anti-land occupation measures that Cardoso put in
BOOK REVIEWS	627
place. Still, Lula has not returned to the pace of settling landless families set under Carodoso’s administration. While MST has voiced their disappointment in these results, they have shown restraint from returning to the confrontational tactics they used during Cardoso’s administration.
Ondetti’s modification of Political Opportunity Theory demonstrates that it really does matter who is President for social movements like MST. While this might seem rather top down, this political scientist does incorporate how the actions of MST leaders and rank-and-file, among other factors, have influenced Presiden- tial policy and vice versa. As a historian, I found the need to run through each theory at the end of each chapter a bit repetitive and tedious. I also thirsted for a stronger sense of the identities of rank-and-file MST members beyond general data about income, education level, or family size. A few vignettes and photographs in each chapter could have helped give the reader a better sense of the movement’s diverse membership, their aspirations, and the setting.
These minor critiques are rather minor and should not deter anyone from read- ing the best synthetic analysis of the MST to date. I know it will enhance my lec- tures on modern Brazilian and Latin American history.
Michigan State University	PETER M. BEATTIE Lansing, Michigan
U.S. & INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Colombia and the United States: The Making of an Inter-American Alliance, 1939- 1960. By Bradley Lynn Coleman. Kent: The Kent State University Press, 2008. Pp. xix, 303. Maps. Illustrations. Abbreviations. Notes. Bibliography. Index. $49.95 cloth.
Bradley L. Coleman is Command Historian, Headquarters of the U.S. Southern Command, and this book expands upon his 2001 dissertation. He argues that World War II, the Korean Conflict, and the Cold War contributed to transforming the U.S.- Colombian alliance from one that was primarily military to one that placed anti- Communism at the center of a new security policy. Colombian politicians on the left and right saw World War II and the Cold War as a clash of civilizations in which Colombia must ally with the U.S. and the West. Aside from ideology, they prag- matically sought to strengthen their military partnership with the U.S. by sending troops and a frigate to Korea. Their reward would be the military training and per- haps materiel necessary to defeat the guerrillas at home. Thus, Coleman portrays Colombia as the initiator of changes in the bilateral relationship.
The heart of Coleman’s book revolves around Colombia’s military participation in the Korean Conflict, the only Latin American country to do so. Colombia’s pre- vious experience and training allowed their soldiers to mesh well with the U.S. mil- itary organization in the multinational UN coalition in Korea. The author stresses

2003
Economics
Journal of Developing Societies
The Concept of Sem Terra and the Peasantry in Brazil
Luca Fanelli and Sarah Sarzynski 

ABSTRACT
This article explores the meanings and uses of the term sem terra (land- less) in relation to the social movement MST and tries to provide provisory answers to the following questions: What is the relationship between small landholders, rural workers, and the term sem terra? Is the idea of sem terra class-based or does it stretch beyond “class”? Which rural popula- tions use the term sem terra to identify themselves? Does sem terra continue to be a useful tool for MST participants who have already obtained stable access to land? Finally, do different (and conflicting) meanings of sem terra exist for the leaders of the MST and the rank-and- file members? The sources for the present article are the interviews collected during field research, some texts published by the MST, and general sources about the matter.
Introduction
This article explores the meanings and uses of the term sem terra (landless) in relation to the social movement MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, Landless Workers Movement). It looks at the process of how the term sem terra has been shaped by the movement and, at the same time, how this term has constructed the identity of the MST. In order to arrive at this understanding, I will outline briefly how rural workers have been defined in Brazil from the 1950s until the present. The term sem terra is not simply a new name for “peasant.” Sem terra has been used to overcome the contradictions between small landowners (or peasants) and rural (wage) workers and these classifications have influenced the creation of the broader identifying concept of sem terra.1
*	corso Brunelleschi, 167, 10141 Torino, Italy, luca.fanelli@photowo.net. **	University of Maryland at College Park, Department of History 2115 Francis Scott Key Hall College Park, MD 20742-7315, USA, ssarzynski@earth
link.net. © de Sitter Publications 2003	JDS 19(2-3):334-364
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	335
I aim to investigate the concept of sem terra as an analytical category, and as a tool of self-representation or subjectivity, as well as examining the connections between the theory and the practice of the term sem terra. I will try to provide provisory answers to the following questions: What is the relationship between small land- holders, rural workers, and the term sem terra? Is the idea of sem terra class-based or does it stretch beyond “class”? Which rural populations use the term sem terra to identify themselves? Does sem terra continue to be a useful tool for MST participants who have already obtained stable access to land? Finally, do different (and conflicting) meanings of sem terra exist for the leaders of the MST and the rank-and-file members?
Representation of the Peasantry from Division to Unity
There are many different ways to define “peasant” in Brazil. This stems from the diversity of rural activity that has developed and changed throughout Brazilian history. The main distinction lies in the contractual forms of rural labor: a rural wage earner has been referred to as opérario rural, assalariado rural, diário, and later, boia-fria; a tenant farmer as arrendatário; a sharecropper as meeiro o parceiro, and a colono is yet a different type of sharecropper. There are also some terms that refer to a specific job, such as corta- dor de cana (sugar cane cutter), boiadeiro (cowboy), or carroceiro (teamster).
A collective noun for the peasantry does not exist, unlike the Spanish campesino or the English peasantry. More general labels for the rural include: rurícola (obsolete), homem do campo, camponês, lavrador, trabalhador rural, agricultor. Each of these terms has a distinctive meaning. The term camponês has a “tradi- tional” or archaic connotation as opposed to the “modern” term of agricultor; lavrador is related to lavoura, or the cultivation of land itself; rurícola means “of the rural,” with a dehumanizing shade of meaning; while homem do campo means country man. Trabalhador rural (rural worker) is currently the most commonly used term.
The different terms and their relationships evolve along history, marking both turning points and continuities. The first time
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
336	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
the term camponês emerged the first time to describe rural people in Brazil within the BOC (Bloco Opérario e Camponês), a social movement linked with the PCB (Partido Comunista Brasileiro) that emerged when the party was declared illegal, in 1927. As noted by Cliff Welch (1999:50), the focus of this movement was new for the party and, we can say, for the whole of politics in Brazil.
The term camponês gained popularity in Brazil in the late 1950s, with the rise of the Ligas Camponesas in Northeastern Brazil. Before the end of the 1950s, rural people had been described in legal instances as rurícola, or by their specific job cortador de cana (sugar cane cutter), or by their relations to land ownership such as foreiros—subsistence farmers who paid rent and gave an uncertain amount of unpaid labor to the landowner. In January of 1955, leader and engenho administrator of the SAAPP (Sociedade Agrícola e Pecuaria dos Plantadores de Pernambuco, Agricultural and Cattle Raising Society of Pernambucan Planters) José Francisco de Souza met with lawyer Francisco Julião Arruda de Paula (Julião 1977). Shortly after the families of the Engenho Galiléia had formed this organization with the approval of the landowner to provide their deceased with individual coffins (instead of the borrowed communal coffin from the municipality of Vitória de Santo Antão), the landowner revoked their right to organize based on fears that the workers were meeting to discuss issues other than funerals and threatened to throw them off his lands.2 Francisco Julião agreed to represent the SAPPP in court, and used the Brazilian Civil Code to fight for their legal right to this land. In 1959, they won the case that allowed for the redistribution of the Engenho Galiléia. By this time, the “Galileus” had gained regional attention and a rural social movement began to develop. Journalists covering the court case labeled this movement the Ligas Camponesas.
According to Francisco Julião, this name was used in order to provoke opposition to the movement by associating it with previ- ous groups known as Ligas Camponesas associated with the PCB.3 According to a later-recorded interview with Francisco Julião, he introduced the term camponês in the courtroom instead of the more common “legal” term rurícola because of the political and ideolog-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	337 ical connotation of camponês in relation to latifundista (large
landowner). He recalled stating in the courtroom,
I cannot use the expression because the camponeses do not know what rurícola means and they could think I am using a bad word. I say camponês because they come from the countryside (campo). (Julião 1977:71)
On the contrary, the term camponês is not present in the name of ULTAB (União dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agricolas do Brasil, Farmers’ and Agricultural Laborers’ Union of Brazil). ULTAB —which for nearly ten years “was to be the only organiza- tion of national scope in the rural labor movement” (Welch 1999:196)—was born in 1954, during the Conferencia dos Trabalhadores Agricola (Agricultural worker conference) that took place in São Paulo, mainly for the initiative of the PCB, an organi- zation deemed illegal except during the short period between 1945 and 1947. The use of the broader term trabalhador rural comes from the ULTAB federative character, but reveals a diversity of atti- tudes between the Ligas and the PCB. Noting this diversity is important in order to understand the role assigned to the countryside inhabitants by the actors that operate in the field.
The PCB believed that the development of a revolutionary consciousness in the countryside required the integration of the peasantry into the proletariat. Thus, the PCB was more concerned with promoting programs of legal aid, education, health care, and burial funds than an extensive agrarian reform project. All the same, since agrarian reform is a step toward a capitalistic transformation of society and a premise for socialist revolution, it is necessary to promote agrarian reform together with the bourgeoisie and all the forces which fight against pre-capitalistic labor relations. The Ligas Camponesas diverged from the PCB in that the Ligas based their struggle in the idea that the peasants alone were a “revolutionary” force. Therefore, alliances with the urban proletariat or the rural bourgeois were not necessary (Medeiros 1989). However this ideo- logical difference does not have an actual correspondence with the behavior of the Ligas and the groups linked to the ULTAB. These
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
338	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
groups took radical positions according to circumstances and based their struggles on the claim that the existing laws needed to be enforced.
The literature about these rural movements traditionally has argued that there were strict ideological and membership divisions between the different movements. However, the 1961 Belo Horizonte Congress, organized by ULTAB and characterized by high attendance of Ligas members, is marked by a concurrence among the different actors (Medeiros 1989; Welch 1999:250-253). The Ligas and the ULTAB proposed a unified agenda for the coun- tryside, but neither set themselves in actual fact as hegemonic actors within the peasantry. To some government leaders, and to interna- tional actors such as the United States, all rural inhabitants were “peasants”—a generalized classification directly related to the Cold War and the threat of the spread of the Cuban Revolution, which was construed as a “peasant revolution.” None of the actors involved in the rural struggles could claim to represent the entire peasantry and most of the struggles were not inserted in a common framework.
On the contrary, the government emphasized the settling of rural workers in a single organizational framework as a priority. Through such a strategy, the government aimed to incorporate these workers into the body of the State. Rural unions—legal since the introduction of the rural unionization statute in 1944 and tool of social agency during the 1950s—were the main instruments of this policy.
Because of the intense interest in the organization of rural workers, the Ministry of Labor...published a pamphlet... containing instruction for union organization. In addition, the Agency for Agrarian Reform—SUPRA—was created in 1962 precisely to work with the growing peasant movement. By 1963, 500 unions with over a half million members were grouped under a National Confederation of Rural Workers. (Forman 1971:9)
In 1963, the ETR (Estatudo do Trabalhador Rural, Rural Workers Statute) was enacted, which “brought existing rural labor
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	339
legislation into a single body of law, just as the CTL (Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho, Consolidated Labor Law) has done for urban labor in 1943” (Houtzager 1998:108). In this statute, the need for the government to agree to some of the demands of the rural social movements coexisted with the strongly argued intent to re-establish government control over the same peasant movement. The ETR divided the countryside actors into two broad categories: workers and employees. At the beginning the worker category was divided into five sub-categories, but by 1965 these extra categories disap- peared.
According to this statute, “small property holders were lumped together with salaried workers, renters and squatters, while the inclusion of the sharecropper as an independent worker mili- tated against his negotiating with his landholder as an employee” (Forman 1971:21). By seeing the peasantry as an unitary actor and, at the same time, ignoring the specific claims of rural workers, sharecroppers, smallholders, and so on, the ETR reduced the action strength of the unions; in this way, the ETR also avoided creating a coalition of rural and urban workers, as was happening in the state of São Paulo. At the same time, “revolutionary” strength of the peasantry itself was stripped by being co-opted by the State (Welch 1995:161-187).
According to Peter Houtzager (1998), the Brazilian military, “after having eliminated the Left as an organized force, deliberately stimulated the growth of the union movement as a part of the large transformative project of the countryside” (p.104). The main goals of this project were “increasing agricultural production, fostering national interaction and incorporating rural labor into national soci- ety” (p.104). The rural unions were a key part of the strategy to achieve the third goal (Houtzager 1998).
The structure of the rural unions established in 1962 allowed each community to have only one union representative, which responded hierarchically to a confederation at the state level and the federal level. When the military came to power, they continued to use this same structure, replacing or violently repressing the major- ity of the leadership and rank-and-file organizers. The CONTAG (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura,
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
340	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
National Confederation of Agricultural Workers)—founded in Rio de Janeiro in 1963—maintained a certain independence during the military regime, whereas the “majority of rural unions...became pseudo-state agencies because of their dependence on the state, inability to mobilize members, and delivery of social services” (Houtzager 1998:105). The term camponês disappeared from public speech, substituted by the more modern agricultor in the legislation and as a name associated with CONTAG. The suppression of the idea of camponês—of the non-capitalist, non-mechanized, feudal, and “backwards” type of agriculture—was actively desired and pursued by the government: the farmer had to replace the peasant in Brazil. At the same time, the rural unions promoted an implicit unification of all peasants (even those not formally considered “peasants”) to be the only tolerated and recognized representatives of this rural population. Moreover, the leaders of CONTAG believed this unification was possible.
In 1973, the government passed a law that repealed the 1963 ETR and partly rewrote the law, once again negating the great contractual differences and the internal productive reality of the rural population.4 This unity imposed “from above” began to explode in the late 1970s when political action also increased. The CONTAG leaders wavered in their stance toward the unitary repre- sentation of the rural workers. In the Third Congress (1979), CONTAG adopted the International Labor Organization’s 87th convention, which compels governments to guarantee the right of union organization. In the Fourth Congress, CONTAG rejected the same convention.5 At first CONTAG wanted to allow a differentia- tion within the peasantry to foster the effectiveness of the struggles. Later, the fear of losing hegemonic control as well as the fear of the proliferation of the different categories won legitimacy. According to CONTAG leaders, this proliferation would have dismantled the articulation of interests of the different actors, a goal laboriously pursued during the dictatorship.
The wave of increased activism and the push for a renova- tion of union practices came at the same time as the political opening (abertura) along with a persistent call for unity in rural union representation. No new unions emerged from the State-led
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	341
rural unions, known as the pejorative pelegos, or co-opted unions.6 Instead, in the place of the largest mobilizations, new forces took over the local unions and gave them new direction. These combat- ive new unions did not become incorporated into the CONTAG but they became associated with other confederations: primarily the CUT (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores, Unified Laborers’ Central) and, to a lesser extent, the CGT (Central General dos Trabalhadores, General Confederation of Labor), which emerged from industrial trade union movements in a purely urban sphere. This merger occurred in a mixed system: at the federal level more than one confederation existed, while at the local level only one union existed. This situation continues today, only changing slightly after the merging of the CONTAG and the CUT. The outcome of this confederation is still not clear. Interestingly, camponês unity was broken but not divided according to the different types of rural workers or peasants. The combative rural unions that united under the CUT were composed of small landowners, landless workers, and rural workers. The difference between the organizations thus is not determined by the kind of peasants (small holders versus rural workers); instead, what matters is the greater or smaller level of political action.
The Construction of the Idea of Sem Terra
With the end of the dictatorship came the end of the experiment of the “representative unity” of the entire peasantry, characterized by a high level of duress and coercion. In the new political scene, while the majority of the rural unions continued along the same lines as aid societies and a small number of rural unions took up direct action, a new actor emerged: the Movimento Sem Terra. The MST formed within some of the more confrontational rural unions and in relation to the CPT (Commissão Pastoral da Terra, Pastoral Commission for Land Rights) and other entities.
What stance did the MST take in the beginning about this matter of the unity or the diversity of the rural population, particu- larly between the small landowners and the rural wageworkers? The answer to this question is found in a text published in 1986 by the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
342	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
MST in the series Cadernos de Formação no. 11, Elementos sobre a teoria da organização no campo by Clodomir Santos de Morais, a former Ligas camponesas member and then MST theorist. According to some of the leaders’ testimonies, the MST considered the thesis sustained in this booklet—written a short time after the MST official constitution was agreed upon—somewhat out-of-date. However, it was in print until 1993. Also, it had a high level of circu- lation and the militants and organizers who trained during these years studied and absorbed the ideas in the booklet, as they do with most of the cadernos de formação. Finally, as this booklet is “ancient,” it allows us to isolate some of the original characteristics of the ideologies of the MST.
The author divided the peasantry in the following way:
First, the artisan, or the producer [the peasant (camponês parceleiro)] who is active in the productive process of a specific product from start to finish...Second, the wage worker, or the producer who intervenes in a small part of the productive process to produce a specific article; for instance, the factory worker who only makes buttonholes or a leg on a pair of pants. The rural worker is a wageworker who intervenes in just a small part of the productive process necessary to produce a bunch of bananas or an ear of corn on a farm...Third: the semi-wage earner, or the worker who works in the factory during the day, but who works in famil- ial production or artisan work during the night, or during a few days of the week...Fourth: The lumpen-proletariat, or an individual who is not involved in any of the productive processes described earlier. The lumpen generally does not work and when he/she works, it is only for a period and when he/she wants to work. (Morais 1986:11-12)7
Once he distinguished the different rural actors, he high- lighted the differences in fundamental attitudes:
The ideological behavior of the peasant (camponês) is the organizational process of the artisan form (tipo artesanal),
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	343
because the peasant (this rural artisan) works in an individ- ual productive process (without a division of labor) in which the producer starts and finishes the production of a product. The ideological behavior of the rural wageworker is the organization al process of the worker form (tipo operário) because the rural wageworker works in socially divided productive process, in which each worker participates in only one part of the production of a product. (Morais 1986:12)
Then, he focused on the smallholder and describes their particular ideology:
The structure of the productive process in which the peasant is involved greatly determines their social attitudes and the traces of their ideological behavior when they participate within a social group. Their isolationist attitude, apparently alien to association (rural union, cooperative, etc.) it is not only a consequence of the very low level of education among the peasant. It is as consequence of a structural form of incompatibility that marks this kind of nature and social participation. (Morais 1986:13)
Morais reached a type of “condemnation”:
The internal enemies of an associative enterprise and even more of a political enterprise are the vices of the artisan forms of work. They reveal themselves undermining little by little the unity and the discipline. (Morais 1986: 27)
This argument was not new when the booklet was published; in fact, it resembles a simplified version of a Marxist thesis, espe- cially how Kautsky and Lenin interpreted Marx. Morais did not deny that the small holder could become a revolutionary force under specific conditions, as Lenin claimed. The title of a booklet chapter is “Mechanism and Tools” to Fight Against the Vices of the Work Artisan Forms. In it, the author states:
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
344
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Within the known “instruments or mechanisms” that we have employed to avoid or combat the corruption generated by the artisan forms of work, we point out the following: vigilance, criticism, and reunion. (Morais 1986:37)
As this arguments state, in the basic class struggle between peasants and landlords, a gap of class-consciousness continues to exist. This gap is the difference between small landowners and rural wageworkers. While the smallholder has the possibility of filling this gap and obtaining a form of class-consciousness, unlike the rural workers, they could not reach this consciousness naturally.8
It is significant that the term sem terra almost does not exist in Morais’s text. However, at the time of the publication, and during the first “national” meeting of the MST, a debate occurred regard- ing this term. According to João Pedro Stedile, the choice of the name sem terra—similar to the history of the name of the Ligas Camponesas—was partially determined by journalists.
We never discussed the origin of the term of the movement. I believe that the mark, the name, was what the press adopted, baptizing it as the “Landless Movement” (Movimento Sem Terra), because it was in the time of MASTER, or a bit later, when we resumed the struggle with the land occupation on the Fazenda Macali and with other struggles in a number of different states. (Stedile and Fernandes 1999:39)
Stedile stated that the official decision to use the name sem terra dated from the meeting in Cascavel in 1984:
The first debate was over the name MST. The press had already called us the Movement of those without Land (Movimento dos Sem Terra), but the leaders did not have this inclination. If it were done by voting, I think that the name of “Movement for Agrarian Reform” would have won, even though the movement was already larger than just a struggle for land. We began a profound reflection over this matter and
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	345
we took advantage of the nickname that we had already been given by society, “the landless” (“os sem-terra”). We unani- mously approved the name Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers Movement). To be honest, the selection of this name was an ideological debate. At the same time, we were reflecting on the feeling that we should have reinforced our class-based character. We are workers, living in a society with different classes and we belong to one of these classes. This was the debate. It never was only over the selection of the name because we thought it was better this way, or simply for us to differentiate ourselves by saying: “the landless we are” (“os sem-terra somos nós”). (Stedile and Fernandes 1999:47)
The debate that took place was over whether to call the movement Movimento pela Reforma Agraria (Movement for Agrarian Reform) or Movimento Sem Terra (Landless Workers Movement) and, according to Stedile, the majority supported the first one. Nonetheless, the second name won in the end, partially because of the influence of the media. The leaders at the conference preferred the “Movement for Agrarian Reform” because it stood for a broader goal: a struggle that was not simply limited to rural popu- lations but also included a fight for citizenship rights. At the same time, this name is tied to a specific objective that could “get old.” However, as the above quotation suggests, the reason for selecting the “Landless Workers Movement” was related to the fact that the “Movement for Agrarian Reform” did not clearly identify the actors participating in the struggle, but only the goal that compels the movement. The “Landless Movement” is the movement of the people without access to land: the stress shifts from the objective to the social group involved and, as Stedile argued, to the class that fights for this goal. It is important to note that most people who joined the MST at this time did not have an identity of “landless” or sem terra in the present-day understandings of these terms. The focus thus passes to the social group involved, and yet the class- consciousness of this group is only just beginning.
In the face of the notion suggested by Morais, the construc- tion of the sem terra identity involves a substantial change in
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
346	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
previous debates about the dichotomy between small landowners and rural wageworkers. This concept goes beyond that opposition, creating a multifaceted category that encompasses more than simply “to be without land.” The concept of sem terra gives a name to the ongoing process of rural struggle in a new and original way. In a Caderno de Formação addressed to the militants José de Souza Martins describes well this process:9
It is basically the sugarcane in the Northeast that shows us with greatest clarity the process of the peasant throughout Brazilian history: marginalized worker (agregado marginal) in the regime of slave labor, occasionally laboring in the production of sugar cane, who became the principal labor force with the end of slavery, as small renter (morador de condição). In this way, as the rent grew and their free or cheap labor in the cane became the rent that paid for the land where they planted their subsistence crops, they had their labor converted into wages. (Martins 1999:12; Martins 1981:62-80)
It is possible to argue that this quote differs greatly from Morais’s original arguments: in this case, the theory is applied to a particular reality of the sugar cane workers in Northeastern Brazil. It is worthwhile to mention that Martins points out a process while Morais had emphasized a steady reality. Most importantly, it is necessary to understand that this is a process that shapes and constructs the sem terra concept: an actor somewhere between the de-capitalized small landowner and the rural wage worker, or the de-capitalized small landowner who is in the process of becoming a rural wage worker.
According to Stedile, another debate about the name of the MST existed between Movimento dos Camponeses Sem Terra (Landless Peasant Movement) and Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of the Landless Rural Workers). At the end of the 1960s, as we have seen, the word camponês disappeared in spite of the consolidation of the corporative union system. Other than the rare use of the term camponês by the peasants and its
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	347
learned nuance, by deciding to use rural worker over camponês the MST tried to make a marked difference between the Ligas Camponesas and the new rural social movement. It is important to note that the term trabalhador rural implies a broader social group than camponês. According to Stedile:
The essence of the MST emerged as a peasant movement (movimento camponês) that had as its flag three main prior- ities: land, agrarian reform and general changes in society. When we ourselves began to conceptualize this, we perceived that the MST was different from other peasant movements that had only struggle for land. (Stedile 1999:31-32)
The leaders proposed these options to the rank-and-file, oscillating between the arguments of Morais and Martins. Through the direct testimonies of some militants, we will show how their very arguments introduced the term sem terra for the participants in the MST, a term that gained its strength and meaning as a concept of self-representation or as a subjective identity. Before touching upon this subject we may linger over a quote from a long interview with João Pedro Stedile published in the New Left Review in Spring, 2002:
In our movement, we try to use terminologies that take account of the fact that there are a great many lumpen in the country areas—the numbers living in misery there have risen with the economic crisis. The agrarian proletariat constitutes around a third of the rural population, but their numbers are dropping sharply with mechanization...Then there is the classically defined layer of small farmers, the campesinato—those who work with their families on a little bit of land, whether it belongs to them or not. Of this frac- tion, a third are landless—our base of four million families. They work as sharecroppers, or tenants; or they could be farmers’ children, who need to earn a wage. Another third— again, around four million families—are small farmer-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
348
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
proprietors, owning up to 50 hectares, about 120 acres. There is also an agrarian petty bourgeoisie, whose properties can vary from 50 hectares in some regions to 500, or 1,200 acres. Over that—the big ranchers and landowners—we’d consider as part of the agrarian bourgeoisie. (Stedile 2002:89-90)
This quotation reveals an interesting connection to Morais’s argument. In this case, the analysis is more complicated but it is still possible to identify the lumpen, no longer with a negative connota- tion; the rural workers, said to be gradually disappearing; and, the small landowners referred to as the campesinato.
The second element worth mentioning is that Stedile identi- f ies	the	de-capitalized	small	landowners	as	the	rank-and-f ile members of the MST. As it turns out, in the larger Brazilian politi- cal debate, the term sem terra is applied to this group and a strong conflict occurs about quantifying this social group. Opponents of a serious or “real” agrarian reform project define sem terra as people who claim the rights to land through forms of protest. On the contrary, proponents of wide-scale agrarian reform argue that the sem terra includes all the de-capitalized small landholders in addi- tion to a wide range of rural and urban working class people (proletarians). What is most interesting about this debate is that it is still unclear what is meant by sem terra. For this answer, we will provide an analysis of oral histories and field interviews.
Sem Terra from the Bottom
To better understand the meaning of these interviews that we pres- ent, it is necessary to put them in context. I conducted these interview during the summer of 2000 in the Santa Maria rural settle- ment (assentamento) in the Northern area (of the Southern Brazilian State) of Paraná.10 This settlement is very small in comparison to others—only 98 alqueires or 23,535 hectares—and the soils are relatively poor. The proximity of the settlement to the nearby town, Paranacity is only 10 kilometers away, proves to be beneficial. Paranacity is a small town of approximately 9,400
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	349
people, 57 percent of whom live in the urban area. Forty-eight percent of the inhabitants are involved in the service sector, and the remaining percentage are involved in either agricultural work, such as cattle ranching, or non-agricultural work in the countryside, perhaps employed by the local sugar cane mill (usina).11
The crisis experienced by the coffee plantations in this region in the early 1970s caused wide-scale extirpation of these plantations. Sugar cane plantations and cattle ranching moved in afterwards. As in other rural regions of Brazil, a small number of the population own most of the land in the form of large estates, and the majority of the population has no access to land. The towns are quite poor. During this time, there was a temporary emigration from this region to Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso do Norte, and the fron- tier region, such as the state of Pará.
The group, which came to occupy the fazenda, developed from within the MST in the early 1990s, aiming to create a completely collective settlement and start a process of territorial- ização, or the spread of the MST in the region.12 All of the families that occupied the fazenda in 1993 came from previously established MST settlements that left either because they had not yet become legal settlements or to initiate a new project in favor of this type of completely collective settlement. From 1993 to 2000, there was a high turnover rate of families in the settlement. Only a “historical” group persists—about half of the original families—but other fami- lies joined the settlement, so the number of families remained just about the same throughout this period. This turnover rate was the result of the difficulty of collective management, personal conflicts, and the engagement of the MST families in state or federal branches. According to recent sources, from 2000 to the present, there is not such a high turnover rate.
Almost half of the adult members of the Santa Maria rural settlement come from small landowner households unable to give land to their children.13 Other members come from situations in which they or their families have had access to land but have lost these lands due to influences such as the modernization of agricul- ture and diminishing access to credit for small producers, processes that began in the 1970s. Still others come from families that worked
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
350	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
on coffee plantations, in São Paulo and Paraná. A few of the adult members of the settlement had been employed in non-agricultural lines of work in the countryside; for instance, working in a sawmill. A minority of the MST settlers had been born and raised in urban areas. Almost half of the adult population had lived for some period of time in a town—from a few months to twenty years—working as bricklayers, waiters, guards, or tailors.
When these people first occupied the fazenda in Santa Maria, the majority of the land was planted with sugar cane. In its nascent stages, the settlers had to free the fields of sugar cane and they supported themselves by selling their labor to some of the large farms in the area. A few months after the original occupation, they founded the COPAVI (Cooperative de Produção Agro Pecuaria Vitória, Cooperative of Agricultural Ranching Victoria) and almost all of the settlers joined the cooperative. The settlement manage- ment is completely collective. The families all live in a conglomeration of close houses (agrovila) and they do not have any individual self-subsistence plots. Each settler works to produce and feed the members, either by production or by selling at the local market. At the end of each month, each family receives a payment based on the number of hours worked by everyone in the family minus the co-op products consumed. The settlement produces milk, pork, and chicken, and has a thriving garden. Most of the grain crops are intended for ranching and beans are the main subsistence crop. There is also some non-agricultural production occurring, such as the production of rapadura (a hard square of raw brown sugar), doçe de leite (caramelized milk), yogurt, and cachaça (sugar cane brandy). In addition to the production sector, there is a commercial sector responsible for sales and a “support” sector— secretariat, refectory care, and militant people. They sell the goods door-to-door most commonly but also in some local (Paranacity, Cruzeiro do Sul) and regional (Maringá) markets.
Tension exists concerning the impressive development of the settlement and its low capitalization; over the improvement of material life conditions of the settlers and the difficult psychologi- cal stresses related to any high level job specialization; in relation to conflicts over the self versus the collective; and over the collective management of many facets of private lives. In addition, problems
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	351
exist for the children who grow up in the collective and then come to consider the settlement too narrow for their expectations and understand the “professional militancy” within the MST as the preferred way to fulfill their expected participation. The reasons for this have to do with the strong ideological commitment of their families and their realization that there are few job opportunities in urban areas. However, the settlement cannot afford a greater number of militants, already employing two full-time militants and one part- time position.
The Santa Maria settlement carries out the goal of increas- ing the MST at a local and regional level. From 1998 to 2000, four to eight land occupations occurred in the micro region; the occu- pants come from local areas and from many different regions. Most of them are brasiguai.14 The settlement is one of the few collective settlements in Brazil; thus the MST considers it a model settlement and promotes visitations.15
Most of the settlers that I interviewed have had a long history of struggle and, in some cases, have participated in the creation of the MST as mid-level organizers. From these partici- pants, it is possible to understand how the sem terra concept is understood in the relevant rank-and-file sector, but it is difficult to determine how the less politically aware participants of the MST perceive the idea of sem terra.
Regina
Regina said that she first joined the settlement by following her husband. Her family is one of the only families that has a long mili- tancy standing in the PT (Partido dos Trabalhadores, Workers’ Party) and did not participate actively in the MST. Ruben, her husband, was invited to join the settlement because of his experi- ence and skills with cultivating market crops. So, Regina is outside of the settlement but, at the same time, she is more and more accept- ing of MST ideology.
Interviewer: So, you are on a MST settlement but you have never been a “sem terra”?
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
352
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Regina: ...No, I’ve never been “sem terra.” Interviewer: ...and when we speak about “sem terra” you feel like... Regina: I think this way and I believe this precisely because they are speaking about sem terra settlement. It’s only that here the people have already won the right to land and shouldn’t be considered sem terra any longer. Sem terra is for those who have not yet obtained land, understand? For those who are already “settled,” I think that they are now “with land”. It’s like what Mauro says...he says that now that we have land we are no longer “sem terra” so I think that it should be the opposite as well. (Regina 2000, 35:23-36:00)
For Regina, sem terra has a literal, technical meaning. People who gained access to a plot of land should change their name, according to her. Her status as outsider to the MST does not necessarily influence her argument. Instead, she cites Mauro who is the “authority” and one of the original settlers. Mauro makes a very similar argument in his interview, although he states this in a joking manner.16 Stedile himself, in the previously cited interview with the New Left Review, actually defines it literally as person without land.
Hamilton and Jorge
In Hamilton and Jorge’s comments, we find a different understand- ing of sem terra. Jorge was born in 1950 and he is 23 years older than Hamilton. During his childhood, Jorge grew up on coffee plan- tations, taking unstable rural jobs afterward. When he was 30 years old, the Itaipú Dam project hired him. He then moved to a nearby town and then, later, moved on to the settlement. Hamilton has urban experiences as well. In 1993, his family moved between Santa Catarina and Paraguay. He worked as a waiter until 1998 when he joined a MST occupation:
Interviewer: So, how did you come to join the MST? Hamilton: How is it that I became aware? Well, to begin, when I was working as a (wage earner), I always watched on TV the conflicts between the MST and the police and
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	353
landowners and I always said, “What is this group of idiots doing? Why aren’t they going to find work?” But at the same time I thought the opposite as well: “But where will they go to find work? If their only option is to have land to plant and to produce, to be able to grow their own food, their subsistence?” And so at this moment, I started to change, well, my expectations. I also knew, I was certain that I was also a “sem-terra” because I never had [land]—I was employed. (Hamilton 2000 47:10-48:16)
In this testimony, there is a cliché: a shift from a negative view of the MST to a more positive one. Nonetheless, it is neces- sary to re-emphasize Hamilton’s last phrase. Hamilton considers himself a sem terra a posteriori, because he is an employee and not an employer. Jorge’s testimony expands upon this idea.
Interviewer: What does the word “sem terra” mean to you? Jorge: Sem terra? I think it means reality, sem terra is people that don’t have anything, understand? Interviewer: But do you feel like a sem terra?
Jorge: Me? Yeah...I always said I was a sem terra, even when I was living in the city with a job, I always spoke about sem terra, I would say “To me, I am sem terra because I have never had land, get it?” So this means I didn’t have any equity, the only equity I had in Cascavel was a house, a bit of land with the house but not land for agricultural produc- tion...simply land for the house, for the home residence, so I didn’t have land, and I would say, “I am also sem terra.” (Jorge 2000, 102:00-102:59)
This testimony demonstrates how the MST ideology func- tions; people remember and frame their past experiences as sem terra even before joining the movement. This is very important for the newcomers to the settlement. Also, it is apparent that in the second part of Jorge’s testimony he uses the term sem terra more literally.
In this testimony, it is clear that there is a strong perception that sem terra means poor and exploited person. This broadening of
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
354	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
the concept of sem terra apparent in the testimonies of Hamilton and Jorge is crucial. A couple of years before they joined the move- ment, they understood themselves to be sem terra showing that the term is no longer limited to rural populations. They may have thought that the countryside could have provided a better way of life, but this line of thinking did not result in direct action. This situ- ation changed dramatically when, in the case of Hamilton, one of the leaders of the settlement invited him to join with the understand- ing that he could already be sem terra or proletarian.
This is not an isolated case. Throughout the 1990s, the base or grassroots part of the MST developed, growing to include more rururbanos (people who live in a town and work as agriculture workers during the daytime), more favelados (people who live in the favelas or “slums”), and more migrants who left the countryside a few decades earlier. For these new members, the sem terra term came to represent a tool of identity construction and, for this reason, had to be assimilated with the concept of exploitation.
The broader meanings attached to sem terra make it useful when constructing an identity for MST struggles in urban areas, or in places where urban counterparts are also partaking in MST strug- gles. These struggles include rallies in urban areas focused on the extension of social and citizenship rights. They have an even broader appeal to international counterparts, as seen in the rallies against neoliberalism.17
The conceptual depth of the MST allows it to represent urban grassroots movements, but it still does not resolve the conflict brought up in Regina’s testimony involving the use of sem terra for both people who received plots of land and for those who continue to be landless. This is relevant to understanding the MST and its coherence as a movement. Historically, in agrarian reform move- ments, the divisions between those who have already obtained access to land and are no longer interested in supporting the social movement and those who have not yet received land created great internal conflict and resentment. As Heidi Tinsman (2002) shows in the case of rural Chile in Partners in Conflict, part of the reason why the agrarian reform movement in Chile became divided and weak- ened was because of divisions between those who had received land and those who continued to fight for land.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	355
In the case of the MST, this conflict has three dimensions. First, a debate exists about whether or not the settlement should invest human and economic resources in new occupations or in the support of the settlement. This choice is highly contested in the Santa Maria settlement where cooperative support for full-time militants is an important cost which rests on the cooperative budget. This same debate also occurs at the central level but to a larger extent since the leaders must decide how to allocate larger quanti- ties of economic and human resources. The second dimension involves the public image of the MST. A radical image does not encourage economic growth and performance of the rural settle- ments since their goal is to integrate into the local society. So, on the one hand, the image is one of radicalism and opposition, but on the other hand, the goals of economic growth and development of the settlements depend on the settlements not being considered radical or oppositional but integrated into the larger community. The third debate involves the extent to which there is a need to support new occupations for those who have already obtained land. Support for new occupations involves economic assistance as well as participa- tion in accompanying mobilizations, causing losses in terms of lost working hours on the already established settlements.
Emma
A new semantic shift of the term sem terra overcomes, at least on a subjective or self-representative level, these latent and everyday conflicts that are present in the MST. Emma clearly expresses this shift in her testimony. She was born in the countryside in the munic- ipality of Nova Prata de Iguaçu, and she grew up there working as an agricultural laborer, difficult work, especially for a child. Her father had developed a grassroots rural union. Emma’s family was evicted from their land when the dam was being built and so they moved to a new plot of land, which was part of an MST occupation.
Interviewer: I would like to ask you a question about the word sem terra, because in your life you have never been a sem terra; well, did you ever feel like a sem terra?
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
356
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Emma: From the time that I began to understand this strug- gle, 11 years...12 years ago...I began to participate. I went to some meetings in my father’s community and I saw them talking about this, you see? We saw discussions about the settlements and such, I always—until today, until today that I am settled here I still feel like I am a sem terra. It seems to me that if I were...While I was a person without land, it seems to me that I was also a sem terra, no? It’s not because today I am settled that I leave a protest, or if there is an occu- pation that someone has invited me to participate in, I will say, “no, if I’m not going to live on these lands, I won’t go.” This thought has never passed through my mind, so if there is an occupation that needs me, I will go help because I think that today I am “settled” but I still have to fight for the people who still aren’t settled, understand? (Emma 2000, 54:40-56:10)
According to Emma, sem terra does not have a connection with the material condition of land scarcity or even a more generic meaning of poverty or exploitation. Sem terra is a person who joins the MST, a person who struggles for land and once they obtain access to land, continues to struggle for the greater MST cause so that other landless people can also obtain land.
Conclusion
In the beginning of the democratic opening (abertura) in the early 1980s, increased mobilization took place in addition to a growing number of political forces claiming to represent the peasantry. Each actor tried to carve out popular support and a space for feasible political action. The MST was a part of this process, identifying its popular support in complex and heterogeneous social groups, and well delineated. Their grassroots constituency evolved over time; at first, it was limited to the de-capitalized small landowner who had lost their lands due to the incorporation of the lands into the market economy, the children of small landowners who no longer had access to new lands because of the closing of the frontier, and the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	357
peasants displaced from their lands because of the construction of dams. Then, it grew to incorporate favela inhabitants, rural workers recently forced to sell their lands, people who are slightly integrated into urban society but are unemployed, and women who want to have a subsistence plot while their husbands and sons are day agri- cultural laborers elsewhere. Making this broad political claim and being represented as such in the media, the MST positions itself as a political actor that represents all of the political forces of rural Brazil. However, this goal falls short in its concrete application and action. Admittedly giving up the claim to represent all of the rural population in a “horizontal” way, the MST aims at a different coali- tion of forces. In this framework, both the fundamental division between small landowners and rural workers and the idea of a singu- lar “peasantry” become inadequate to describe the participants in the MST.
The sem terra concept, on the contrary, goes beyond even including the entire rural population. It is a “new” term that can apply to all the social groups previously mentioned and, at the same time, it gives this social group a meaningful tool for constructing a unifying identity. At an analytical level, the process of uniting these different social groups is different from the process of uniting the urban and rural proletarian; the connection between these different social groups is therefore not a connection between the modes of production, but a similar experience of poverty and exploitation. Some participants, however, do not feel that this identity is depend- ent on their indefinite deprivation, but rests upon their acquisition of class-consciousness, if it is at all possible to redefine class according to entirely new parameters and different cleavages. This “vertical” depth of the sem terra idea stems, in part, from the inter- action between the rank-and-file members and the leaders. For the grassroots members, it is a flexible tool of self-representation, useful in a variety of social circumstances. At the same time, the term allows the leadership to continue to press for greater political struggles, such as for a new world economic order and for citizen- ship rights.
The idea of sem terra allows for the homogenization of differences between the original members of the MST and the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
358	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
newcomers. An occupant can be a de-capitalized small landholder, or a boia-fria. It does not necessarily refer to any definite social condition or even, necessarily, an exploited condition: sem terra becomes the membership mark of a broadly defined organization. Is this category socially homogeneous?18 No, but in the concept it is possible to find the originality of the idea. The leveling of the differ- ences among a variety of social actors who are able to relate and use the term sem terra is the result of a joint effort by the rank-and-file members and the leaders to overcome the strong, though enlivening, MST contradictions such as the diversity of backgrounds of the participants and the conflict between those who have land and those who continue to struggle for land. Perhaps this is the way to state, in an obscure manner, that in this general crisis of the peasantry and rural populations, the only peasant who can survive economically, politically, and culturally, is the militant peasant.
NOTES
1	This article stems from field research Luca Fanelli did in Brazil during the year 2000. From this research comes the book La scelta della terra. Studio di un insediamento rurale del Movimento Sem Terra in Brasile (The Choice of Land. Study of a Rural Settlement of the Movimento Sem Terra in Brazil) (Fanelli 2003). The matters of the article were discussed with Sarah Sarzynski. This article is based on some texts produced by the Movimento Sem Terra and, above all, on interviews done at a specific rural settlement. Therefore, it is absolutely preliminary. For future studies, it would be important to develop research exploring how this concept is used in other rural settlements in different regions and how it is used among the middle strata of Movement organizers. Although this analysis of sem terra has focused primarily on how this new identity has allowed partici- pants—and the movement itself—to overcome divisions based in class differences, more research is needed to under- stand how this term works in relation to differences based on other socially constructed identities such as region/commu-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	359 nities, gender, race/ethnicity, and religion. Sarah Sarzynski
edited the translation of the article.
2	Many versions of this story appear in the literature on the Ligas Camponesas, which is generally contradictory. Gerrit Huizer, for instance, argues that the coffin story was invented in order to prevent repression from the landowner. The real reason for the formation of the SAPPP, according to Huizer, was to organize to collect money to be able to buy the land from the landowner (Huizer 1972:124). Authors who agree on the coffin story include Josué de Castro (1967:23-24); Eduardo Coutinho (1965-1984); Joseph Page writes that the SAPPP began with fireworks, dancing and other festivities as Beltrão offered wood to build a chapel for the Sociedade on January 1, 1955 (Page 1972:36-37). See also Julião (1977).
3	Francisco Julião never considered the 1959 Ligas Camponesas “communist” in part because he was not a member of the Brazilian Communist Party. He considered himself Socialist. This distinction is confusing in the litera- ture because of the confusion in the United States about the difference between Socialist and Communist. Most often, Francisco Julião is referred to as “communist” and the Ligas Camponesas as “communist.”
4	Law 5.889, July 8, 1973. Rules about rural labor. “Article 2. Rural worker is the person who works not temporarily on a rural property or on a rural building, as an employee of an employer, receiving a salary. Article 3. For this law the rural employer is the person or the corporation (which could own or could not own a land), which develops an agribusiness, permanently or temporar- ily, directly or by intermediary and employees. §1. The agribusiness above-mentioned could also be an industry, within a rural property, that is not included in the Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho..Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
360
5
6
7 8
9
10
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Article 4. The person or the corporation, which permanently performs an agricultural work on behalf of another person and employing other peoples, is considered as a rural employer.” (Non literal translation by the authors).
C87. Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize Convention, 1948. “Article 2. Workers and employers, without distinction whatsoever, shall have the right to establish and, subject only to the rules of the organisation concerned, to join organisa- tions of their own choosing without previous authorisation. Article 5. Workers’ and employers’ organisations shall have the right to establish and join federations and confederations and any such organisation, federation or confederation shall have the right to affiliate with international organisations of workers and employers.” (ILO 1948).
Pelego is the bit of young lamb hide that used to be put between the saddle and the horse. Because of this, the term has come to mean “servile person” or “hidden officer of the Ministry of Labour within the trade unions” (cf. 1999. Dicionário Aurélio Eletrônico. Século XXI. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira).
The italics in the Morais citation are bold in the original text.
Many texts and statements of militants and leaders of the MST could bear out this argument. When the organizers cope with the question of the collective groups often refer to the “individualist peasantry mentality.”
The Movimento Sem Terra published in a Caderno de Formação (Martins 1999) an excerpt from the book Os camponeses e a política do Brasil (Martins 1981).
The interviews are partly transcribed and used in Fanelli (2003). For the researcher who want to use it, it is available
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	361
the original recording. In the textual citations I indicate the minute and the second of the starting and end point of each recorded interview. The symbol † means “not understand- able word.”
11	For the population, cf. Ibge (1991). For the occupation ratio, cf. the database “Paranacidade” (http://www.paranacidade. org.br) and the interviews done in place.
12	For the concept of territorialização, cf. Fernandes (1996).
13	The grandparents of these members of the rural settlement moved from the state of Rio Grande do Sul or Santa Catarina toward the south or the west Paraná when the land was virgin and covered with forest.
14	The brasiguai are Brazilian people who moved, in great numbers, toward Paraguay during the 1980s and 1990s, searching for cheap plots of land and jobs in tree chopping and in sawmills.
15	The I Censo da Reforma Agraria takes a sample of 151,678 settlers. 86.6 percent of them live in individual settlement, 8 percent in mixed ones and 5.4 percent in collective settle- ments. Cf. Incra, Crub, UnB (1997).
16	Stedile claims that at the beginning they debated about call- ing the people who gained a plot of land Movimento Pé no Chão (feet on the ground). Cf. Stedile (1999:92.
17	Besides new meanings being attached to the term sem terra, a number of related terms emerged. For instance, the sem- teto is the urban component of the MST, a social movement that uses occupations of old buildings in their struggle for appropriate urban housing. Other new identities that emerge are not related to the MST, such as the sem-sem, a term used by scholars and journalists to refer to the marginal popula- tions. Cf. José Graziano da Silva (1999).
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
362	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
18	José de Souza Martins poses this question in a recent essay. Cf. Martins (2002:300-335).
REFERENCES
Castro, Josué de. 1967. Sete palmos de terra e um caixão: ensaio sôbre o Nordeste, área explosiva. (Seven Feet Underground and a Coffin: Essays about the Northeast, an Explosive Area). São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense.
Chayanov, Alexander Vasil’evich. 1966. The Theory of Peasant Economy. Edited by Daniel Thorner, Basile Kerblay, and R. E. F. Smith. Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin Inc.
Coutinho, Eduardo, director. 1965-1984. Cabra Marcado para morrer. (Goat Branded for Dead). 119 mins, colour and b&w, Brazil, 1965-1984.
Fanelli, Luca. 2003. La scelta della terra. Studio di un insediamento rurale del Movimento Sem Terra in Brasile. (The Choice for Land: Study of a Rural Settlement of the Landless Movement in Brazil). Torino: Zamorani.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. 1996. MST - Formação e territori- alização em São Paulo. (Formation and Land Spreading in São Paulo) São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, Shepard. 1971. “Disunity and Discontent: A Study of Peasant Political Movements in Brazil.” Journal of Latin American Studies 3(1):3-24.
Houtzager, Peter P. 1998. “State and Unions in the Transformation of the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1979.” Latin American Research Review 33(2):103-142.
Huizer, Gerrit. 1972. The Revolutionary Potential of Peasants in Latin America. Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books.
Ibge. 1991. Censo demografico do Brazil. Datos gerais. Paraná (Brazilian Census of Population, General Data, Paraná) Ibge.
ILO. 1948. Convention n. 87, Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention.
Incra, Crub, UnB. 1997. I Censo da Reforma Agraria no Brasil. (I Census of the Agrarian Reform in Brazil). Brasilia.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	363
Julião, Francisco. 1951. Cachaça. (Sugar-Cane alcohol). Recife: Editora Nordeste.
––––––. 1968. Cambão: La Cara Oculta de Brasil. (Cambão: The Hidden Face of Brazil). Mexico: Siglo XXI Editores.
Mallon, Florencia. 1978. “Peasants and Rural Laborers in Pernambuco, 1955-1964.” Latin American Perspectives 4
Martins, José de Souza. 1999. “Os movimentos camponeses e as lutas camponesas no Brasil” (“Peasant Movements and the Peasants Struggles in Brazil”) in Caderno de Formação no. 31. O movimento camponês no Brasil e a luta pela reforma agrária: (The Peasant Movement in Brazil and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform.) São Paulo: Movimento Sem Terra.
––––––. 1981. Os camponeses e a política do Brasil. (Brazil Peasants and Politics) Persepolis: Vozes.
––––––. 2002. “Representing the Peasantry? Struggles for/about land in Brazil.” The Journal of Peasant Studies 29(3/4):300-335. Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de. 1989. História dos movimentos sociais no campo. (History of Social Movements in the
Countryside). Rio de Janeiro: Fase. Morais, Clodomir Santos de. 1986. Caderno de formação no. 11.
Elemento sobre a teoria da organização no campo. (Training notebook n. 11. Elements about the Theory of Organizations in the Countryside). São Paulo: Movimento Sem Terra.
Nenci, Giacomina. 1997. Le campagne italiane in età contempo- ranea. Un bilancio storiografico. (The Italian Countryside in the Contemporary Age. An Historiographical Outcome). Bologna: Mulino.
Page, Joseph. The Revolution that Never Was. 1972. New York: Grossman Publishers.
Procacci, Giuliano. 1970. Le lotte di classe in Italia all’inizio del secolo XX. (Class Struggles in Italy at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century). Roma: Editori Riuniti.
Shanin, Teodor. 1990. Defining Peasant. Essays Concerning Rural Societies, Expolary Economies, and Learning from the Contemporary World. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blakwell.
Stedile, João Pedro and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. 1999. Brava gente. A trajetória do MST e a luta pela terra no Brasil.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
364	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
(Brave People: The Trajectory of the MST and the Struggle for Land in Brazil). São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo.
––––––. 2002 “Landless Battalions. The Sem terra Movement of Brazil.” New Left Review 15:77-104.
Tinsman, Heidi. 2002. Partners in Conflict: The Politics of Gender, Sexuality, and Labor in the Chilean Agrarian Reform. 1950- 1973. Durham: Duke University Press.
Welch, Cliff. 1995. “Rivalry and Unification: Mobilising Rural Workers in São Paulo on the Eve of the Brazilian Golpe of 1964.” Journal of Latin American Studies 27(1):161-187.
––––––. 1999. The Seed was Planted. The São Paulo Roots of Brazil’s Rural Labor Movement, 1924-1964. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Primary Sources
Emma. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine 13, Torino, Italy.
Hamilton. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Jorge. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Julião, Francisco 1977. Transcript in Fundação Getúlio Vargas/Centro de Pesquisa e Documentação (hereafter abbreviated as CPDOC/FGV), interviewed by Aspásia Camargo in Yxcatepec, Morelos, Mexico, 1977.
Regina. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2004
Sociology
Latin American Politics and Society
The MST and the Media: Competing Images of
the BrdZian Landess Farmworkem’ Movement
John L. Hammond

ABSTRACT
For social movements, coverage in the media is a mixed blessing; but like many movements, the Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Movement (MST) actively seeks it out. Treatment of the MST in the Brazilian media is analyzed here using the concept of frame. That treatment is determined by a complex interaction between media producers and movement activists.The frames adopted by those on each side influence public perception of the movement. This study identifies five such underlying frames (mostly in print media but with attention to a television soap opera based on the MST’s activ- ities) and examines the images of the movement that they present. Though the coverage often presents the MST in a favorable light, it does not necessarily encourage the goal of mobilization that the movement seeks to promote.
The Landless Farmworkers’ Movement (Mouimento dos Trabal- hadores Rurais Sem Tma,or MST) has been the most vigorous and prominent social movement in urban or rural Brazil in the last decade. During that time it has garnered significant media attention. Accord- ingly, it makes a good case study of how the interaction between social movements and the media determines media coverage and thus influ- ences the public perception of the movement itself.
The MST organizes unemployed and landless farmworkers to take over idle, absentee-owned farmland. In pushing for land redistribution, the movement challenges big landowners, traditionally one of the most powerful groups in Brazilian politics, and attempts to provide a liveli- hood for poor farmworkers and small farmers. The MST emerged from a wave of land occupations in southern Brazil that began under the mil- itary dictatorship in the late 1970s. It was formally organized in 1984 and has grown in prominence especially since the mid-1990s.
The MST has sought out media coverage and succeeded in attract- ing it. Indeed, the two most important events of the movement’s recent history can be seen as media events: the 1996 massacre of 19 demon- strating landless farmworkers by the military police in Eldorado do Cara- j5s in the state of Par& and the telenovela 0 rei do gad0 (The King of
61
62	LATINAMERICANPOLITICSAND SOCIETY	46:4
Cattle), which was the featured telenovela on the TV Globo network for several months during 1996 and 1997.
Calling the Eldorado massacre a media event does not mean to imply that it was in any sense staged for the media; fortuitously, how- ever, it was covered. The demonstrators were blocking a highway, and a television camera crew, caught in the traffic jam, filmed the police firing on them; the videotape was played repeatedly on nationwide tel- evision, bringing to this case the national attention that attacks on rural protesters normally do not receive.
The telenovela projected the situation of the landless to an even wider audience, and for a longer time. It was one of the most popu- lar novelas of recent years. Telenovelas are a prominent Brazilian cul- tural phenomenon, as general accounts and academic analyses have recognized. This novela can be regarded as one of the most signifi- cant events in the MST’s recent history because it offered a generally sympathetic portrayal (though the movement was not named) and reached well beyond the news-attentive public for several months. These two events and their repercussions are by themselves sufficient to warrant examination of the relationship between the MST and the media.
This paper will discuss several issues in the relationship between social movements and the news media: how a movement gets attention, what determines the way it is pictured, whether the picture presented corresponds to its own understanding of itself, and whether the atten- tion serves the movement’s goals. In examining these issues, the con- cept of frame is useful. This concept has been used to characterize the unarticulated assumptions with which journalists condition their pres- entation of a social movement and movement leaders’ attempts to create a favorable image. The MST’s efforts to get media coverage and the frames in which the media have presented it will be examined from this perspective. 0 rei do gado, in particular, is a special case. Although it was a soap opera, the show and the movement’s reaction to it illustrated some of the same issues.
Several Brazilian scholars have offered analyses of media treatment of the MST. Most of them describe that treatment as unequivocally hos- tile-just	as one would expect, if media coverage of the land reform movement reflects the common interests of big landowners and big cap- ital (of which the major media are part). Research for this study found, on the contrary, that media treatment has been diverse. Yet even the sympathetic treatment that sometimes emerges does not necessarily present the movement in a light that furthers its political goals. It is not only the explicit content of the coverage that matters but its tone and its effect; news reports can be sympathetic and still fail to encourage the movement’seffort to promote desired social change.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	63
This study examines these issues from the standpoint of the move- ment’s goals and tries to determine how much the movement can influ- ence media treatment and secure coverage that will contribute to its efforts to recruit adherents, win over public opinion, and promote its long-term objectives. It should be noted at the outset that this study is limited to the content of media accounts, and makes no direct estimate of their effect on the public.
MEDIAAND MOVEMENTS
Scholars of social movements in the United States have increasingly rec- ognized the importance of media to movements-as	have the move- ments themselves. In the 1990 update of his 1975 classic, m e Strategy of Social Protest, William Gamson identifies the media as the “central battleground” for challenging groups (1990, 147). They seek coverage because the media can spread a group’s message to a target public. That coverage, however, will not always present groups in a way that furthers their purposes. So fighting on the central battleground of the media offers movements both opportunities and dangers.
The “news,” rather than being a clearly and previously defined object of which the media present a straightforward, unproblematic transcription, is a construction. It is constituted by its presentation in the media. To be reported as news, actions have to be translated into events, and then into a “story.”Recognition of an issue as newsworthy, the selection of specific events and topics, the context explicitly pre- sented or assumed, and the positive or negative judgment implied by a news report all emerge from media coverage rather than being inherent in behavior and reported stenographically.
A journalist writing a news report operates on the basis of back- ground assumptions of knowledge and evaluation. Following Erving Goffman, scholars of the media have referred to that set of assumptions as the frame. Frames are “‘schemata of interpretation’ that enable indi- viduals ‘to locate, perceive, identify, and label’ occurrences within their life space and the world at large. By rendering events or occurrences meaningful, frames function to organize experience and guide action” (Snow et al. 1986, 464, quoting Goffman 1974, 21).
Using a frame, a journalist can represent events as part of a coher- ent larger reality within which readers and viewers can comprehend them. The frame adopted in a media account provides the context and largely determines the way specific details are presented. Media analy- sis usually presents a frame as taken for granted by journalists, some- thing they adopt relatively unreflectively and assume that their audi- ence shares. The frame is an organizing device for analyzing the media’s selectivity and approach to any topic; but its presence is
64	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS A N D SOCIETY	46: 4 largely invisible. Even if journalists have criteria of objectivity for rep-
resenting events,
news frames are almost entirely implicit and taken for granted. They do not appear to either journalists or audience as social construc- tions but as primary attributes of events that reporters are merely reflecting. News frames make the world look natural. They deter- mine what is selected, what is excluded, what is emphasized. In short, news presents a packaged world. (Gamson 1985,618)
Media do a double framing job relevant to the present study: they frame issues and they frame movements. We will return to this point after discussing the role of a movement in framing itself and its issues.
Movements themselves participate in the framing process, offer their own frames, and attempt to influence the frame adopted in the media. The social movements literature generally regards frames as deliberately created, “strategicefforts by groups of people to fashion shared under- standings of the world and of themselves that legitimate and motivate collective action” (McAdam et al. 1996,6). While the audiences of social movements (potential recruits, sympathizers, and the general public) are assumed to have preexisting frames within which they interpret the issues and the actions of social movements, movement leaders-as described by analysts of social movements-attempt	to construct new frames to define problems and propose solutions, modlfy frames in the mind of the public, or at least make their message appear consonant with what they believe the dominant frame to be (Snow et al. 1986; Snow and Benford 1988, 199-204; Tarrow 1994, 122-29).
The concept of frames found its way into studies of the media and of social movements separately, though both follow Goffman’sformu- lation. Frames were apparently first applied to the analysis of the news media by Gaye Tuchman (1978; compare Entman 1993; Gitlin 1980; Ryan 1991).The concept was introduced into the social movements lit- erature by Gamson, Bruce Fireman, and Steven Rytina (1982). But social movement scholars adopted it more widely following its use by David Snow and his colleagues (1986; cf. Snow and Benford 1988, 1992; Ben- ford and Snow 2000; Babb 1996; Ellingson 1995; Gerhards and Rucht 1992;Smith 1996;Tarrow 1994).
The two uses have converged as movement scholars have come to recognize the importance of the media to movements. Both media and movements frame the issues they present. They explain (or not) the com- plexities of an issue; they use language and highlight associations imply- ing interpretations of events that seem to verify or challenge a move- ment’s message; they invoke generally accepted values and portray the movement’smessage as being in accordance or dissonance with them.
Media and movement scholars usually give the term different emphases, however: for the former, frames are part of the background,
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	65
while the latter treat them as the product of active construction. Jour- nalists are portrayed as taking frames for granted; similarly, they believe that their product-a	news story in print or on the air-is	a reflection of reality rather than a constitutive part. Movement leaders, on the other hand, deliberately attempt to create or alter frames just as they hope to influence the course of events. As Gamson and his colleagues point out, the concept of frame contains a useful tension between structure and agency (Gamson et al. 1992,384).
Movements and media interact in the production of news about movements, making the media themselves an actor in social struggles (Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993). Movements care about media coverage because most people not already active in a movement do not learn about it by direct experience. Many potential recruits and, even more important, potential sympathizers among the public become aware of movements and their issues primarily through the media.’ Their attitude toward the movement and the issue, and their potential participation, may be determined largely by media presentations. These not only pro- vide the information but create for them the frame within which they perceive and perhaps assimilate the movement’s message.
The way the media frame (or ignore) a movement, then, can abet or impede the movement’sachievement of its goal. The media will provide a frame both of the movement and of the problem the movement is trying to resolve. Most of the work on frames by movement scholars has addressed the framing of the problem a movement addresses; but as Ben- ford and Snow point out, the first topic researched by scholars using the concept was how the mass media framed 1960s social movements (2000, 626). The distinction is important, because media framing of the issue can support or undercut the legitimacy of the movement’sclaim by the way it presents the issue, and media framing of the movement’s actors can like- wise affect the legitimacy of those actors to press the claim. This distinc- tion is especially important in the case of the MST. The Brazilian media often present concentrated land ownership and rural poverty as serious problems while dismissing the movement’s struggles to alleviate them.
Constructing the news about a movement and its issue is a process of collaborative, or not so collaborative, interaction between the media and the movement. The relation between the two is determined by their respective interests, which differ significantly.It is also highly asymmet- ric: movements need the media much more than the media need move- ments. This puts movements at a disadvantage when they struggle for media attention. Movement activists are an ambivalent partner, angling for coverage even as they condemn the “capitalistpress” as a servant of bourgeois hegemony, necessarily distorting coverage.
Media, on the other hand, are under no a priori obligation to cover any given movement or issue, and competition for journalists’attention
66	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
is high. Media may appreciate movements because they provide good copy. On the other hand, the media have (or are likely to assume that they have) an obligation to present the official story, sanctioned by high-level public officials and vested sources whose position is assumed to guarantee their credibility (or at least their right to access). The media generally (though not inevitably) conform to official received opinion, seek to maintain an appearance of objectivity, and emphasize spectacle and newsworthiness. The economic interests of owners, reporters’ unexamined assumptions, and newsgathering routines relying on offi- cial sources and regular contacts all mean that news reports are likely to reinforce viewpoints already taken for granted by public opinion.
By definition, the views that challengers want to promote, and even their demand for attention, go against the prevailing views. The factors governing news frames therefore work to exclude news about chal- lengers and, even more, their views; it is especially unlikely that news stories will be framed in line with their perspectives. Indeed, most treat- ments of media frames argue that they foster ideological hegemony, dis- tort movement messages, and marginalize or demonize dissent. Activists, therefore, rarely get what they would regard as fair and thor- ough coverage (Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993, 116-17; Gitlin 1980; Ryan 1991;Tuchman 1978).
Still, the media are not impenetrable. They play a double role: agents of the reproduction of culture, they are also the site of symbolic contests over meaning. In the latter respect, they offer movements an opportunity. Like the movements themselves, media are in the business of interpreting events; they are open to contestation, and they offer movements an opportunity to intrude their frame into public discussion (Gamson and Meyer 1996, 287; Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993, 117).
Few movements offering a significant challenge can afford to ignore the media or disdain their attention. A movement seeking to attract the attention of the media, however, faces a difficult choice. Even if it suc- ceeds at getting the media’s attention, it has no guarantee that a story will present its own view of its cause or of its activists. News reports center on events and individuals and rarely present the background or structural causes of problems. They often present a movement through portraits of colorful and articulate individuals. Such portrayals can fail to convey the movement’s message for at least three reasons: they may make the movement appear smaller than it is, involving only a few people; the more articulate or colorful activists-“media	stars”-may	not be representative of the constituency the movement claims to mobilize; and an account concentrating on individuals is not likely to address a problem’s systemic causes (Ryan 1991, 98-105).
When the media present a new claimant on their attention, they are likely to seek out the bizarre and curious and emphasize the deviant
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	67
aspects of movement activity. Indeed, spectacular, disruptive perform- ances are often the easiest way to offer “good copy” and get media attention, but the coverage may well produce hostility rather than sym- pathy. To challenge a dominant frame through the media, therefore, a movement must overcome an inherent inequality in access and risk frame distortion (Ryan 1991, 67). It faces
an inescapable dilemma[:l . . . marginality and political irrelevance [or,ifl it plays by conventional political rules in order to acquire an image of credibility, . . . its oppositional edge is blunted. (Gitlin 1980, 291)
One could add that marginality and political irrelevance can take two forms: the media may ignore a movement entirely, or they may triv- ialize it by emphasizing its deviant character rather than taking its action and its issues seriously.
Some movements have succeeded at using the media to convey their sense of injustice and at using disruptive actions to underline their contention that they are denied access to institutional channels. Even sympathetic coverage, however, will not always favor the movement’s goal of mobilization of the public for its cause. If an issue gets covered in purely individual terms, or if its “stars”are presented as extraordinary individuals rather than as part of the movement’s broad constituency, media accounts may not encourage potential adherents to identify with the cause or believe that it is potentially responsive to mobilization.
Because they are weaker participants in such cultural contests, movements cannot normally expect that their message will be reflected in the media’s unquestioned frame, but can only hope that it will be pre- sented at all; at best, they can hope that they will succeed in moving the discourse to a point where their frame is admitted as a contender and the dominant frame is recognized as susceptible to challenge (Ryan 1991,70).
This summary-and	this study-say	little about the audience. Dis- cussions of the relation of movements to the media tend to assume that what readers or viewers will take away from a news story can be inferred from the content. In reality, the reception cannot be assumed. Audience members decode messages; their interpretation may not cor- respond to the intended meaning (Hall 1980).This study of the MST and the media likewise examines only two vertices of the movement-media- audience triad.2
THEMST: BACKGROUND
The MST pursues land reform in the country with the second-highest concentration of land ownership in the world. Brazil has never had a significant agrarian reform, and the land question remains a major issue
68	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
economically, socially, and p~liticallyT.~hough Brazil today is highly urban, agriculture remains significant, accounting for 40 percent of Brazil’sexports and 25 percent of its employment. Living conditions are far worse in rural than in urban areas: 56 percent of the rural popula- tion, but 39 percent of the urban population, was below the poverty level in 1990, while the level of schooling averaged 2.6 and 5.9 years, respectively (ValdCs and Wiens 1996, 7, 9, 25). The modernization of agriculture promoted by the military government after 1964 deprived many small farmers and agricultural day laborers of their livelihood. Poverty impelled migration to already overcrowded cities. Despite urbanization and industrial development, landowners still exercise enor- mous political power through control of local political machines, over- representation of rural areas in the national congress and state legisla- tures, and deployment of “goon squads” to intimidate those who challenge the landowners’ control.
The 1985 agrarian reform law and the 1988 Constitution provide that farmland that is not being farmed productively can be declared “of social interest” and expropriated. Because the law is not routinely enforced, however, the MST organizes large groups of landless farm- workers to occupy farms and demand their expropriation. The move- ment also mounts steady pressure for a more general agrarian reform. It was the most consistent and active movement of opposition to the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, 1995-2003 (Ham- mond 1999a).
As the MST has grown in organization and activity since the early 1990s, it has become the most visible social movement in Brazil. Its growing prominence owes much to the weakening of the urban left; but it also coincides with the movement’s expansion, beginning in 1995, into the Pontal do Paranapanema, a vast region of western Slo Paulo State that has been cleared for ranching only since the 1950s. Acceler- ating occupations in SQoPaulo, whose capital city is the largest in the country and one of two national media capitals, brought the movement increasing attention.
Though the law provides for expropriation, authorities generally do not decree it unless direct action forces their hand. In pursuit of its strat- egy to force agrarian reform authorities to expropriate and redistribute farmland, the MST seeks out sites that it believes are eligible for expro- priation and recruits and organizes occupiers. An occupation can involve anywhere from 200 to 2,500 families. Some are recruited in the immediate vicinity and others in larger towns and cities. They meet reg- ularly for a period of months, undergoing political education and prepa- ration for the effort.
Once an occupation is decided on, several groups from various localities will be called to join it. Maintaining secrecy while planning
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	69
requires considerable effort. The occupation itself is an even more impressive feat, mobilizing thousands of people overnight, some of them from substantial distances, with rented buses and trucks borrowed from sympathetic organizations ( Veju 1994; Paiero and Damatto 1996).
After an occupation, expropriation usually requires a long legal process. The landowner (or claimant) typically responds to an occupa- tion by petitioning a local court for an order of restoration of possession (reintegru@o deposse).*Local courts, where the petition is heard in the first instance, are part of the local governing structure, which is notori- ously favorable to landlords. They usually order the eviction of the occupiers, which may be carried out with greater or lesser force depending on negotiations between the occupiers and the police. Evic- tions can become major political events, in which not only the courts and police but landowners’ organizations and politicians supporting each side become involved.
After eviction, the occupiers are sometimes resettled on land other than that which they originally occupied-state-owned or already expropriated for agrarian reform. More often, they erect an encampment of sheds or tents (burracm) somewhere in the vicinity, generally on the right-of-way of a public road, state-owned and therefore unlikely to pro- voke another eviction. Maintaining cohesion during the period of litiga- tion is an essential task. Their occupying presence is crucial to asserting the moral force of their demand to have a particular property expropri- ated. (They do not always succeed. Some families leave during the occupation period.)
Joining a land occupation entails a high commitment, as occupiers leave their entire life behind and wait to find out whether their gamble will pay off. While camped out, they live on government food subsidies, dona- tions from solidarity committees formed in unions and among other pro- gressive urban dwellers, and their own labor on rented farmland or for wages. They risk waiting for years and getting nothing in the end. They also risk repression. But if they win title to the land, the payoff is high.
Occupiers seek an inspection by the Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA) to determine whether a property is expropri- able.5If it is, compensation (indenizaCZo)for the owner is set. The owner may then go to court to challenge the expropriation or, more commonly, the value of the compensation. Some owners are happy to be expropriated; they may be able to negotiate a price better than the market value of the land (Petry 1997, 35; SEJUP 199713).
The MST often wins; that is, occupations usually lead to expropria- tion, evidently because the MST is careful to occupy land that appears to be eligible under the law. The law establishes that once a property is expropriated, it will be redistributed to people meeting certain criteria of need. Occupiers have no formal standing in the process that deter-
70	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
mines whether the property is expropriated; legally that is a matter between the owner and the INCRA. When an occupied property is expropriated, however, it is normally turned over to the occupiers.
Properties thus expropriated and redistributed are known as assen- tamentos (settlements). Once in possession of an assentamento, the occupiers turn it into a productive farm, which they usually work by some combination of individual and collective production. They must create not only a farm enterprise but a community. This process begins during the preparation for an occupation and continues in the camps and then in the legalized mentamentos. The MST gives high priority to education. The landless are generally poorly educated and often illiter- ate. The movement is committed to the education of children and adults, and has created schools in many of its camps and assentamen- tos. Its elementary education programs were recognized by UNICEF in 1993 (Caldart 1997; MST n.d.).
Landowners retaliate against occupations. In much of rural Brazil, landowners still enjoy local political monopolies, and they target occu- pations for violence, contracting paramilitary groups or individual hired guns ( j a g u n p and pistolaros) directly, or enlisting the official forces of order. Violence is most likely to be directed against occupiers at the time of initial occupation or eviction.
Violence is pervasive in the life of Brazil’s rural poor. The Catholic Church’s Pastoral Land Commission reports that 1,190 squatters, land occupiers, farmworkers’ union members, and their defenders were killed in occupations and other land conflicts between 1985 and 2000 (ComissHo Pastoral da Terra 2000). These attacks rarely get much atten- tion. The worst single incident was the massacre at Eldorado do Cara- jhs. On April 17, 1996, 2,000 farmworkers who were occupying the 5,900-hectare Macaxeira ranch blocked a highway to demand that the government expropriate the farm. Military police fired on them, killing 19. The number of victims and, even more important, the nationwide broadcast of the videotape of the massacre guaranteed public attention. More than 150 military police who had participated in the operation faced charges in the massacre, but the trials were delayed for six years through a complicated series of legal maneuvers, convictions, and rever- sals. Of the 149 military police eventually tried in 2002, only the two commanding officers were ultimately convicted (Hammond 1999b; Amnesty International 2002).
T H E M O V E M E N T M’ S E D I A P o m c s
Media ownership in Brazil, like land ownership, is highly concentrated, and big agriculture and big capital have been allied both traditionally and since the military dictatorship. The media are dominated by one
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	71
firm, the Globo network, which includes the Globo television network; the country’s largest-circulation daily paper, Rio-based 0 Globo; and interests in publishing, finance, insurance, shopping centers, and cattle ranches. TV Globo reaches almost the entire country through its affili- ated local stations (some owned by the network, some independent). Roberto Marinho is its principal owner. With the newspaper as a base, Marinho built up the television empire by acquiring station licenses through the favoritism of the military government. The officers’ rule coincided with the spread of television, and they saw it as a means to national integration (Amaral and GuimarPes 1994;Page 1995, 155-76).
TV Globo has competitors, but none of the other networks has ever had the same political pull or amassed the same number of affiliates. The network has remained by far the most important medium for both news and entertainment, partly because of the high quality of its enter- tainment programming, especially the telenovelas. Its news coverage is highly influential and unabashedly partisan, usually-though	with exceptions-favoring	conservative candidates and positions. In the first three presidential elections after democratization (1989, 1994,and 19981, it strongly opposed the progressive candidacy of the Partido dos Tra- balhadores (PT, Workers’ Party). Some observers have found its influ- ence decisive, especially in the first democratic election in 1989 (Amaral and GuimarPes 1994; Lima 1993, 102-7; Port0 2001).
This monopoly is reproduced at the state level: in most state capi- tals, one person owns the leading newspaper and the leading television station (usually affiliated with the Globo network). The owner often is also a dominant local politician (Amaral and Guimariies 1994, 30-32).
It is not surprising that a media system so concentrated in the hands of the wealthy and so tied into the dominant political system often lives up to the stereotype of the capitalist press, hostile to progressive move- ments from below. Nevertheless, the MST has found some favorable representation in the media. The MST has attempted to cultivate the media and influence the way it is framed; it has a conscious media strat- egy, which has evolved over the life of the movement. During its first decade, it maintained a certain isolation both from the media and from the rest of the political left. Since the early 1990s, it has reversed itself and more deliberately has sought to establish good relations with the media. It produces many internal publications: its own newspaper and magazine, directed mainly at members; educational materials for use in its schools; and low-power radio stations for the communities it has cre- ated on its occupied farms. A 1995 occupation was celebrated as the first to use cell phones and to issue daily reports on the Internet-two important media of internal communication, because occupiers, camped out waiting resolution of their claims, did not always have up-to-date reports on negotiations (Berger 1998,100).
72	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
The MST has also cultivated the mass media. An internal document, “For an MST Communication Policy,” of March 1995, demonstrates the movement’s concern to mobilize the media to motivate militants and to broadcast to the public its accomplishments, especially in the areas of production and education. Christa Berger, who discusses the document, does not say in what level of the movement it originated, but internal evidence suggests that it is from the state of Rio Grande do SuL6The document envisions providing technical, administrative, and organiza- tional support to the media effort but clearly dictates that it should remain subordinate to political criteria. At the same time, the document recognizes that the MST does not always convey its message success- fully, and some militants say that much more must be done for the com- munication policy to “go beyond being on paper” (Berger 1998, 111-16).
The movement’s concern for its relations with the media is also demonstrated by a letter written by MST leader Gilmar Mauro to the national Journalists’ Congress, which met a few days after the Eldorado massacre. Mauro acknowledged the importance of journalists’ work and congratulated the news team that captured the event on videotape (Berger 1998,197).
Although the MST consciously attempts to influence the media, the media remain secondary in the movement’s overall strategy. The princi- pal weapon in its arsenal remains direct action to occupy farmland, on the assumption that only thereby can it force the government to uphold its own laws and provide land to the landless. Interviewed by a media trade journal about the MST’s view of its relation to the media, MST national coordinator Joiio Pedro StCdile said,
What I can say, honestly, with open heart, is that the MST never does mass actions for the sake of attracting the press. Our goal is to do mass actions to create pressure for concrete measures to resolve the problems. (Imprensa 1998, 23)
Yet Zander Navarro (1997,120) has suggested that the massive occu- pation campaign in the Pontal do Paranapanema was undertaken with an eye to the media. The region was a target of opportunity because many ranchers had grabbed huge tracts of land illegally, and their lack of valid titles made them subject to expropriation. But large-scale actions there could also count on major media attention because, even though most of the audience for the SPo Paulo daily papers and television sta- tions (along with the majority of the state’s population) is in or near the city, the media regularly cover the rest of the state with more attention than they would give to events in the hinterland of another state. The movement’s rise in public consciousness in the 1990s,as already noted, largely coincides with the wave of occupations in the Pontal.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	73
Most coverage of the MST falls within the newsgatherers’ routine of covering the spectacular event. The great majority of news items report land occupations. Because occupations number in the hundreds, how- ever, their news value is minimal unless they have some novel element or the prospect of violence. It is violence, or the possibility of violence, that dominates coverage of the movement, Berger claims, especially if the occupiers can be described as “armed”-which, as Berger shows, usually means that they have armed themselves with shovels and sick- les, adopting a “defensive-provocative”stance. According to her study of coverage by the Port0 Alegre daily Zero Horu,
For the newspaper, the Movement belongs in the “conflicts”section and therefore should correspond to the principle that it mounts “conflictsat any cost,”guaranteeing its place in the [newspaper’s] internal news hierarchy. . . . Political conflict does not produce a headline and generates little news; institutionalconflict is news and, perhaps, a headline, but it produces few images; armed conflict is guaranteed to be news, headline, front page, and deserves a pho- tograph. (Berger 1998, 120-21)
Movement activists are resentful that the underlying problems- maldistribution of farmland, idle land stockpiled by wealthy owners, and farmworkers’ poverty-are	never news, and that the media pay scant attention to what the MST regards as its most important accom- plishments: production and education.
Even so, the MST’sfrequent appearances in the media are a sign of its success. So is the frequency with which movement leaders are quoted. Media analysts show that journalists tend to rely on regular sources; and being treated as a creditable source is itself a sign of stand- ing (Ryan 1991;Sigal 1973,123-28; Tuchman 1978).It is striking to find MST national coordinator Stkdile quoted in a New York Times article on the privatization of nationally owned Brazilian firms (Rohter 1999, C2), in a story that appeared in the business section and was not about agrar- ian reform (though, to be sure, it was written just days after a major demonstration in Brasilia of which the MST was the chief organizer, though agrarian reform was not its central theme). Stedile was quoted as if he were an ordinary cabinet minister, say, o r bank president.
The MST emphasizes the need to win public opinion, and has had some success.MST leaders like to say that the battle for agrarian reform will be won in the cities. According to a poll taken by the Brazilian Institute of Public Opinion and Statistics(IBOPE) in March 1997,52 percent of respon- dents were generallyfavorableto the MST, and 85percent approved of land occupations as long as they were not violent (SEJUP 1997a).
The movement has also worked to forge alliances with other move- ments. It has attracted attention, support, and sometimes full-time mili-
74	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
tancy from young activists, urban and, in some cases, university-edu- cated, who staff its offices and even join its occupations. It played a leading role in organizing opposition to the neoliberal policies of the Cardoso government. In 1997, on the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre, it sponsored a thousand-kilometer march to Brasilia from sev- eral points around the country and won ample participation from a broad segment of Brazil’s left. In 1998 and 1999 it was at the center of organizing major countrywide mobilizations (the March for Brazil and the March of the Excluded) that lasted several weeks, and it swelled the ranks of demonstrations in opposition to the privatization of state firms (notably the telephone system in 1998). It has taken the lead in organ- izing Brazilian opposition to the cultivation of genetically modified crops, and in 2001 occupied an experimental farm where, the MST charged, the Monsanto Corporation was experimenting with genetically modified seeds.
The MST’s centrality in organizing major demonstrations is not the only sign of its leadership role in this array of protest movements. Its very name has become a trope for movements against social exclusion. The name in Portuguese, Movimento dos TrabalbadoresRurais Sem Terra, means “movementof rural workers without land,”and people refer to the movement and its adherents in abbreviated form as 0s sem terra,those without land. The word sem (without) has become part of the names of other movements, such as the homeless (sem teto, literally, without roof). All these groups, along with the MST, are collectivelyreferred to as 0ssem, “the withouts” (Fernandes 2000, 227; Gohn 2000,6).
Pursuit of these alliances, however, has sometimes led to the sort of spectacular gesture that gets coverage but may divert attention from the movement’s message. Three examples will bear this out. In 1998, a severe drought struck northeast Brazil, the poorest section of the coun- try and one frequently plagued by drought. Many poor people were on the brink of starvation; some looted grocery stores and their delivery trucks for food. While the MST disputed assertions that it was behind the looting, it seems clear that it played some role, and the press tended to blame it completely. In April 2000, the five hundredth anniversary of the Portuguese discovery of Brazil, the MST organized indigenous and other protesters; police kept the demonstrators away from the official commemoration and arrested more than one hundred. In January 2001, the MST organized delegates to the World Social Forum in Port0 Alegre for the Monsanto occupation. Foreigners attending the forum joined them, includingJose BovC, the French farmer and leader of the antiglob- alization protest that resulted in the destruction of a McDonald’srestau- rant in France in 1999.
These incidents drew some of the most consistently negative cov- erage the MST has received in Brazilian newspapers. Maria da G16ria
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	75
Gohn argues that the incidents allowed the press to portray the MST as the “source and origin of violence . . . to create fear and insecurity in public opinion” (2000, 24). The temptation to stage spectacular events in order to guarantee coverage and draw in followers from a broad array of social movements can produce reporting that is likely to create an unfavorable image among the public at large.
FRAMINTGHE MST
This study analyzed the framing of the MST in Brazilian newspapers based on a systematic reading of online editions of two of the country’s major dailies, Estado de Sdo Paul0 and Folha de Sdo Paulo, between 1997 and 2001. It also drew on less systematic readings of other news- papers and newsweeklies and on Berger’s study of Zero Hora, and examined in detail the movement’s representation in the telenovela 0 rei do gado. The study relied primarily on print sources because, while television undoubtedly has greater reach and influence among the pop- ulation at large, this researcher unfortunately had no regular access to either television newscasts or dramas for close analysis.
News reports of a single-issue movement like the MST frame two distinct objects: the movement itself and the issue it addresses. The movement hopes to achieve coverage that will advance its policy goals and r a t e its status as the privileged interlocutor for those goals. The MST can reasonably claim that it has won the battle to frame its main issue, the land question, in the Brazilian media. The media (even, some- times, the provincial press owned by local elites) generally portray agrarian reform as a necessity and the struggle for it as just. They gen- erally acknowledge the concentration of land ownership and the prac- tices that have fostered it. They present landowners as politically reac- tionary, often violent, and economically inefficient, underproducing on their land and failing to contribute to the national economy. During the 1980s, especially during the writing of the 1988 Constitution, landown- ers organized in the Rural Democratic Union (UDR) succeeded in culti- vating a favorable image of themselves, in league with small farmown- ers, as “rural producers” (Payne 2000,140). The perception of the justice of the struggle has been heightened in recent years by two conjunctural factors: the severity of repression (especially the Eldorado massacre) and the 1988 drought in the Northeast.
It is entirely possible, however, to frame the land question by acknowledging the validity of the call for land reform and still dismiss the movement itself. Some sources that acknowledge the justice of the cause nevertheless argue that the means the MST uses invalidate its claim to legitimacy. Marking the end of a widely reported 1993 land occupation in Rio Grande d o Sul, Zero Horu editorialized,
76
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46:4
There is no one with a minimal level of information who does not support agrarian reform in this country. . . . On the other hand, the simple distribution of land does not represent agrarian reform. . . . It is appropriate that the leaders of the MST leave aside the passion of ideological positions. (Quoted in Berger 1998, 170)
Or as Jarbas Passarinho, former minister of justice, wrote in an opinion column in Estado de S6o Paulo,
Of course if someone asked me whether I defend agrarian reform, I would answer yes without blinking. But, [if they asked] whether I would approve an invasion, I would not give the same answer. Nei- ther would the respondents [in a survey in which 52 percent said they approved of the MSTI. Their support depended on there being no violence. Now, isn’tan invasion in itself violent?(Passarinho 1997)
Thus an apparent acceptance of the movement’s goals can be turned against the movement itself.
The frames found in the coverage of the MST reflect differing posi- tions on its demand for agrarian reform and the tactics it uses to pro- mote that demand. This study identified five frames in current use for the MST as a movement, each one reflected in media accounts, and some of them also in academic research. These frames were derived inductively and, as noted, primarily from print sources.
Four of these frames can be considered sympathetic in some degree. Though they overlap somewhat, each is relatively homoge- neous, and they are relatively distinct. They are targeted to different audiences. Each of them emerges in public discourse, and most are also reflected in academic production about the movement. The first two correspond in some degree to the image the movement presents of itself to internal and external audiences, respectively.’
1. “Militantmovement.”The MST applies the “militantmovement” frame to itself for internal consumption. Promoted by the leadership, in movement schools, and in political education in the camps and assen- tamentos is a view of a militant revolutionary movement using a novel strategy. Within this frame, the movement produces T-shirts and posters with images of Che Guevara and invokes a Brazilian past of agrarian resistance in the person of Zumbi, the eighteenth-century leader of the Palmares quilombo, a settlement of escaped slaves, and the rural revolts of Canudos and the Contestado at the turn of the twentieth century. Though the MST does not propose armed struggle now or for the future, the presence of these military images is striking. The U.S. sociologist James Petras (1997) presents a similar view of the MST.
2. “Solution to national problems.” For public consumption, the movement promotes a pragmatic image of itself: the MST brings idle farmland into production and thereby provides work for large numbers
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	77
of unemployed rural workers, increases the food supply, and stems the flow of urban migrants8 It gives people the chance to live from their own productive labor; it also works very hard to educate the illiterate peasants and their children. This frame emphasizes the violent repres- sion suffered by land occupiers at the hands of the state and landown- ers, whose blind self-interest causes them to obstruct the logical and vir- tually cost-free solution of major social problems.
One might call this the “saltof the earth” frame, because it portrays the rural character as reflecting the cleanliness and wholesomeness of the countryside, in striking contrast to the evils of city life. For public consumption, however, the emphasis is on the outcome: MST ussentu-
mentos practice low-cost and ecologicallysustainable agriculture to pro- duce food instead of export crops and educated children instead of beggars and delinquents. This frame, like the first, appears in the MST’s own literature and in the work of supporters, such as photographer Sebastigo Salgado (1997a; compare Salgado 1997b), but also in the media addressed to the general public. The (relatively rare) media accounts of the ussentamentos themselves give a generally favorable picture, selecting for coverage those that are highly productive rather than the many foundering ussentamentos.
Related to this frame are two interpretations present in the treatment of the MST by many Brazilian social scientists, in terms similar to those used in the analysis of urban social movements: citizenship and identity politics. The idea of citizenship, widely diffused in the contemporary discourse of popular movements in Latin America, entails both benefits and the guarantee that as a matter of right those benefits cannot be taken away; but it also emphasizes the exercise of citizenship by agents to secure recognition of their rights. The MST enables its adherents to exercise citizenship, in this view, by making possible their participation, from which their poverty, illiteracy, and subjection to powerful land- lords have excluded them (Navarro 1994; Nunes 1993). Many sources describe the personal transformation of movement activists as a result of their participation. They achieve dignity and claim rights, civil, political, economic, and social (Gaiger 1987; Lisboa 1988; Sorj 1998, 38-39).
Scholars who interpret the MST in terms of identity politics say that it and allied political movements of poor cultivatorshave labored to con- struct an identity as “rural worker,” superseding the differences that sep- arate the small landowner, tenant, day laborer (bdiufria>, and agricul- tural producers with other forms of property relationship (Gaiger 1987, 28; Gohn 2000, 3; Houtzager 1997, 127-30, 1998, 12; Medeiros 2001).
These two academic views can be placed in the “solution to national problems” frame because both portray the MST as serving con- sensually recognized goals of national institution building and agricul- tural production, downplaying the conflictual element of the struggle
78	LATIN AMEFUCAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
against landowners to achieve agrarian reform, which is a central ele- ment of the MSTs self-image.
3. “Patheticcreatures.”Thisframeissympathetic,butambiguously. Also addressed to public opinion, it is not found in the discourse of the movement itself. While it applauds the movement for solving the prob- lems of the rural poor, it nevertheless portrays them as backward and ignorant-in	a word, hicks. An article in the newsweekly V i a intro- ducing the report on the march to Brasilia in April 1997, on the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre, begins this way:
In the age of the jet plane, they go on foot. When the economy is globalizing, their ideal is a piece of land with a fence, a cow in the pasture, and a vegetable garden behind the house. The world moves at the speed of computers and high technology, and they want to work the land, spade in hand. The kids are dancing to rock, and the anthem of the Movement of Landless Farmworkers, MST, sings of a “workers’and peasants”’homeland. Representing an archaic Brazil, barefoot, rotten teeth, vermin under the skin and little schooling, the landless invade properties, disrespect the law, and confront the police. They have died and killed in these con- flicts. They look a bit like the devout followers of the messianic AntBnio Conselheiro (Veja 1997, 3419
The pathetic creatures frame suggests that the MST has its heart in the right place but that its concrete programs are inadequate for con- temporary Brazilian reality. The frame assumes that in a modem soci- ety, where agriculture requires capitalist organization and enterprise to be adequately productive, and for all the MST‘s good intentions, agrar- ian reform is not a realistic solution. Francisco Graziano Neto, whom Cardoso appointed president of INCRA, and sociologist Bernard0 Sorj make this claim more explicit. Given that there is no real possibility for agrarian reform or for a viable living derived from agrarian property, they argue, those who call for it should instead work to improve their living conditions (Graziano Net0 1998;Sorj 1998).
The implication for agrarian policy is that the issues that need to be addressed are those of employment and “access to citizenship by the unemployed,”problems which can best be solved by promoting educa- tion, according to Sorj (1398, 391, or with unemployment insurance for rural workers, according to Graziano (1998, 168). This frame implicitly buys into the conservative modernization of Brazilian agriculture pro- moted by the military dictatorship, which has been expelling peasants from the land since the 1960s. It accepts the claim that only high-input, high-productivityagricultureuses the land appropriately,in contrast to the low-cost agriculture the MST claims to favor. (It of course begs the ques- tion of whether the concentration of landholding actually favors high-pro- ductivity land use rather than speculation and leaving farmland idle.)
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	79
4. “Guerrillacapitalism.”Thefourthsympatheticframefindsitsclear- est expression in, of all places, the Latin American edition of Time maga- zine, January 1998. The cover story on the MST features mmtammtos that are notably successful in business, selling their farm goods to multi- national corporations to market under nationwide brand names and diversdying from agriculture to such activities as a clothing factory and a distillery. In “guerrilla capitalism” (the magazine’s phrase), revolutionary ideology is watered down, an exercise in nostalgia; the Che posters on display in many mmtamentos are “mere decor”; and the movement, though “stridently socialist in its public pronouncements, . , . has also become a force for corporate entrepreneurship” (Padgett 1998).’O
5. “Demonization.”The final frame presents the MST as a law- breaker and provoker of violence that prevents authorities from peace- fully carrying out their responsibility to provide land for the landless. The movement is, by definition, lawless. It does not “occupy”land; it “invades” land. The column by former Minister of Justice Passarinho (1997) quoted above is an example.
The demons of this frame are the demons of old left politics: MST leaders, beholden to an outmoded doctrine supporting centralist social- ism, struggle for power for themselves under the guise of serving the interests of the poor. An invidious distinction between leaders and land- less farmworkers is a common theme in news reports (Voese 1998). MST leader StCdile was shown on the cover of Veju in June 1998, against a bright red background, in a photograph that can only be described as Mephistophelean; the caption read, “A esquerda com raiva” (the enraged left). The movement plays a “double game,” the cover story says, talking moderately for public consumption but presenting views in its private circles that the magazine does not hesitate to qualify as “out of date” (anacrdnzco). The movement refuses to contemplate any decentralization of agrarian reform because that would mean giving land “directly [to] all those who want to enter in the distribution pro- gram, without having the MST leadership as intermediaries” (Petry and Oinegue 1998, 47). The article appeared shortly after the wave of loot- ing in response to the drought in the Northeast, which some commen- tators blamed on the MST.
The demonization frame levels two major accusations: that the movement is simultaneously out of touch with contemporary reality and diabolically clever in its tactics. Though these charges might seem con- tradictory, they appear side by side in the same accounts. On the one hand, the movement’s leaders are captives of an ideology that has been superseded by history; on the other hand, they are clever manipulators of the masses who are their foot soldiers in the battles to conquer land.
There are elements of overlap among the frames. The problem-solv- ing frame and the guerrilla capitalist frame are strikingly similar in
80	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
emphasizing the productive potential of assentamentos.The demoniza- tion frame and the pathetic creatures frame also have much in common: both view the movement’s members as objects of pity, vulnerable to manipulation by opportunistic leaders. Both depict the movement as following a hopelessly outdated doctrine and the occupiers as pitiful, if willing, victims of manipulation.
Of the five, the demonization frame appears most frequently, prob- ably accounting for more newspaper reports than the other four com- bined. It is also, evidently, the most clearly hostile to the movement. The presence of four frames that are, in varying degrees, sympathetic, by contrast, demonstrates that the movement has been able to achieve some coverage favorable to its goals and its methods of operation. But the overlap among the frames shows that frames with similar content can be enlisted to serve different purposes. The same elements can be presented to generate sympathy or hostility.
The degree of sympathy or hostility a frame shows for the move- ment may not, however, be the most important one for considering the relevance of frames to media goals. What Gamson and Modigliani say about public opinion analysis also applies to the analysis of media accounts: they criticize the methodological tradition of public opinion analysisbecause it “assumesthat the task is to array relevant publics on a pro-con dimension.”The proper task, they argue, is
to make the underlying schemata visible. . . . Only by methods that elicit more of the interpretive process will we be able to see the extent to which different media packages have become part of the public’s tool kit in making sense of the world of public affairs. (Gamson and Modigliani 1989, 36)
The differences in these frames’ underlying schemata reveal that even those that are ostensibly sympathetic d o not necessarily offer inter- pretations that are likely to promote the movement’s goals. Gamson proposes that a successful collective action frame must integrate ele- ments of injustice, agency, and identity (1992, 31-109). To the extent that a frame encourages a movement’s potential adherents to feel that they are being treated unjustly, that they have the capacity to better their situation, and that they belong to a collectivity sharing the sense of injustice and agency and opposed to another collectivity that stands in their way, they will mobilize against the injustice.
Some of these five frames clearly are more likely to have these effects than others. The pathetic creatures frame pictures the potential beneficiaries of land occupations as having limited competence; they are objects of pity rather than possessors of rights. The guerrilla capi- talism frame implies that movement members’ problems are most amenable to market-based solutions rather than political ones. Such
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	81
frames will not inspire mobilization. Nor will a frame that is not patron- izing but that idealizes the landless, as do the telenovela 0 rei dogad0 and some of the ostensibly sympathetic coverage.
THE MST ON THE HOMESCREEN
Broadcast onTVGloboin the prime eight o’clocktime slot in 1996and 1997,the telenovela 0 rei do gado presented land occupiers in a highly sympathetic light, which combined elements of the “solutionto national problems” and “pathetic creatures” frames. It is a clear example of a treatment that, while favorable, did not entirely project the image the movement holds of itself. The reaction in the movement was ambiva- lent, although in the end the movement welcomed the show.
The novela illustrates in a peculiar way some of the noteworthy issues in the relation of social movements and the media. Though it was clearly fictional, not a news story, it surely garnered for the MST more attention than any news story (and even, probably, more than all the news coverage during the months in which it ran). In addition, it per- mitted multiple interpretations, just as do news reports that claim to rep- resent straightforward accounts of reality. The show became a news event in itself, moreover, and its coverage in the media inevitably reflected attitudes toward the movement.
For a topic to be featured as the theme of a telenovela represents the pinnacle of recognition in Brazilian popular culture. The importance of telenovelas in Brazilian politics and everyday life cannot be overesti- mated. They are the most widely viewed shows on Brazilian television. A typical novela runs nightly for several months. At any time, the cur- rent novela is a frequent topic of daily conversation. Many novelas address social themes and ratify the importance of issues. In addition, television actors, writers, and production crews are reputed to be highly progressive, often lending their names to political causes.
Alma Guillermoprieto, former Latin American correspondent for the New Yorker,has characterized the presentation of public issues in tele- novelas thus:
On the news, executives are kidnapped and murdered, state enter- prises go bankrupt, drug lords wage war in the favelas, and sewer systems erupt in the streets, all of which is to say that in Brazilian terms nothing happens. In the telenovelas, executives are kid- napped and drug lords wage war in the favelas, but the kidnapper is caught, the drug lord meets a nice girl and goes straight, the crooked executive’s righteous son inherits the family business, and moral order is restored to the world. Things change. They change in precisely the same fashion in every single novela . . . viewers can fantasize that the real Brazil is not the hopeless swamp of moral
82
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY
46: 4
confusion and economic chaos that it sometimes feels like . . . but a place where family values withstand all assaults, the poor even- tually find jobs and always have enough to eat, and even the wicked can be redeemed. (Guillermoprieto 1994, 291. For further discussionsof the role of telenovelas in Brazilian life,see La Pastina 1999;Page 1996,444-65;Oliveira 1993;Port0 1998a,b)
If news reports concentrate on individuals to the detriment of struc- tural analysis, this is all the more true of telenovelas. It is inherent in the medium that social questions, if they are dealt with at all, are treated as individual problems. 0 rei do gado was no exception. The movement (which was not named) faded into the background. The central charac- ter was a heroic land occupier; one of the subplots was resolved when a beautiful occupier and a landowner fell in love, perhaps permitting the conclusion that the solution for rural poverty is not land reform but love. The program's image of conflict in the countryside did not neces- sarily reinforce the MST's position because it tempered the conflict and suggested a peaceful resolution.
The novela was nonetheless important for presenting the issue of land reform in prime time every night for six months, and it undoubt- edly drew the attention of millions of people to the plight of the land- less. It can be described as alternating between two of the frames found in news reports. Land occupiers are, on the one hand, pathetic crea- tures, poor and deserving but acting in the shadow of movement lead- ers and people of higher status; on the other hand, they offer a solution to national problems. The show's picture of the movement certainly could be expected to invoke sympathy (and it presented landowners in such a bad light that some of them threatened to sue the author). Even with sanitized politics, a dramatized story may well affect people more powerfully than an ordinary news report.
It is worth noting that the show appeared at what was probably the movement's highest point of popularity in public opinion: it premiered two months after the Eldorado massacre. (It was already on the draw- ing board at the time of the massacre, although the scripts for later episodes were completed only during the run of the program.) The media had been drawing daily attention to the movement's Pontal cam- paign. Brazil, moreover, had enjoyed two years of price stability after a decade of vertiginous inflation, and it may be that the sense of pros- perity made urban Brazilians more willing than usual to recognize the plight of the rural poor."
The series itself made news on several occasions. Editorial and opinion columns referred to it; President Cardoso visited the set during taping and was shown on the evening news meeting actors in costume. One of the characters, a senator who defended agrarian reform, was killed, and two real-life PT senators, Benedita da Silva and Eduardo
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	83
Suplicy, made cameo appearances as themselves at his funeral. (In the present context, any distinction between a telenovela character and “real-life”senators can only be relative.) Their appearance in itself occa- sioned a flurry of public comment: while a columnist for Estudo de S2o Puulo huffily complained that “taxpayers have a right to believe that the representatives they elect use their time parsimoniously in their bene- fit,” the television critic of the newsweekly Vejurejoined that “theBrazil that telejournalism tried to hide winds u p appearing in its entirety in the novela. . . . When two senators agree to make an appearance in 0 rei do gudo, reality presents itself through the telenovela” (La Pastina et al. 1999;Reis 1997;Bucci 1997).
TeoriuGDebate,the PTs theoreticaljournal,covered the telenovela. In a long interview, MST leader StCdile criticized the show for being “romanticized,”for showing “a half-messianic leader who decided by himself” instead of democratically run ussentumentos,and for trimming its politics under pressure from the network. He nevertheless acknowl- edged that on the whole, the movement thought that the show had a positive impact because it brought the land question into prime time and presented important themes, such as the farmworkers’encampments and the movement-run schools. StCdile also revealed that movement leaders met with the writer during the show’srun and persuaded him to broaden his treatment of the movement. Finally, he said, the novela raised the status of occupying farmworkers in their communities; other viewers treated them with more respect (Azevedo and Sottili 1997, 32-33, 39).
The “coverage”of a movement in fictional representation necessarily departs significantly from its treatment as a news item. Still, the telenov- ela merits the extended treatment given here because it drew more atten- tion to the movement than news coverage ordinarily attracts. It paralleled straight news reporting of social movements in many respects: it was important simply for garnering attention; it acknowledged-even as it called into question-the	movement’sstanding to speak for itself; it per- sonalized a problem, obscuring its social dimensions; those in the move- ment regarded it as a distortion of their reality; but even so, it served their purposes at least partially. Of course, it was only a soap opera.12
CONCLUSIONS
The treatment of the MST in the Brazilian media is diverse, presenting a mixture of sympathy and hostility. The sympathetic coverage itself varies, moreover, in acknowledging the movement’s political significance.
Most movement activists and sympathetic media critics who have studied the coverage of the MST, however, argue that such coverage is uniformly hostile (with some exceptions; for example, Berger 1998; Gohn 2000). They see demonization in virtually all coverage, even if
84	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
they do not use the term (although Maschio 2000 refers to the “Sataniza- tion” of the MST). They do claim to find systematic distortion in media accounts. Maisa Mendonga, for example, analyzes headlines from three hundred articles about the MST in the four major Brazilian dailies (Estado de Sa’o Paulo, Folha de Siio Paulo, 0 Globo, and Jornal do Brasin between April and August 1999. She concludes,
A large part of these articles characterize the landless as aggressors, potential guerrilla fighters, obsessed [obsecadosl with the seizure of power or violent. On the other hand, the police are presented as defenders of order, although statistics of violence in the countryside demonstrate the opposite. The government, for its part, is seen as negotiating agent, which supports and invests a large amount of resources in agrarian reform. (MendonCa 2000)
Many other critics point out that reports regularly use the term inua- sion rather than occupationand identify an “invasion”ips0 facto with vio- lence, without regard for whether people have been injured or property has been damaged. Several Brazilian media critics emphasize that the term invasion, found in many media reports, is explicitly condemnatory (Baccega and Citelli 1989;Marambaia and CPmara 2000; Voese 1998).
The coverage is, in reality, more complex. Though the demoniza- tion frame is most common, this study has found four other frames, all of which show some sympathy for the MST and its goals. The MST must regard the attention it has enjoyed from the Brazilian media as a mixed blessing. Though the MST has won considerable attention, it has not been able to dictate the content of that attention. Still, the achievement of getting attention itself may be as important as the exact way the movement is framed. The MST has won significant public support and maintained a high level of mobilization, which appears to demonstrate that the movement has, on the whole, benefited, even with the media’s mixed treatment. The movement’s complaints about that treatment appear to have been balanced by a recognition that even mixed cover- age serves it better than none at all.
NOTES
This is a revised version of a paper presented to the Columbia University Seminar on Brazil, April 1999; the International Rural Sociological Association, Rio de Janeiro, July 2000; and the Seminar on Contentious Politics, Columbia University, April 2001. I appreciate the helpful comments of Laura Kramer, Gabriel Ondetti, and Wendy Wolford, as well as Charles Tilly and the other par- ticipants in the contentious politics seminar.
1. Media are more important for appealing to sympathizers than for recruiting active participants because joining a collective action is often deter-
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	85
mined at least in part by personal contact with others who are already active (Snow et al. 1980).
2. La Pastina (1999) conducted an original and interesting study of audi- ence response to the telenovela 0 rei do gado, based on participant observation. 3. The term land question is used here as it is in Brazil, shorthand for the complex of issues regarding concentration of land ownership, agricultural pro-
ductivity, and rural poverty and unemployment. 4. Ownership of rural property is often poorly defined, readily permitting
fraudulent title claims. James Holston argues that the land grab (srilagem) is a normal feature of the Brazilian legal system, not an exceptional violation. The grileiro “pretendsto have legitimate title to the land through a vast repertoire of deceptions” (Holston 1991, 700). Holston is writing about land grabs on the recently urbanized peripheries of expanding cities, but they are most common in rural areas. New roads and the conversion of huge virgin forests to cultivation or pasture since the 1964 military coup have produced innumerable opportunities for fraudulent property claims (compare Hall 1990, Maybury-Lewis 1994).
5. Between 2000 and 2002, hoping to discourage occupations, the Car- doso government decreed that it would not inspect occupied properties (Ondetti 2002, 175).
6. It refers to emu mate, a favorite drink in Rio Grande do Sul (Berger 1998, 112).
7. The labels given to each frame (except the fourth) are the author’s, chosen to characterize the frames succinctly without necessarily drawing on the language of those who employ them.
8. There are doubtless some citizens who believe that the movement is keeping potential criminals out of the cities and who therefore support the movement as a form of social cleansing.
9. AntBnio Conselheiro was the leader of Canudos, a nineteenth-century community of rural withdrawal that was wiped out by the Brazilian army. Con- temporary Brazil learned about Canudos from Euclides da Cunha, whose first- hand account appears in the book translated as Rebellion in the Backlands (1944); Mario Vargas Llosa’s novel m e War of the End of the World (1984) is based on the episode. Among the many accounts of Canudos by Brazilians and foreigners, the diversity of interpretations parallels that of other “prepolitical” movements, such as the Luddites; to some, the movement symbolizes fanatical primitive rebellion or a movement of withdrawal attempting to recover a myth- ical lost past, while for others it is the epitome of rural resistance to the oli- garchical power of landed property.
10. This account appears to rely mainly on one of the most successful assentamentos in Rio Grande do Sul, the state where assentamentos are more prosperous in general than elsewhere in the country.
11. The success of the fight against inflation also won its architect, Fer- nando Henrique Cardoso, election to the first of two terms as president in 1994. 12. WithoutapologiestoGamson,whoconcludeshisdiscussionofthefilm
TheChinaSyndromeandtheanti-nuclear powermovementbysaying,“But,of course, it was just a movie” (1988, 234).
86	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4 REFERENCES
Amaral, Roberto, and Cesar GuimarPes. 1994.Media Monopoly in Brazil.Jour- nal of Communication 44, 4 (Autumn): 26-38.
Amnesty International. 2002. International Secretariat. News Release. AMR 19/ 008/2002, June 13. (Reprinted in SEJUP, News from Brazil, 471, June 17, 2002.)
Azevedo, Ricardo, and RogCrio Soaili. 1997. Maledetto latiftindio. Teoria G Debate 34 (March-May):	32-39.
Babb, Sarah. 1996.A True American System of Finance: Frame Resonance in the US. Labor Movement, 1866 to 1886. American Sociological Review 61, 6 (December): 1033-52.
Baccega, Maria Aparecida, and Adilson Odair Citelli. 1989. Ret6rica da manipulagilo: 0s Sem-Terra nos jornais. Comunicapjes e Artes 20 (April): 23-29.
Benford, Robert D., and David A. Snow. 2000. Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment. Annual Review of Sociology 26: 611-39.
Berger, Christa. 1998. Campos em confronto: a terra e o texto. Port0 Alegre: Edi- tora da Universidade.
Bucci, EugCnio. 1997. FiccPo C ignorar a novela. Veja 30, 4 Uanuary 29): 16. Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1997. EducaGdo em movimento:formapio de educadoras
e educadores no MSI: Petr6polis: Vozes. ComissPo Pastoral da Terra. 2000. Assassinatos no campo: Brasil 1985 a 2000.
<www.cptnac.com.br> Cunha,Euclidesda. 1944.RebellionintheBacklands10ssertdes].Trans.Samuel
Putnam. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ellingson, Stephen J. 1995. Understanding the Dialectic of Discourse and Col-
lective Action: Public Debate and Rioting in Antebellum Cincinnati. Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 101, 1 (July): 100-44. Entman, Robert M. 1993. Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured Paradigm.
Journal of Communication 43, 4 (Autumn): 51-58. Fernandes, Bernard0 Mancano. 2000. A forma@o do MST no Brasil. Petr6polis:
V ozes. Gaiger,Luiz InPcio German. 1987.Agentes religiosose camponesessemterra no
sul do Brasil:quadro de interpreta@o sociol6gica.Petr6polis: Vozes. Gamson,WilliamA. 1985.Goffman’sLegacytoPoliticalSociology.Theoryand
Society 14, 5 (September): 605-22. -.	1990. TheStrategyofSocial Protest.2nd ed. Belmont: Wadsworth. -.	1992. Talking Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gamson, William A., and Andre Modigliani. 1989. Media Discourse and Public
Opinion on Nuclear Power: A Constructionist Approach. AmericanJournal
of Sociology 95, 1 uuly): 1-37. Gamson, William A,, and David S. Meyer. 1396. Framing Political Opportunity.
In Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings, ed. Doug McAdam, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 275-90.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	87
Gamson, William A., and Gadi Wolfsfeld. 1993.Movements and Media as Inter- acting Systems. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 528 (July): 114-25.
Gamson, William A,, Bruce Fireman, and Steven Rytina. 1982. Encounters with Unjust AuthoriQ. Chicago: Dorsey Press.
Gamson, William A., David Croteau, William Hoynes, and Theodore Sasson. 1992. Media Images and the Social Construction of Reality. Annual Review of Sociology 18,373-93.
Gerhards, Jurgen, and Dieter Rucht. 1992. Mesomobilization: Organizing and Framing in Two Protest Campaigns in West Germany. AmericanJournal of Sociology 98, 3 (November): 555-96.
Gitlin,Todd.1980.n eWholeWorldIsWatching:MassMediaintheMakingand Unmaking of the New Lejl Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis. New York: Harper Colophon. Gohn, Maria da G16ria. 2000. Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra no Brasil e a Midia, 1997-2000. Paper presented to the World Congress of
RuralSociology,RiodeJaneiro,July30-August 5. Graziano Neto, Francisco. 1998. A (dificil) interpretacko da realidade agr5ria. In
0sassentamentos de reforma agraria no Brasil, ed. Benicio Viero Schmidt, Danilo Nolasco C. Marinho, and Sueli L. Couto Rosa. Brasilia: Editora Uni- versidade de Brasilia. 153-69.
Guillermoprieto, Alma. 1994. 7be Heart that Bleeds: Latin America Now. New York: Vintage Books.
Hall, Anthony L. 1990. Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil. In Agrarian Reform and Grassroots Development: Ten Case Studies, ed. Roy L. Proster- man, Mary N. Temple, and Timothy M. Hanstad. Boulder: Lynne Rienner. 205-32.
Hall, Stuart. 1980. Encoding/Decoding. In Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972- 79.London: Hutchinson. 128-38.
Hammond, John L. 1999a. Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farm- workers' Movement. Bulletin of Latin American Research 18, 4: 469-89.
-.	1999b. [Impunity. . .I Lives On in Brazil. NACLA Report on the Americas 33 (November-December): 1-2.
Holston,James. 1991.The Misrule of Law: Land and Usurpation in Brazil. Com- parative Studies in Society and History 33, 4 (October): 695-725.
Houtzager, Peter Pim. 1997. Caught Between State and Church: Popular Move- ments in the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1989. Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley.
-.	1998. State and Union in the Transformation of the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1979.	Latin American Research Reyiew 33, 2: 103-42.
Imprensa ( S oPaulo). 1998.Jo20 Pedro Stkdile: o lider dos sem-terra ataca jor- nalistas e empresarios d e comunicac2o. No. 11 (August): 21-26.
La Pastina, Antonio C. 1999. The Telenovela Way of Knowledge: An Ethno- graphic Reception Study Among Rural Viewers in Brazil. Ph.D. diss., Uni- versity of Texas, Austin.
La Pastina, Antonio C., Joseph Straubhaar, and Heloisa Buarque de Almeida. 1999. Producers, Audiences, and the Limits of Social Marketing on Televi- sion: The Case of 0 Rei do Gado, a Telenovela About Land Reform in Brazil.
88	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
Paper presented at the 49th Annual Conference of the International Com-
munication Association, San Francisco, May 27-31. Lima, Venicio A. de. 1993. Brazilian Television in the 1989 Presidential Cam-
paign: Constructing a President. In Television, Politics, and the Transition to Democracy in Latin America, ed. Thomas E. Skidmore. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press. 97-17.
Lisboa, Teresa Kleba. 1988. A luta dos Sem Terra no oeste catarinense. Flori- an6polis: Editora da UFSC.
Marambaia, Hudson Passos, and AntBnio da Silva CBmara. 2000. 0 MST e a imprensa na Bahia: o caso do a tarde. Paper presented to the World Con- gressofRuralSociology,RiodeJaneiro,July30-August 5.
Maschio,Jost. 2000. Brasil: La satanizaci6n del MST en 10s medios de comuni- cacibn. Servicio Informativo alai-amlatina Agencia Latinoamericana de Informacion. Email list, <alai-amlatina@quito.ecuanex.net.ec>
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn. 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 19541985. Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press. McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald. 1996. Introduction:
Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Framing Processes--Toward a Synthetic, Comparative Perspective on Social Movements. In Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Ofportunities, Mobilizing Struc- tures, and Cultural Framings, ed. McAdam, McCarthy, and Zald. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. 1-20,
Medeiros, Leonilde Servolo de. 2001. Sem Terra, assentados, agricultores famil- iares: consideragees sobre 0 s conflitos sociais e as formas de 0rganizar;iio dos trabalhadores rurais brasileiros. In iUna nueva ruralidad en Am&ica Latina? ed. Norma Giarracca. Buenos Aires: CLACSO. 103-28. <www. clacso.org/libros/rura~ruralh. tml>
Mendonca, Maisa. 2000. 0 MST na midia. <www.mst.org.br/biblioteca/textos/ midiahstnamidia.html>
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST). n.d. 0 MST e a edu- cacPo. <www.mst.org>
Navarro,Zander. 1994.Democracy,Citizenshipand Representation:Rural Social Movements in Southern Brazil, 1978-1990. Bulletin of Latin American Research 13, 2: 129-54.
-.	1997. Sete teses equivocadas sobre as lutas sociais no campo, o MST e a reforma agriria. In A reforma agraria e a luta do MST, ed. JoPo Pedro StCdile.Petropolis:Vozes. 111-32.
Nunes, IvBnio Barros. 1993. Reforma agraria, p’ra que? In Zntroducdo crftica ao direito. Brasilia: Centro de Educaciio Aberta, Continuada, a DistPncia, Uni- versidade de Brasilia. 40-42.
Oliveira, Omar Souki. 1993. Brazilian Soaps Outshine Hollywood: Is Cultural Imperialism Fading Out? In Beyond National Sovereignty: International Communication in the 1990s,ed. Kaarle Nordenstreng and Herbert I. Schiller. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 116-31.
Ondetti, Gabriel A. 2002. Opportunities, Ideas, and Actions: The Brazilian Land- less Movement, 1979-2001. Ph.D. diss., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
-. -.
tial Election. Communication Review 2, 4: 433-59. 1998b. Telenovelas, Politics, and National Identity in Brazil. Paper pre-
sented to the Society for Cinema Studies conference, San Diego, April 4-7. 2001. Mass Media and Politics in Democratic Brazil. Paper presented at the Conference “15 Years of Democracy in Brazil,” Institute of Latin American
HAMMOND:MSTAND MEDIA	89
Padgett, Tim. 1998. Brazil’s Landless Rebels. Time, Latin American edition, Jan- uary 19: 12-17.
Page,Joseph A. 1995. TheBrazilians. Reading: Addison-Wesley. Paiero, Denise, and Jose Roberto Damatto, Jr. 1996. Foices e sabres: a hisMria
de uma ocupaGao dos Sem Terra. Siio Paulo: Annablume. Passarinho, Jarbas. 1997. A fibula se inverte. Estado de Siio Paulo, March 25.
<www.estado.com.br> Payne, Leigh A. 2000. UncivilMovements: 7heArmed Right Wing and Democ-
racy in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Petras, James. 1997. Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left. New Left Review
223 (May-June):	17-47. Petry, Andre. 1997. Parado por 500 anos. Veja 30, 17 (April 16): 50-51. Petry, Andre, and Eduardo Oinegue. 1998.0que eles querem. Veja31, 22 (June
3): 4248. Porto, Mauro P. 1998a. Telenovelas and Politics in the 1994 Brazilian Presiden-
Studies, University of London, February 15-16. Reis,Leila.1997.FiguragiiodesenadoresCoassuntodasemana.&ado deSao
Paulo,January 24. <www.estado.com.br> Rohter, Larry. 1999. Politics Threatens Brazilian Utility Sales. New York Times,
October 9: C2. Ryan, Charlotte. 1991. Prime Time Activism: Media Strategiesfor Grassroots
Organizing. Boston: South End Press. Salgado, Sebastiiio. 1997a. Terra:Struggle of the hndless. London: Phaidon Press. -.	1997b. The Dispossessed. Photo essay. New York TimesMagazine, April
20: 40-47. ServiCo Brasileiro de JustiCa e Paz (SEJUP). 1997a. Land Issues: Widespread
Approval of Land Occupation Tactic of MST. NewsfromBrazil 268 (April
3). <www.oneworld.org/sejup> -,	1997b. Land Issues: Government Pays Over 24000% More for Land Than
It Received for It. Newsfrom Brazil 293 (November 20). Sigal, Leon V. 1973. Reporters and Ofliciak: 7he Organization and Politics of
Newsmaking. Lexington: D.C. Heath. Smith, Christian. 1996. Resisting Reagan: The U S . Central America Peace Move-
ment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Snow, David A,, and Robert D. Benford. 1988. Ideology, Frame Resonance, and
Participant Mobilization. International Social Movement Research 1:
197-2 17. -.	1992. Master Frames and Cycles of Protest. In Frontiers in Social Move-
ment Theory,ed. Aldon D. Morris and Carol McClurg Mueller. New Haven: Yale University Press. 133-55.
Snow, David A., Louis A. Zurcher, Jr., and Sheldon Ekland-Olson. 1980. Social Networks and Social Movements: A Microstructural Approach to Differen- tial Recruitment. American Sociological Review 45 (October): 787-801.
90	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Ben- ford. 1986. Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation. American Sociological Review 51 (August): 464-81.
Sorj, Bernardo. 1998. A reforma agrziria em tempos de democracia e globaliza- GPO. Novos Btudos CEBRAP50 (March): 23-40.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1994. Power in Movement: Social Movements, CollectiveAction and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tuchman, Gaye. 1978. Making News. New York: Free Press. Valdks, Alberto, and Tom Wiens. 1996. Rural Poverty in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Unpublished mss. Washington, DC: World Bank. Vargas Llosa, Mario. 1984. 7be War of the End of the World [Guerra del fin del
mundol. Trans. Helen Lane. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Veja (SPo Paulo). 1994. Olhai as foices dos pobres da terra. June 1: 70-75.
-.	1997. A longa marcha. 30, 15 (April 16): 34-35. Voese, Ingo. 1998. 0 movimento dos Sem-Terra na imprensa: urn exercicio de
anilise d o discurso. Ijui: Editora Unijui.

2007
Law
Law, Social Justice & Global Development
The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
George Meszaros

 Associate Professor, School of Law, University of Warwick
G.A.Meszaros@warwick.ac.uk
This is a refereed article published on: 6 December 2007
Citation: Meszaros, G, ‘The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil’, 2007 (1) Law, Social Justice & Global Development Journal (LGD). <http://www.go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros>
Meszaros, G	2	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
Abstract
The paper begins by acknowledging the uncomfortable nature of the MST’s relations with prevailing legal orthodoxy, but then go on to briefly examine their nature, origins and extent. In acknowledging the tension between the MST and prevailing legal orthodoxy we ask how much this reveals about the movement’s approach to legality, and how much it reveals about the legal system itself and the attitudes of those who operate it. The paper goes on to emphasise the positive interactions between the MST and the rule of law rather than points of friction. It underscores the importance of unpicking these relations, as well as examining the MST’s record, which does not conform to the lawless stereotype. The overall picture that emerges, however uneven and localised, is that of an increasingly rich interplay between legal practitioners and the MST. The latter, it turns out, has quite a sophisticated legal discourse and strategy. Similarly, albeit to a more limited extent given that this is a major part of the challenge, we find that the legal sphere is the subject of internal contestation in addition to external social pressure. Finally, the paper draws these threads together in the light of President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva’s administration. His 2002 election and 2006 re-election undoubtedly gave a distinctive new slant to the MST’s relationship with the State in general and the rule of law in particular. If the rhetoric was to be believed, land questions had acquired a new urgency. Gone was the repressive tension that had underlain relations between the movement and all the post dictatorship administrations. Temperamentally, at least, significant sectors of Lula’s government, including the President himself, were favourably disposed towards land reform. This raised the tantalising possibility that, for the first time in decades, a fundamental reorientation of the State - and its corollary, a loosening of the legal regime and decriminalisation of landless struggles, might take place. But it also raised the difficult question of how a government of the left would respond to Rule of Law imperatives on the one hand, and to a social movement known for tactics of direct action, on the other.
Keywords:
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST), Rule of Law, Land Reform, Social Movements, Brazil.
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	3	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
1. Introduction
Few subjects so exercise commentators and politicians in Brazil than the real or imagined relationship between the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) and the Rule of Law, or Estado de Direito,. Here is a typical example, an open letter sent by Raul Jungmann, the Minister of Agrarian Reform in President Cardoso's government, to President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva in July 2003:
President, no democrat can sacrifice the Rule of Law in name of the combat against poverty and social exclusion. I am sure you understand this. The MST and the UDR1, for different reasons, do not. Agrarian reform has been carried out in two contexts; that of rupture or institutional normality. Rupture is in nobody’s interests. Normality implies the strict and rigid adherence to the law - whether we like it or not. Mr President, follow the law and make others follow it.2
The implication is clear: firstly, that the MST’s restricted worldview means that questions of poverty and social exclusion are invariably set upon a collision with more broadly based Rule of Law imperatives; and secondly, that Brazil’s reconnection with ‘institutional normality’, makes it imperative for the President to uphold the Rule of Law at all times, even if this is to the detriment of allies like the MST. This is powerful language. It strikes an historical chord with Brazilians who recall the military rupture of 1964 and its costly aftermath; and at the same time makes a point of universal significance in terms accessible to all generations. It proposes a highest common denominator by appealing to people’s sense of fair play, firmly rejecting the idea that any individual or organisation should be considered above the law, and offering a clear way forward: ‘follow the law and make others follow it’. What could be simpler than that?
The present article argues that this is precisely the problem with the way the discussion is framed. The picture presented of both the MST and law is deceptively simple, representing little more than a caricature. Of course caricatures have their uses, and public letters must take short cuts in the interest of clarity, but why should someone like Raul Jungmann, one of the sharpest intellects in the Cardoso government, with a deep understanding of the issues involved and the dangers of oversimplification, adopt this type of limiting discourse? Part of the answer is that he remains a politician and the text is a political document and not just a statement of legal orthodoxy. It skilfully takes a sideswipe at the Lula administration by highlighting a vulnerability, namely how a government of the left can reconcile Rule of Law imperatives with direct action tactics deployed by its ally in opposition, the MST. By far the most crucial part of the letter, however, consists in the claims it makes about law in general and the MST in particular. In this respect it offers not so much a distorted caricature as a remarkably faithful and succinct portrayal of dominant legal and political discourses. For this reason it cannot be dismissed lightly and was chosen as our point of departure.
This paper addresses some of the issues raised by orthodox discourses like Jungmann’s, but from an entirely different perspective. We begin by acknowledging the uncomfortable nature of the MST’s relations with prevailing legal orthodoxy, but then go on to briefly examine their nature, origins and extent. Typically, critics
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	4	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
emphasise the points of friction (of which there are many) and trace (in our view erroneously) their origins exclusively back to the MST and its supposed unilateral failure to ‘understand’ the rule of law. Constructing the problem thus both raises the stakes to a supposed clash between the MST and law. In fact, Jungmann’s letter suggests that it heralds nothing less than an assault upon democracy itself.3 This view invites the conclusion that containment, with repressive measures if necessary, is the best course of action. Indeed, Jungmann has gone on to say that it is high time for ‘law’s truncheon to be brought down upon the MST’.4
The approach of this article differs. In acknowledging the tension between the MST and prevailing legal orthodoxy we ask how much this reveals about the movement’s approach to legality, and how much it reveals about the legal system itself and the attitudes of those who operate it. The suggestion is that we are dealing with a multilateral equation. Titanic clashes or assaults upon democracy are not the issue. Indeed, aspects of legality may actually be fortified by the MSTs actions.
The second part of this paper emphasises positive interactions between the MST and the rule of law rather than points of friction. It underscores the importance of unpicking these relations, as well as examining the MST’s record, which does not conform to the lawless stereotype. The overall picture that emerges, however uneven and localised, is that of an increasingly rich interplay between legal practitioners and the MST. The latter, it turns out, has quite a sophisticated legal discourse and strategy. Similarly, albeit to a more limited extent given that this is a major part of the challenge, we find that the legal sphere is the subject of internal contestation in addition to external social pressure.
The third and final section draws these threads together in the light of President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva’s administration. His 2002 election and 2006 re-election undoubtedly gave a distinctive new slant to the MST’s relationship with the State in general and the rule of law in particular. If the rhetoric was to be believed, land questions had acquired a new urgency. Gone was the repressive tension that had underlain relations between the movement and all the post dictatorship administrations. Temperamentally, at least, significant sectors of Lula’s government, including the President himself, were favourably disposed towards land reform. This raised the tantalising possibility that, for the first time in decades, a fundamental reorientation of the State - and its corollary, a loosening of the legal regime and decriminalisation of landless struggles, might take place. But it also raised the difficult question of how a government of the left would respond to Rule of Law imperatives on the one hand, and to a social movement known for tactics of direct action, on the other.
2. Tensions between the MST and Legal Orthodoxy
2.1.	Social and Political Origins
There is an element of inevitability governing the MST’s difficulties with the established legal order. While this is partly due to the movement's chosen course of action, methods and self-conception, it also derives from the movement's social origins, i.e., to the fact that the MST was a product of, and not just a response to, circumstances. These circumstances, especially the extent of social polarisation, are well known. Land and income inequality in Brazil are star. According to the latest UNDP Human Development Report, Brazil’s Gini coefficient (the most widely used
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	5	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
inequality indicator) was 58.0, lower only than Colombia (58.6), Bolivia (60.1), Namibia (74.3), Botswana (63), Swaziland (60.9), Lesotho (63.2), Central African Republic (61.3) and Sierra Leone (62.9).5 Recent data suggest that 56 percent of propertied land is still concentrated among just 3.5 percent of property holders, while a mere 6.3 percent of land is held by 57.6 percent of property holders, in other words, 144,281 properties have successfully appropriated 183,564,299 hectares of land, leaving 2,441,770 other properties to squeeze into just 26,601,982 hectares.6 Absolute poverty is an endemic problem for rural families, of whom more than three million live on a maximum income of three reais (roughly a dollar) per capita per day. It is a grave mistake to imagine that legal conflicts arising from the release of these structural tensions is the product of ‘irresponsible leadership’. Time and again, whether in South Africa, Poland or, indeed, Brazil during the 1970’s and 1980’s, events suggest wider social forces are at work. The MST’s supposed failure to ‘understand’ the Rule of Law simultaneously belittles these tensions and exaggerates leadership volition.
A sense of proportion, then, is needed when considering rural conflicts that occur under the banner of the MST. All too often they are reduced - ad absurdam - to the terrain of ‘movement or leadership irresponsibility’ when in fact something more significant is happening. Consider the marked growth of groups similar to the MST. The numbers speak for themselves.7 To be sure the MST is by far the most vocal and powerful of these groups, and exercises a de facto leadership role, but that still begs the question why so many others have followed suit and adopted similar tactics of mass occupation? Whatever the answer, a spontaneous mass outbreak of law breaking is not it. Like the MST these movements should be understood as distinctive responses to and ‘products’ of circumstances rather than strait jacketed with repressive legal discourses and actions.
Another way to understand the origins of conflict between the MST and legal orthodoxy is by posing the following question: what were and are the alternatives to conflict? In fact, the alternatives had been tried and found wanting. The MST was born of a strong sense of past failures, including the assassinations of rural trade union leaders, the glacial pace of land reform, and the excessively debilitating legalistic culture of existing rural organisations.8 Not even the prospect of more radical rural unions, following the upheavals of the late 1970's, could persuade MST organisers to throw in their lot with these groups. The argument, which finally prevailed, was that while unions could only organise individual workers as members, the MST could derive strength from the organisation of families - men, women and children - in mass occupations without the restriction of municipal limits, to which legislation also subjected unions. Mobilising beyond traditional borders – geographic and legal - would give the movement its national characteristic as well as the capacity to concentrate large groups of people in small areas without the usual restrictions. In this sense, leadership did indeed play a vital role in shaping the movement and to this extent is responsible for the path undertaken and its consequences.
But what of the substantive critique offered by orthodox Rule of Law advocates? Is the MST acting beyond the law, thereby ‘threatening democracy’ itself?9 The illegality argument is usually based on two pillars. The first, although less significant, arises from specific cases of law breaking and their depiction as representative of the movement as a whole. Undoubtedly, this is one of the most difficult questions facing
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	6	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
the movement. However, in an organisation of the MST’s size, operating under extremely stressful conditions, it is not surprising that laws have been broken. That is one reason why, for instance, the movement has long banned alcohol from encampments, since it often gave rise to fights. Over the years, the process of conflict has seen thefts, damage to property, the killing of landowners, military police and even fellow members. Opponents have been quick to latch on to these events, seeing in them the possibility of tarnishing the movement’s image and embarrassing its leadership. Crucially, though, they do not form part of the MST’s modus operandi. If they did then Rule of Law arguments would hold more weight. Instead, they must be seen for what they are, as episodic exceptions to the rule, no matter how tragic or unwelcome for those directly involved.
The same claim to exceptionality, however, cannot be made for the second target of criticism: land occupations. On the contrary, these form an indispensable part of the MST’s whole operation. Without them its survival would either be compromised, or the movement would be institutionalised. To this extent, the allegation that the movement is embarked upon a systematic confrontation with the law itself is far more serious. Before addressing this issue, some reference to the operation of Brazil’s legal system is required.
2.2.	Failures of the Legal System
In the absence of clarification the impression created so far has been of a fully functional and largely impartial legal order where due process prevails. Like Gandhian notions of Western civilisation, though, it would be a nice idea. Arguably the only consistent feature of Brazil’s justice system is its inconsistency, namely its capacity to deviate from many of the basic premises advanced by a range of Rule of Law advocates. The system is notoriously unjust, bureaucratic, cripplingly slow, and saturated with class bias. Because detailed consideration of these points is beyond the scope of this paper, our remarks are confined to a few brief illustrations of this last point, class bias.
Even senior figures working within the system have acknowledged major class divisions. In 2000, for instance, the Deputy Attorney General for Human Rights, Wagner Gonçalves, observed that ‘in Brazil there is a very strong complex of formal and informal mechanisms that protect people with political and economic power.’ He went on to note that the Brazilian penal system was ‘profoundly selective’: ‘The chances of a poor person succumbing to the long arm of the law are incomparably greater than those of a rich person.’10 The differences abound. When a college educated person goes to prison, assuming that matters get this far, he or she has the right, enshrined in law (article 295 of the penal code), to be held in a separate cell away from less educated and grossly overcrowded countrymen and women. This says a lot for the system. In the case of politicians, the situation remains unequal but is different. For years they attained near untouchable status. In his Oxford speech11, Gonçalves, confirmed that ‘in Brazil, if the author of a crime is a parliamentarian there is a 95 percent chance that he will not have to respond for the crime he committed’.12 An illustrative case took place in September 2003, when Brazil’s Attorney General was compelled to halt investigations into the fraudulent emission of hundreds of millions of dollars of land bonds during senator Jader Barbalho’s tenureship of the land reform ministry back in the late 1980’s. Despite the colossal magnitude of the crime, the passage of time and destruction of crucial evidence had
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	7	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
undermined the prospects of a successful prosecution. At one point in the lengthy proceedings, Barbalho was imprisoned for precisely five hours. The contrast with landless workers is striking. Menial crimes routinely attract custodial sentences. An extreme example occurred in March 1999 when five workers from Pernambuco state were imprisoned for a period of six months. Their crime was the theft of eight goats to feed 70 families encamped near the Santa Rita ranch, in São Bento do Una.
Given the class biases of Brazilian justice, it is no wonder that the MSTs relationship with the law is difficult. The situation is compounded by Kafkaesque absurdities of which the emphasis upon the vindication of procedure to the exclusion of substantive issues is perhaps the most notable. However, any notion that the MST is uniquely disadvantaged, or a ‘victim’, must be qualified. To a large extent movement members are in exactly the same position as the majority of Brazilians who, according to many studies, have little faith in the system. In a 2003 poll, only 12 percent of the respondents claimed to have ‘total confidence’ in the judiciary. 13	Although a blindfolded statue of Themis, the Greek god of justice, sits outside the Supreme Court denoting impartiality, other more negative and powerful representations grip the popular imagination. These include common expressions like: ‘A lei é para o ingles ver’ (The law is for appearances); ‘Da justiça, o pobre só conhece castigos,’ (From justice the poor only know punishment), and ‘Há uma lei para o rico e outra para o pobre’, (There’s one law for the rich and another for the poor.). Arguably the most potent, damning and illuminating aphorism is attributed to Brazil’s greatest 20th century statesman and legislator, Getulio Vargas: ‘Aos meus amigos tudo, para os inimigos, a lei’, (For my friends everything, for my enemies the law). The underlying message of these examples is clear: justice is selective.
Thus there is a universal dimension to tensions between the MST and legal orthodoxy. One feature that clearly distinguishes the movement from the vast majority of other victims, though, is the organised nature of its challenge and the equally systematic nature of the legal response. This gives the conflict an eminently political character. For many observers politics and law do not mix. The MST is perceived as intruding upon the tranquil and ‘normal’ functioning of the legal system. Such an account is one-sided. Historically speaking it was landowners who dominated legal spaces, through imperial and republican arrangements, and gave law its highly sectarian character. That Brazil retains an acutely polarised rural social structure illustrates the adaptability and tenacity of landed interests, and degree to which courts and legislatures sustain those interests. Orthodox rhetoric’s substitution of a-historical notions of legal neutrality deliberately overlooks these constitutive social and historical dimensions. Proponents suggest that the line must be drawn somewhere for the common good -’strict and rigid adherence to the law, whether we like it or not’ - but rarely acknowledge how it has been redrawn repeatedly to suit landed interests. Although the acknowledgment of law’s historical, and especially contemporary, permeability by social forces would move the debate forwards, this presents real difficulties for orthodox advocates. Legal change resulting from social pressure is inadmissible because it calls into question law’s supposed origins and neutrality and raises the prospect that lines will be redrawn by the most aggressive groups, for example, the MST and UDR. And yet, when one looks at the extent of the threat to legal ‘neutrality’ it becomes clear that any pressure brought to bear upon the system by the MST is nothing compared to that still exercised by landowners – whether by the UDR (a comparatively easy target), or infinitely more powerful mainstream
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	8	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
economic and political groupings like the Agricultural and Livestock Confederation of Brazil (Confederação da Agricultura e Pecuária do Brasil, CNA), which still exercises a veto over government policy.
Elective affinities felt by many legal practitioners towards landed interests reinforce these imbalances from within. The Agrarian Ombudsman, a senior judge by profession, acknowledges that fifty per cent of his colleagues believe his more progressive ideas, based upon constitutional notions of the social function of property, are ‘not in accordance with the Civil Code, which says that whoever registers land is its absolute owner, and that consequently it is wrong to speak of a social question’.14 With a starting point like this, the actions of the MST and other rural labour organisations look more like an attempt to rebalance the social and legal order rather than an effort to subvert it or democracy.
2.3.	Diverse Legal Currents
In the light of the foregoing discussion we return to the question of whether occupations are lawful. Although we have seen that profound historical and social imbalances structure the legal order, which in turn favours the landed status quo, the legal order is not entirely closed. Indeed, from a strictly legal perspective the status of occupations depends upon the weight attached to various seemingly contradictory legal documents and clauses. Put at its simplest, defenders of the status quo regard the Civil Code as the main bulwark of property rights, while reformers see the 1988 Constitution’s concepts of property, especially what is termed its ‘social function’, as the highest expression of property rights and the overriding qualification upon all prior formulations.
Thus to urge the President to ‘follow the law and make other follow it’ begs the question: whose law and on whose terms? Matters are further complicated by the Constitution’s failure to offer a sufficiently unambiguous programme. Instead, it was marked by immense social and political pressures at the drafting stage. Florestan Fernandes, a deputy on the left of the political spectrum, described the result as a patchwork quilt; while José Sarney, the former right wing Brazilian President (1985- 1990), called it a Frankenstein’s monster.15 Whatever the metaphor, the stitching is evident. Faced with the impossibility of resolving underlying social tensions, the Constituent Congress framing the constitution simply farmed out the most contentious issues to other fora for later consideration and, as it would turn out, litigation. Thus although the Constitution asserts the conditions under which the State can and cannot appropriate property for the purposes of agrarian reform, it does so through an elaborate legal, administrative, economic and social web mediated by judges, administrative agencies (for example Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária [INCRA]) and politicians. Conflict was built in from the start.
A complex battle is now being waged inside the legal establishment for hegemony. However, rather than occurring along a single front it is expressed in terms of multiple skirmishes and sometimes quite fluid and episodic formations. Even those taking part are not necessarily fully aware of the ramifications of their own decisions. Indeed, many would reject the notion that they fall into any kind of ‘camp’ at all, since their decisions are taken upon a case-by-case basis, often upon extremely narrow legal points.16 Highly restrictive judicial interpretations of property rights form part of a tradition that goes back centuries. Although the alternatives start from a position of
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	9	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
institutional and cultural weakness, they are neither weak nor new in doctrinal terms. On the contrary, academic studies examining the social function of property can trace their pedigree back to antiquity and to nineteenth century Catholic social teaching amongst others.17 But just as the Catholic Church developed its immense political and cultural presence in Latin America by ostracising radical alternatives, so too the legal order developed in close proximity with landed classes, while marginalising the alternatives.
The failure to establish the supremacy of the 1988 Constitution illustrates the difficulty of reversing such ingrained patterns of behaviour. As the following section makes clear, that is precisely why the contribution made by groups like the MST to the debate is potentially so important. In sum, most of the tensions between the MST and the legal order can be traced to the latter’s fabric and operating dynamics rather than to the MST’s supposedly irresponsible or lawless approach. In fact there is more to relations between the MST and legality than tension alone. A variety of reciprocal determinations are at work occasionally with unexpected consequences. Arguably, the MST’s very emergence is a prime example of this. Although the movement was the brainchild of the left and progressive religious organisations, it also emerged as a direct response to the huge legal limitations imposed by the military dictatorship and largely retained by the legal establishment immediately following the transition to democracy. A common perception among MST supporters during the early 1980’s was that progressive initiatives were hamstrung by these laws, would remain so unless the connection was broken and entirely new methods and structures developed.
3. Developing Alternative Conceptions of Legality
This section develops a number of themes. It argues that although the MST’s relationship to law was initially marked by mutual ideological hostility, that situation has long since developed into one where, no matter how fraught relations may be, law’s potentialities are recognised. The change was neatly symbolised in June 2000 by a front cover of Caros Amigos magazine picturing an MST leader holding up a copy of the Brazilian Constitution under the caption: ‘The Weapons of the MST’.18 Some detailed examples of these ‘weapons’ are discussed, as well as the shift from what I term a defensive conception of legality to an offensive conception that appreciates law’s potentialities. We also examine the increased willingness on the part of legal practitioners (prosecutors, judges and legal theorists) to recognise the contribution and potentialities of the movement itself. Far from equating to Raul Jungmann’s description, it turns out that the MST offers a fundamental reference point for interpretations of legality together with the crucially important practical impetus for change so frequently lacking in legal discourses. This last theme is continued into the fourth and final section dealing with the Lula administration.
3.1.	Legal Conservatism and the Imperative for Change
Law’s class character, and consequent inability to deliver progressive social change, understandably left deep marks upon the MST. In its early days the movement was compelled to develop uncompromising methods, notably the mass occupation of properties, as part of its strategy to propel land reform forwards. Contestation and conflict came to be seen as the primary motor of political change. Perhaps because of its success, this perspective left little scope for fuller consideration of the role that law might play. It came to be viewed either with a mixture of hostility and suspicion, or at
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	10	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
best as an afterthought. A typical example of the latter occurred in October 1987 with the simultaneous occupation of seven locations across the state of Rio Grande do Sul. Although the occupations themselves were meticulously planned and executed, simultaneously shocking the political establishment and capturing the public imagination, there was little evidence of legal planning. Sympathetic lawyers scurried hundreds of kilometres from one occupation to the next and then back to the courts, improvising the best defence they could to legal counter attacks. With relatively minor variations this pattern of neglect would be repeated throughout Brazil. The MST’s daring and imaginative political offensive contrasted starkly with its restrictive conception of legality.
Although it would take several years for the MST to overcome its legal conservatism, the case for doing so was present at the outset. The success of mass occupations, their remarkable capacity to establish a progressive social and political agenda and counter many aspects of landowner power, including violence, created a paradox: simultaneously relegating law to the shade and enhancing its significance. After all, occupations not only created victories and landowner defensiveness, but also engendered a backlash, i.e., the reinvigoration of parliamentary and violent extra- parliamentary landowner networks and court based responses. Legal success offered landlords a great prize: the prospect of enlisting the direct support of the State and de- legitimising the movement. For if the courts sided with landowners, imposed an injunction and the MST resisted, the military police could then be summoned to arrest MST members and halt occupations in their tracks. Clearly, the MST’s underdevelopment of legal expertise, at its simplest, the failure to present an adequate defence in court because lawyers were unavailable, was leaving the movement badly exposed. Either it would have to reconsider the question of law, or risk fighting with one arm tied behind its back.
There was no Damascene conversion to the virtues of the established legal order. Instead the movement gradually moved from defensive conceptions of law to more offensive – proactive - ones. Undoubtedly, the MST’s painstaking construction of legal personnel networks and arguments strengthened its hand. But this still left landlords with massive legal firepower (backed by monetary and other advantages). The playing field is anything but level. Representing landowners is so lucrative that some lawyers leave the ranks of INCRA, the land agency, to join those of landowners, and in many cases, litigating, advising and researching on behalf of landless workers represents a costly personal undertaking. Were it not for the dedicated body of lawyers and paralegals willing to offer these services on a voluntary basis, the MST’s legal presence would be a fraction of its current size.
According to MST leaders, serious discussion of legal issues, like the possibility of forming an in-house legal team instead of relying upon the good will of the Catholic Church’s Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra, CPT), began in the early 1990’s. This was a direct response to the wave of violence unleashed by President Fernando Collor de Mello’s administration (1990-1992). Until then, the approach had been both deliberately and inadvertently piecemeal. On the one hand the MST did not wish to go down the route adopted by other organisations which, it believed, had become so enamoured with individual lawyers and legal niceties that, in effect, political and movement imperatives had been subordinated to legal ones. On the other hand, though, a relationship of convenience had developed with third parties,
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	11	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
like the CPT. ‘Why change it?’ was the attitude. For radical independent lawyers like Jacques Alfonsin, who provided legal services just as occupations were taking off in Rio Grande do Sul, the movement’s arms length approach in the mid 1980’s was inadequate and difficult to deal with on a personal level. ‘At the beginning I almost felt like an appendage, an excrescence’, he said19. Like many lawyers he would be called in to assist occupations at the last minute, or in their aftermath. A tension clearly existed between the internal political dynamics of a vibrant social movement, still operating under semi-clandestine conditions, and externally constituted legal demands. The MST felt that lawyers could never ‘solve’ fundamental problems (e.g., accelerate expropriations) on its behalf and that the key to changing social attitudes and pressurising the state into land reform lay with mass mobilisations. If it came down to a choice between who was going to be subordinated, then it would have to be the lawyers, not movement actions.
Whatever the substantive merits of the MST’s position, in practical terms the choice was not so stark as this. Legal action could be expanded and enhanced without compromising the movement’s strategic objectives. Indeed, over time even leaders like João Pedro Stedile came to recognise that, ‘clearing up after the milk was spilt’ was not an adequate policy.20 Gradually, therefore, a more sophisticated, expanded and assured concept of militant legal action emerged that was in harmony with the MST’s imperative of political autonomy. Evidence of this shift comes in the early 1990s, with the development of in-house legal services that drew directly upon MST resources; and the increased support given by the movement for the National Network of Popular Independent Lawyers (Rede Nacional de Advogados e Advogadas Populares, RENAP), officially created in 1996.
The emergence of a more coherent legal strategy, or consciousness, partly arose in response to external shocks like the repression of the Collor administration and the host of court based and paramilitary countermeasures undertaken by landowners in the 1990s. Prior to this legal consciousness was incipient and episodic. Over time, however, the movement’s exchanges with the radical legal profession became second nature. Lawyers like Jacques Alfonsin were instrumental in the development of RENAP and legal dialogues in the mid 1990s. Another lawyer, Luis Eduardo Greenhalgh, also provided the movement with assistance during its early struggles, such as the occupation, in 1985, of the Annoni ranch in Rio Grande do Sul. As a radical lawyer and politician of national standing he was used to straddling the contradictory worlds of politics and law in a way that better suited the movement. Although this may have helped cement the closer relationship he enjoyed it hardly constituted an autonomous legal consciousness. Dependence upon the personal characteristics of an individual lawyer, no matter how brilliant, represented a precarious foundation. As if to underline the point it was Greenhalgh himself who took the lead in setting up the MST’s in-house legal services.
The Worker’s Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, PT) provided yet another support network through sympathetic lawyers and leading figures like Plinio de Arruda Sampaio. Like Greenhalgh, Alfonsin and many others, Sampaio was separate from, but closely linked to, the movement’s fortunes from its earliest days. Sampaio’s background also straddled the worlds of law and politics. He was a Party heavy weight in the legal sphere (making a notable contribution to those chapters of the 1988 Constitution dealing with the separation of powers and role of the Attorney
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	12	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
General’s department), and was deeply involved in agrarian questions (hence his citation as a possible Minister of Agrarian Reform under President Lula da Silva, and his appointment as head of the commission that elaborated the National Programme of Agrarian Reform [PNRA]). Numerous exchanges with such figures aided the development of a more mature and nuanced legal conception. Vigorous exchanges also took place between the MST and the radical legal education network AJUP (Apoio Juridico Popular). It organised seminars for lawyers and militants, produced specialised pamphlets, and actively supported the movement, but Miguel Pressburger, one of AJUP’s leading figures and a Marxist lawyer, was openly critical of the MST’s lack of legal policies, arguing that these failed to exploit its scope for action. Finally, of course, there was the CPT upon which, as noted earlier, the MST greatly depended and whose influence is still felt today. In short, change was more than just the product of external shocks; it was also part of a wider process of critical reflection going back to the mid 1980s.
The development of in-house legal services during the early 1990s, under the official heading of Human Rights Sector, undoubtedly represented a major step forward. At last the movement could systematise its legal policies; offer a point of contact for the agglutination and coordination of external legal support; comment officially upon individual cases; represent the legal plight of landless workers at a national level; and produce legally oriented publications. It should be stressed, however, that this was not a legal service in the usual mould. The connection between movement and lawyers was intended to be organic. Instead of contracting outside professionals, the movement began training its own cadres, like the head of the Human Rights Sector, Juvelino Strozake, the son of landless workers and an MST activist. His university education was sponsored by the movement, and he was given vital practical training by a skilled lawyer, Luiz Eduardo Greenhalgh, who’s political and legal judgements the movement respected. These characteristics would help ensure the legal department meshed fully with the movement’s wider objectives.21
The MST’s tightly controlled model of organic legal growth came at a price. It was slow and therefore bound to be limited in scale, a major problem when dealing with social conflicts scattered across a country of Brazil’s dimensions. Some attempts were therefore made to break these limits through agreements, established with both the Cardoso and Lula governments, providing federal funds to retain lawyers to work on certain human rights cases.22 In no way did the subcontracting of functions at the periphery imply a loss of control at the centre. An extended division of labour and professionalisation of legal services was perfectly in keeping with the movement’s political and legal objectives. Providing the MST with material leverage – enough lawyers in the right place and at the right time – was obviously a vital task, but so too was broadening its range of legal arguments. Intellectual leverage could not be established in isolation or organically: the movement had to reach out. In this context RENAP would prove highly significant. It offered both lawyers that the movement’s internal resources could never hope to match and a vital network of information exchange.
RENAP also had repercussions within the MST.23 Central to RENAP’s agenda is what Jacques Alfonsin described as the ‘need to bring together and concentrate law professionals, to improve the provision of legal advice, and to debate and clarify legal defence strategies - especially in relation to criminal and civil matters arising from the
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	13	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
struggle for agrarian reform’.24 For RENAP members, steeped in radical legal theory and activist struggles, this meant attempting to consolidate an alternative model of legal action by questioning their role as legal professionals; developing jurisprudence that challenged orthodox interpretations; propagating these concepts through pamphlets, meetings, courses, and information technology networks; and seeking a close working relationship with the MST (amongst others) that stressed not only the latter’s autonomy (and in this sense the limited nature of legal action), but RENAP’s autonomy too. The constant dialogue with the MST would give RENAP initiatives their vital grounding, but also helped the MST reorient its legal agenda from a conservative/defensive posture to one grounded in more offensive/radical notions of legality.
3.2.	From Defensive to Offensive Legality
Although João Pedro Stédile accepts that substantive changes have taken place,25 he is keen to stress that these occurred primarily as a function of politics rather than law. Certainly it is true that the movement never lost strategic control over its legal dealings, or found itself in awe of law or lawyers. No matter how insightful Greenhalgh’s legal advice might be, it was overruled on several occasions.26 Thus, offensive legality had its limits. It was developed within constraints imposed by the MST and the wider social struggle. Notwithstanding these limits, legal action did possess its own logic and qualities. Just as Stédile emphasises that movement activities should ‘lead society to support us’, there can be little doubt that occasionally law constituted a vital bridge in this process. Events in the Pontal do Paranapanema, which first marked the MST in the nation’s consciousness, bear this out.27 As Stedile says:
It is obvious that the Pontal was very important from an ideological perspective, because in the Pontal there were 700,000 hectares of public land: the status of the property, which belonged to the State, had already been clearly decided in the courts. It had been illegally seized [grilhada28] by large landowners and figures from São Paulo’s aristocracy, indeed the ex- governor, Roberto Costa de Abreu Sodré was a grilheiro from the region. The fact of having made occupations and organised the movement here acquired greater symbolic value on account of these aspects.29
In other words, the politics of occupation, near the epicentre of landed, industrial and media power, was complemented by the legal situation. Whatever their de facto power, which was immense, in de jure terms landowners found themselves in a vulnerable position, a fact not lost upon the movement and made much of in the course of its public pronouncements. In private negotiations too, with centrist and conservative local town mayors, law exercised a bridge building capacity. According to José Rainha, the MST’s chief spokesperson at the time, ‘we won over the mayors and isolated the landowners, because there was no way of saying ‘no’, because the land was public.’30 Thus, no longer was law simply used to defend the movement from attack; it was also used in a wide variety of contexts to put others on the defensive. Consider, for example, the attitude of landless workers themselves, who are said to be reluctant law breakers.31 If true, Rainha’s affirmation that the Pontal’s legal situation made it ‘a great deal easier’ to organize workers is significant. He could claim ‘we’re not the illegal ones; you [the landlords] are because the law says that the land belongs to the State.’32 The MST was using a legal claim as an aid to mobilisation.
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	14	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
Although the MST’s legal claim was aided by the devolved status of land, activists simultaneously relied upon another prop of wider significance: the idea that the State had failed to accord landless workers fundamental collective rights enshrined in the 1988 Constitution. Thus, struggles over devolved land were part of a much broader process of struggle in the social, political and legal fields. Offensive legality’s task was to develop the legal imagination and tools capable of undertaking these struggles in all their diversity and universality. Finding a ‘trump card’, like the 1958 decision confirming the devolved status of land in the Pontal, could not be relied upon elsewhere. Indeed, court victories alone were not enough, as the fact that it took 35 years to begin to establish the 1958 court’s writ so powerfully illustrates. Instead cards had to be manufactured through painstaking work inside and outside the courts.
3.3.	Changing Legal Culture
Judicial conservatism resides at the heart of Brazil’s legal system, and nowhere is this more evident than in questions pertaining to property. While the movement has always looked beyond the horizons of law, it has come to recognise that these cultures must be contested head on, rather than written off and accepted as forms of oppression. Contestation here neither constitutes an overestimation of movement power nor a sign of its institutionalistation. Rather, it is viewed simply as a necessary part of the struggle.
Although the uphill nature of that struggle is clear for all to see, favourable shifts do occur sometimes. In March 1996, for example, one of Brazil’s highest courts, the Superior Tribunal de Justiça, was asked to decide upon the merits of a petition for habeus corpus (HC.4.399 SP.) made by six leading MST members preventively imprisoned following a wave of occupations in the Pontal.33 In a landmark ruling the court concluded that their actions could not be characterised as a crime under the terms of the penal code because the subjective intentions of the petitioners was furtherance of agrarian reform, rather than theft of property. Their intentions were, in the words of the judges, ‘substantively distinct’ from those alleged by prosecutors. The court also noted the connection between the inaction of the state on land reform, the constitutional imperative for change, and MST activities. The implication was clear. Given the monumental failure on the part of the political class there was a corresponding need to understand the circumstances in which workers felt compelled to occupy land. A comment one often hears from the MST captures this well: ‘From the point of view of our legislation, if there was political will, there would be no need for land occupations.’34
The court’s decision touches upon many of the themes discussed in this article. The ruling would become an important piece of ammunition in the MST’s arsenal. Through networks like RENAP, as well as the MST’s own legal service, the precedent was used in countless other legal actions, albeit with varying degrees of success. The case was also used to cement further the legal aspects of movement’s claim to legitimacy, both before the public and internally, among members. Finally, the case clearly showed that even within Brazil’s conservative legal establishment, there were sectors - at the very highest levels - willing to embrace theses advanced by MST lawyers.
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	15	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
The 1996 ruling by the High Court illustrated other issues. Although the judges failed to detail judicial failures, reserving criticism for politicians instead, they did emphasise the importance of a contextual approach and substantively oriented legal reasoning, rather than the purely formal variety characteristic of prevailing legal orthodoxy.35 This was not a revolution in legal thinking, or the radical kind of reasoning proposed by some legal scholars and judges36, but it did represent a symbolic break with tradition and an implied criticism of colleagues. The presence on the panel of Luiz Vicente Cernicchiaro, a leading intellectual in penal affairs who chaired the committee examining reform of the Penal Code, gave the decision added weight. It could not be written off lightly. As such the MST would keep it in the public and judicial eye over the years to come.37
For the MST the central issue is not to ‘sacrifice the Rule of Law in name of the combat against poverty and social exclusion’, but to regain those aspects of law’s rule that deal favourably with questions of poverty and social exclusion but which have been buried under the immense weight of other institutional, political and class imperatives.	Regaining law’s progressive potential and pushing its boundaries is not just a matter of legal archaeology. New precedents have to be set. One example of this occurred in December 1999, near the town of Matão, in São Paulo state. Six hundred landless families occupied an area devoted to the intensive cultivation of sugar cane, land that was deemed productive. In so doing, the MST appeared to have placed itself on a collision course with the 1988 Constitution, which makes a crucial distinction between so-called productive and unproductive property. According to article 185 the expropriation of productive properties is ‘not permitted.’ Closer examination reveals that the movement was not on a collision course with the Constitution, but rather with highly restrictive constitutional interpretations. It was attempting to re-establish the validity, indeed primacy, of other constitutional clauses, notably article 186 which asserts that in order to be accorded legal protection, property must simultaneously fulfil its ‘social function’.38
A striking feature of the Matão occupation is that from the outset activists were acutely aware of and drew attention to the legal implications of their actions. This was offensive legality at work. As one leader explained, ‘it is essential that land fulfils its social function, and occupations are one means of carrying out this debate in society.’39 To the surprise of many, the lower court validated the movement’s main argument, namely that the property in question was failing to fulfil its social function because of local pollution and the systematic abuse of labour rights. Thus the occupants were allowed to stay. This ruling established an important new precedent. It seemed the MST had an arguable case after all, a remarkable fact given the greater public, political and judicial hostility towards occupations of productive property.
A shift in legal culture appeared to be taking place. The MST’s arguments even received support from local and state prosecutors. A few days before the occupation began prosecutors and other state officials issued an open letter dealing with the social function of property in much the same terms as those advanced by the MST.40 Far from coincidental, the letter was indicated increased cross fertilisation between the movement and various legal practitioners.41
Though unusual, the Matão case highlights a broader trend: the increasing responsiveness of Brazilian legal professionals towards innovative strategies advanced by the MST. Furthermore, the occupation underlines the movement’s
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	16	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
capacity for creative case construction. Legal issues were woven into the very fabric of this occupation and the MST was more than happy to draw attention to this fact. Throughout, though, the essential driving force remained the unresolved nature of the social and legal contradictions themselves.
3.4. The Lula Administration
The election in November 2002 of Luis Inacio Lula da Silva as President raised tantalising possibilities as well as thorny questions about the relationship between the MST, law and the State. Clearly, the most important issue was the extent to which the presidency would address social contradictions and mark the emergence of a new and radical partnership for agrarian reform, and the beginning of the end of the long cycle of conflict between State and society. Here the role of law was critical since the government could exercise its authority in clearing cultural and legislative obstacles to land reform; could use its constitutional powers in making senior judicial and other appointments, including the Attorney General; and could adopt a more benign tone in its public pronouncements, instead of, as Raul Jungmann suggested, ‘articulate with the security and justice sectors of the states and with the federal police and democratically crack down [baixar o pau] in cases of excess by the MST’42.
The best that can be said of both Lula administrations is that they did not adopt Jungmann’s advice. To be sure there were rhetorical ambiguities at the heart of the administration in its legal discourse towards the MST. This oscillated between brinkmanship and conciliation. The former largely came from its so-called hard men, José Genoino and José Dirceu. ‘Do not doubt the authority of the government’, the latter pointedly said at the end of July 2003, following a round of land occupations and tension with the movement. ‘Acts and actions cannot be allowed to prejudice the democratic Rule of Law’, said Genoino. Almost simultaneously (June 2003) though, other Ministers, like Miguel Rossetto (Agrarian Development), were negotiating with judges in the Pontal do Paranapanema in order to accelerate legal procedures and thereby hasten the acquisition of land that might be used to defuse a volatile situation.
The appointment of key legal personnel also appears to send out mixed messages. On the one hand Claudio Fontelles’ appointment as Attorney General was a positive development. A progressive with a longstanding interest in land issues and a well worked out position, he felt able to criticise the MST when it occupied public buildings and President Cardoso’s ranch, in March 2002, contending that such practices, including the occupation of productive property, were illegal and therefore undermined movement legitimacy. But he also confronted basic tenets of legal orthodoxy. In one article he emphasised the futility of bringing repressive penal policies to bear upon food thefts in the northeast Brazil because their cause essentially lay in the persistence of centuries old structures of injustice.43 On 14th August 2003 he took aim at another target - property, which he contended was ‘not absolute’: ‘you cannot do with an area what you like. Use must be destined towards a social function. The constitution impregnates within the notion of property the notion of solidarity.’ For properties that were underutilised or held for speculative purposes ‘social movements can, in a peaceful and orderly fashion go in plant and produce’.44
Although these statements fell well short of claims made by the MST, they represented a clear departure from Fontelles’ predecessor, not to mention the repressive approach adopted by Cardoso’s Minister of Justice, Nelson Jobim.45	For
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	17	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
the first time ever, Brazil’s most senior prosecutor was publicly endorsing a key argument advanced by the MST: that property was not absolute and could, under certain circumstances, be occupied. Setting the tone in this way would encourage and embolden young prosecutors to question landowner claims instead of taking them at face value. It also strengthened the MST’s wider public claims. Fontelles’ declarations generated newspaper headlines and predictable criticism from landed interests.46
However, when it came to judicial appointments to the Federal Supreme Court (composed of 11 individuals), timidity dominated. A wave of retirements under Lula meant that in contrast to Cardoso, who only appointed three judges during his two terms, the new president was in the privileged position of making five appointments in one term. Instead of leaving an indelible mark, it is arguable that the government’s choice quickly came to haunt it when, in August 2003, the Federal Supreme Court rejected the first major expropriation order signed by Lula. The manner of the defeat, on procedural grounds, again seemed to confirm the assertion made to me by one judge that: ‘With the Brazilian judiciary, if you have an able lawyer you can almost eternalise the discussion!’47 Clearly one should not read too much into one decision, but it is symptomatic of a general malaise. Advancing the cause of land reform within the courts has always been a difficult task. It appears likely to remain so for years to come.48 Perhaps in recognition of past failures, the strength of Lula’s popular mandate, and the extent to which the courts were now on trial for any policy failures, the High Court judges involved in the São Gabriel case reiterated their support for agrarian reform. However, their rhetorical support sat uncomfortably alongside their rejection of one of the few practical measures capable of achieving it. MST leaders like Mário Lill asked a pertinent question: ‘if the judges don’t permit agrarian reform within the law, what is left to us?’49
As for the law itself, in one of many mixed signals to the MST and right wing sectors, the government refused to reverse the August 2001 measure designed by the Cardoso administration to choke off occupations at source.50 The measure forbade INCRA from auditing any ranch for a period of two years subsequent to any occupation. Lula’s retention of the measure was the symbolic equivalent of Tony Blair retaining anti-trade union legislation. Substantively, though, it was more complex. Since its passage the MST had, quite literally, worked its way around the measure by occupying properties adjacent to intended targets.
In both symbolic and substantive terms, however, the government’s failure to update agricultural productivity indices has been far more significant. Dating back to 1975, these indices take no account whatsoever of massive leaps in productivity and Brazil’s newfound status as an agricultural superpower: only the most hopelessly unproductive properties can be expropriated, thereby artificially restricting the supply of land available for redistribution. Thus the problems accumulate. Despite promises made by President Lula on the eve of his second electoral victory, he has refused to take on the agricultural lobby by updating the indices. An unholy alliance of propertied classes- from the most advanced to the most antediluvian-has succeeded in preventing the MST and INCRA from getting their foot in the door for fear that their remit may expand uncontrollably. Such fears are, in my view, exaggerated. But they underline just how ideologically driven landed power remains, in all its forms, at the onset of the twenty first century. While the Lula government has increased public funding for
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	18	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
land reform and family farming, ultimately it has done nothing to undermine those power relations.
4. Conclusion
That this paper could have been renamed The Devil in the Detail for the Rule of Law in Brazil depends greatly upon correlations of force at a given moment in time, micro- political arrangements and the willingness of operators of the legal system to use their powers in a particular way. A notion like the Rule of Law fails to capture these dynamics and in Jungmann’s hands becomes a highly schematic frame of reference. In fact, the disjuncture between narrowly conceived Rule of Law rhetoric on the one hand, and reality on the other, is exemplified by Jungmann’s own conduct. Between 1999 and 2000, as Minister of Agrarian Development he was faced with a major clash involving landowners from Rio Grande do Sul who did not want their properties audited on the one side, and INCRA, the local judiciary and MST, who felt that inspectors should be allowed to audit properties freely as the law prescribed. Far from demanding the Rule of Law Jungmann simply circumvented it. The head of the land agency, a former prosecutor with a declared desire to make the law ‘stick’, was sacked. Land productivity indices were kept artificially low so that landowners could clear this hurdle and hold on to their land. To be sure, Jungmann had his reasons51 (as he doubtless has for now urging an authoritarian approach on the part of Lula), but a purist notion of the Rule of Law is clearly not one of them.
Abstract de-contextualised approaches to law and its institutions are unsustainable and unhelpful. Indeed, for all Jungmann’s rhetorical inflexibility and emphasis upon ‘institutional normality’, he recognised just how flawed and perverse that normality was. The punitive approach of many legal practitioners towards landless workers, and glacial speed with which the legal system resolved problems while they accumulated apace, posed a major obstacle to agrarian reform. In order to overcome some of these obstacles Jungmann created the office of the National Agrarian Ombudsman (Ouvidoria Agrária Nacional). Its head, a high ranking judge, explained that this was an attempt to ‘treat agrarian questions in an informal manner, without bureaucracy, without costs to the various parties, and as close to the events as possible’.52 Typically, though, the institution’s chances of success depended not upon the formal trappings of office, but upon the ombudsman’s own personal authority and skill. Even so judicial culture remained an obstacle. As the Ombudsman freely admitted, his progressive legal theses on land issues were rejected by a substantial part of the Brazilian judiciary.53 Against such profound divisions and institutional contradictions, it seems reasonable to question what Jungmann and others mean by the ‘strict and rigid adherence to the law’.
As for the MST’s relationship to law, this must be seen as an integral and legitimate part of legal processes that have long been divided. That an organisation of its social expressiveness and stature should at last contribute to reshaping the debate on the nature and function of law, instead of merely accepting the consequences of others’ designs, is surely a healthy and long overdue development. Many observers have failed to pick up this point or seem unwilling to do so. They acknowledge the movement’s political impact, but seem incapable of recognising its positive legal ramifications, preferring to remain trapped within an artificially restrictive notion of the Rule of Law to which not even they can live up to. To this extent relations with
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	19	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
the Lula administration do mark a significant shift in tone. Despite Genoino’s assertion that ‘Acts and actions cannot be allowed to prejudice the democratic Rule of Law’, it is also clear that this administration is far more at home with the idea of social movement pressure than any of its predecessors. In the same speech, for instance, Genoino referred to the right of social movements to continue to make demands, and the corresponding obligation of the government to manage its alliances in such a way as to bring about reform.
Far from bringing about reform, the government’s alliances have only engendered disunity within the PT’s own ranks and provoked the emergence of a new more radical party, Party for Socialism and Liberty (PSOL). In the minds of many observers the evident lack of leadership shown by Lula has raised the question of whether the MST might finally turn its back on both the political and legal process in some sort of ‘radical’ break. . A look at the recent past shows why not. The fact remains that over the course of the Sarney, Collor and Cardoso administrations, with all their attendant limitations, the MST strengthened its engagement with the legal field. There is nothing about the Lula administration that would suggest a reversal of this tendency. If anything, the highest echelons of the legal establishment are more receptive now than ever before. To assume that the MST will suddenly become disillusioned with the political process is to make a critical error about the illusions originally held by the organisation. Its history suggests that while change from the top is to be welcomed, it must be pushed for from below. It is in this context that legal action has come-and will continue-to play an indispensable part of the struggle.
Endnotes
1The União Democrática Ruralista (UDR) is the most militant and visceral of the right wing landowners organisations. It successfully lobbied to defeat land reform legislation in the late 1980s and on subsequent occasions. Throughout its ups and downs it has engaged in violent confrontation with rural groups, including the MST. According to one study, though, it has also sought to integrate its own version of social movement discourse. See Payne, Leigh, (2000). 2 Jungmann, (Jungmann, Raul, 2003). 3 Jungmann, (Jungmann, Raul, 2003). 4 See ‘Jungmann diz ser preciso ‘baixar o pau da lei’ no MST’, Folha de São Paulo, 29/07/2003. 5 UNDP Human Development Report, 2006. 6 Data derived by the author from Ministerio Desenvolvimento Agrario figures. A more complete picture should emerge when the last agricultural census, of 1996, upon which many of these figures are based, is finally updated by the Fundação Getulio Vargas in 2008. 7 The MST is only one of dozens of organisations active in rural conflicts and land occupations. 8 For a more extended discussion of this issue, particularly as it related to the National Confederation of Workers in Agriculture (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura, CONTAG) see Medeiros (Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de, 1989, p 92). She notes that with the emergence of the military dictatorship in the 1960s, and the generalised climate of fear and demobilization of rural workers that resulted, ‘the struggle for ‘rights’, within legal parameters, came to constitute the basic directive to action of CONTAG’ (my emphasis). She concludes that, ‘...The point of departure that comes to guide the practise of CONTAG is that rights existed but were not respected....In this way the recourse to legal justice became the framework of action.’ 9 This is another charge levelled at the MST by Jungmann (Jungmann, Raul, 2003). 10 Wagner Gonçalves speech delivered to the conference on The Institutional and Political Challenges of Human Rights Reform in Brazil organised by the Oxford Centre for Brazilian Studies, St Antony’s College, 13 October 2000. His point was underlined in a special edition of the Brazilian weekly Veja (15 August 2007) dealing with ‘the plague of impunity’ from its ruling classes. One article (‘Por que os corruptos não ficam presos’ <http://arquivoetc.blogspot.com/2007/08/por-que-os-corruptos-no-ficam- presos.html> 11 August 2007) examined 10 high profile corruption investigations (between December
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	20	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
2003 and 2004) of politicians, businessmen and public officials. Legal loopholes and appeals mechanisms were so successfully exploited by lawyers that the initial figure of 245 arrests was distilled into 64 convictions and only two imprisonments. These, it should be emphasised, are instances where the justice system spent considerable sums in the investigative phases. 11 Ibid. 12 Gonçalves, Wagner, ibid. 13 The same study commissioned by the Brazilian Bar Association (Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil, OAB)), revealed that 30.9 percent of respondents had ‘no faith whatsoever’ in the judiciary and 26.7 percent only had ‘partial confidence’ in the institution. Among the chief reasons cited for lack of confidence in the justice system as a whole was unequal application of the law, privileging white people and the rich (24.3 percent); and corruption involving judges, prosecutors and lawyers (22 percent). ‘Pesquisa revela falta de credibilidade e conhecimento em relação ao Judiciário’, Jornal do Brasil Online, <http://jbonline.terra.com.br/jb/papel/brasil/2003/11/10/jorbra20031110005.html> 11 August 2007. 14 Desembargador Gercino da Silva, interview by author, Brasília, 25 October 1999. 15 For a comprehensive guide to the Brazilian Constitution see Silva (Silva, José Alfonso da, 2004). 16 The August 14th 2003 decision of eight Federal Supreme Court judges to annul Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s presidential decree expropriating 13,200 hectares in Rio Grande do Sul carried tremendous political weight. The expropriation was the largest of its kind ever proposed in Rio Grande do Sul and would have allowed 530 families to be settled. However, the key question before the judges was not so much whether the property was productive or not, but whether the landowner in question had been properly served with notice of an impending audit by INCRA. Lawyers for the landowner argued that the agency had failed in its legal duty while lawyers on behalf of the President argued that notification had taken place but that access to the property had been impeded by landowners. The agency had returned later but neglected to serve a new notification. It was the absence of the new notification – and the landowner’s participation in the audit - that formed the basis of the landowner’s case. One of Lula’s own appointees sided with the majority, who on administrative grounds rejected the arguments made on behalf of the President of the Republic. Another Lula appointee, however, suggested that landowner had contributed to the situation through his own reluctance to be notified. For a highly critical analysis of the socio-legal background to the case see Stédile, Miguel, (2003) ‘STF suspende maior desapropriação do RS’ <http://www.midiaindependente.org.pt/blue/2003/06/256226.shtml> 10th June 2003. A critical evaluation of the legal background to the case is set out in Sérgio, Frei (2003) ‘Informações jurídicas sobre a desapropriação de terra’, <http://www.midiaindependente.org.pt/blue/2003/08/260961.shtml> 13th August 2003. The decision of each judge can be accessed on the Supremo Tribunal Federal’s site (http://stf.gov.br/) under mandado de seguranca number MS24547. 17 For a thorough discussion of these issues from a radical perspective by one of Brazil’s leading thinkers and practitioners, see Marés, Carlos Fredrico, 2003. 18 Caros Amigos, Ano IV, No. 39, June 2000. 19 Jacques Alfonsin, interview by author, Porto Alegre, 24 June 1997. 20 João Pedro Stedile, interview by author, Campinas, 18 March 2000. 21 Indeed, once Strozake was qualified, Greenhalgh would note that in dealing with movement affairs, ‘these days I am subordinated to him.’ Luis Eduardo Greenhalgh, interview by author, São Paulo, September 1999. 22 Already under the Cardoso administration some 15 lawyers were contracted in this way. Under Lula this number was expanded to 25 in an agreement made between INCRA on the one hand, the CPT and the MST’s legal representative, ANCA (Associação Nacional de Cooperação Agrícola). That agreement expired in March 2005 but others have now taken its place. While detractors see this as a waste of money, proponents argue that such work, which encompasses the defence of all militants in rural areas rather than just those of the MST, is essential given the conflictive nature of the rural sphere and the absence of an effective system of public defenders. 23 For an extended discussion of RENAP’s early formation and subsequent development, see Gorsdorf, Leandro, Franklin, 2004. 24 Cited Gorsdorf (Gorsdorf, Leandro, Franklin, 2004 p 96). 25One example is the movement’s use of ‘manutenção de posse’, maintenance of possession, as a means of forestalling counterattacks. When an area is occupied it is common for landowners to seek the ‘reintegração de posse’, literally meaning the reintegration of possession, via the courts. The maintenance of possession, is one means of trying to forestall such a move. The apparent simplicity of possession belies a host of legal complexities with massive social and political ramifications. By way
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	21	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
of introduction consider these comments from Jacques Alfonsin ‘In the vast majority of ações possessorias (possession actions) what is of importance is not so much the title of land ownership, but the occupation. The proceedings that the owners undertake generally rely on the title. The judge never asks whether that person is actually occupying this area. With a mere glance at the land register the judge grants the injunction. We have a longstanding struggle to get judges to see this otherwise. The reintegração de posse, the action they most frequently use, presupposes possession. And yet these people often don’t have possession. They may be living in the United States, in England, or elsewhere. They undertake legal proceedings and the judge grants it to them. So even from the point of view of positive law the actions of the judge are highly debatable. In an area where the person does not have possession, they undertake proceedings for the reintegration of possession. Why does he go for a reintegration of possession? Because these proceedings involve an injunction.’ Jacques Alfonsin, interview by author, Porto Alegre, 24 June 1997. 26 Luis Eduardo Greenhalgh, interview by author, São Paulo, 3 September 1999. 27 I devote two chapters of my forthcoming book to the Pontal do Paranapanema, see Mesaros (Meszaros, George, 2006). For further background on this region see Leite, José Ferrari (Leite, José Ferrari, 1998) and Fernandes (Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano, 1996), as well the publications by São Paulo’s state land agency, Instituto de Terras do Estado de São Paulo (ITESP), Cadernos ITESP (ITESP, 1998a, 1998b), and Fernandes and Ramalho (Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano, and Ramalho, Cristiane Barbosa, 2001). 28 The origin of the term is said to lie in the practice of taking ‘grilos’ (crickets), and locking them up in a drawer with fictitious deeds. When the crickets died they would secrete liquids that would discolour the paper – prematurely ageing it. A slightly different version has it that the crickets eat the paper thereby ageing its edges, and their excrement discolours it. In both instances, though, authentication of the document would be completed by networks of corrupt notaries. 29 João Pedro Stedile, interview by author, Campinas, 18 March 2000. 30 José Rainha, interview by author, Teodoro Sampaio, 20 March 2000. 31 To the best of my knowledge there is no systematic inquiry into this question. The idea that law is a meaningful category of reference in people’s lives needs to be treated with caution. Leonilde Sérvolo Medeiros notes that even in situations of extreme violence perpetrated by landowners, rural workers often do not look to law for mediation of conflicts. This may be because of fear of the consequences, unawareness of its provisions, or lack of access. But she also acknowledges that other factors might be in play: ‘in many situations, at least apparently, domination is exercised without contestation in a complex imbrication between consent...and coercion’. (Medeiros, Leonilde, Sérvolo 2002 p 186). 32 José Rainha, interview by author, Teodoro Sampaio, 20 March 2000. 33 I discuss this ruling in Meszaros (Meszaros, George 2000). 34 See MST, 1998, p 3. 35 For a critical analysis of the Brazilian judiciary, see Dallari (Dallari, Dalmo de Abreu 1996). 36 At the beginning of the 1990s the Alternative Law movement emerged with considerable force in Rio Grande do Sul. On both theoretical and practical grounds a group of judges questioned claims that Brazilian justice was in any way value neutral and even whether value neutrality was a workable proposition. For practitioners and academics who came to ally themselves to the group a key issue was how to conceptualise the legal order’s failure to address issues of substantive inequality while developing practical alternatives to it. For a useful introduction to the subject see Lédio Rosa de Andrade (1996). For an example of its practical application to the Public Ministry see the work of two public prosecutors, Machado and Goulart (Machado, Antônio Alberto and Marcelo, Pedroso Goulart, 1992). 37 On the back of this decision the MST’s in-house legal service produced a pamphlet with the title ‘Land Occupations are Constitutional, Legitimate and Necessary’; see MST - Setor de Direitos Humanos (MST - Setor de Direitos Humanos, 1997). 38 It pays to read articles 184, 185 and 186 in their entirety rather than as freestanding objects. Article 184 permits the State to expropriate lands that are not fulfilling their ‘social function’ and to destine these towards agrarian reform. Article 185 deals with the protection of productive land, while article 186 deals with property’s social function. The latter article reads: ‘The social function is met when the rural property complies simultaneously with, according to the criteria and standards prescribed by law, the following requirements: I - rational and adequate use; II - adequate use of available natural resources and preservation of the environment; III - compliance with the provisions that regulate labour relations; IV - exploitation that favours the well-being of the owners and labourers.’ Source: Vajda, Zimbres and Souza (Vajda, Istvan, Zimbres, Patrícia de Queiroz Carvalho and Souza, Vanira Tavares de, 1998, p 121).
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	22	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
39 Gilmar Mauro, interview by author, Brasília, 10 August 2000. 40 This letter, issued on December 13, 1999, became known as the Carta de Ribeirão Preto. 41 The launch of a Manifesto for Agrarian Reform in July 2003 is not specifically directed to the MST but is symptomatic of a broader legal support for agrarian reform. The document, signed by 30 leading practitioners (including judges, prosecutors, lawyers and law professors) outlined the legal case for agrarian reform as well as expressing the hope that progressive case law would at last inform the views of other practitioners. See Manifesto de Juristas Brasileiros pela Reforma Agrária, available at: <http://www.cidadania.org.br/imprimir.asp?conteudo_id=1336&secao_id=98> 23 July 2003. 42 ‘Jungmann propõe que o governo ‘baixe o pau’’, Estado de São Paulo, 29/07/2003. 43 The article, entitled ‘A fome não faz de famintos criminosos’, is cited in ‘Procurador-geral diz que invasão é crime intolerável’, Estado de São Paulo, 04/07/2003. 44 Idem. 45 In 1997, Minister Nelson Jobim tried to target more MST activists for prosecution by enlisting the support of the Public Ministry in states where tension was particularly high. In the case of São Paulo his overtures were firmly rejected. 46 ‘Fonteles defende invasão de áreas improdutivas’ (Jornal do Brasil, 14/08/2003) <http://jbonline.terra.com.br/jb/papel/brasil/2003/08/13/jorbra20030813014.html> 14 August 2003; ‘Ruralista Critica Procurador (Jornal do Brasil, 14/08/2003) <http://jbonline.terra.com.br/jb/papel/brasil/2003/08/13/jorbra20030813017.html> 14 August 2003; ‘Fonteles volta a apoiar invasão de terra improdutiva’, Estado de São Paulo, 14/08/2003. 47 Urbano Ruiz, member of the Association of Judges for Democracy, interview by author, São Paulo, 2 September 1999. For details of this case see note 13 above. 48 In a recent interview the fourth judge appointed by Lula, Eros Roberto Grau, affirmed his view that the figure of the politically neutral judge was a fiction. When asked to comment upon a loaded question, namely whether social movements are in conflict with the spirit of the law, he retreated arguing that it would be ‘imprudent to pass comment’ and ‘the federal constitution must be respected by all sides.’ ‘Novo ministro do STF defende Estado mais forte na economia’, Folha de São Paulo, 28/06/2004. 49 ‘Ruralistas eufóricos, sem terra revoltados’, Estado de São Paulo, 15/08/2003. 50 The relevant measures, Portaria/ MDA/ no 62, of 27/03/ 2001 and Medida Provisória no 2.183-56, of 24/08/2001, are available on INCRA’s website at <http://www.incra.gov.br/estrut/snda/iriv.htm> 27/03/ 2001 and <http://www.incra.gov.br/estrut/pj/medidas/2109.htm> 24/08/2001respectively. 51 I briefly discuss the motivations in Meszaros (Meszaros, George, 2000). 52 Author interview with Judge Gersino José da Silva Filho, Agrarian Ombudsman, Brasília, 25/10/99. 53 See the Ombudsman’s comments on page 10 above.
References
Andrade, Lédio Rosa de (1996) Introdução ao Direito Aleternativo Brasileiro (Porto Alegre, Livraria do Advogado Editora).
Antunes, Ricardo (1988) A Rebeldia do Trabalho: O Confronto Operário no ABC Paulista, As Greves de 1978/80 (São Paulo, Editora Ensaio/UNICAMP).
Dallari, Dalmo de Abreu (1996) O Poder dos Juizes (São Paulo, Saraiva). Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano (1996) MST: Formação e Territorialização (São
Paulo, Editoral Hucitec).
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano and Ramalho, Cristiane Barbosa (2001) ‘Luta Pela Terra e Desenvolvimento Rural no Pontal do Paranapanema’ Estudos Avançados, 43 <http://64.233.183.104/search?q=cache:6zLLS1wGaiAJ:www.scielo.br/scielo.php%3 Fpid%3DS0103-
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	23	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
40142001000300018%26script%3Dsci_arttext+Luta+Pela+Terra+e+Desenvolviment o+Rural+no+Pontal+do+Paranapanema&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=uk> 22 November 2007.
Gorsdorf, Leandro Franklin (2004). ‘Advocacia Popular na Construção de um Novo Senso Comum Jurídico.’ Ph.D Thesis, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba.
Instituto de Terras do Estado de São Paulo (ITESP) (1998a) Terra e Cidadãos: Aspectos da Ação de Regularização Fundiária no Estado de São Paulo, Cadernos ITESP, 4 (São Paulo, ITESP).
Instituto de Terras do Estado de São Paulo (ITESP) (1998b) Mediação Campo: Estratégias Ação em Situações de Conflito Fundiário, Cadernos ITESP, 6 (São Paulo, ITESP).
Jungmann, Raul (2003). ‘Carta Aberta ao Presidente Lula’, Folha de São Paulo, 15 July.
Leite, José Ferrari (1998) A Ocupação do Pontal do Paranapanema (São Paulo, Editora Hucitec).
Machado, Antônio Alberto and Marcelo, Pedroso Goulart (1992) Ministério Público e Direito Alternativo: O MP e a Defesa do Regime Democrático e da Ordem Jurídica (São Paulo, Editora Académica).
Marés, Carlos Frederico (2003) A Função Social da Terra (Porto Alegre: Editora Sergio Antonio Fabris).
Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de (2002) ‘Dimensões Políticas da Violência no Campo’ in Molina, Monica Castagna, Júnior, José Geraldo de Sousa and Neto, Fernando da Costa Tourinhi (eds.) O Direito Achado na Rua: Introdução Crítica ao Direito Agrário Vol. 3. (Brasília / São Paulo, Editora UnB/Imprensa Oficial do Estado de São Paulo).
Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de (1989) História dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. (Rio de Janeiro, FASE).
Meszaros, George (2006) Law Makers, Law Breakers: The State and Landless Workers’ Movement in Brazil (Unpublished manuscript).
Meszaros, George (2000) ‘Taking the Land into their Hands: The Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian State’ Journal of Law and Society, 27 pp 517 – 541.
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA) (2004) Relatório da Ouvidoria Agrária 05/2004 (Brasília, MDA).
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA) (2003) Proposta de Plano Nacional de Reforma Agrária (Brasília, MDA).
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article
Meszaros, G	24	The MST and the Rule of Law in Brazil
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) (1998) A Lei e as Ocupaçcões de Terras (São Paulo, MST).
MST - Setor de Direitos Humanos (1997) As Ocupaçcõoes de Terras são Constitucionais, Legítimas e Necessárias (São Paulo, MST).
Payne, Leigh (2000) The Armed Right Wing, Uncivil Movements: The Armed Right Wing and Democracy in Latin America (Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press).
Sérgio, Frei (2003) ‘Informações jurídicas sobre a desapropriação de terra’, <http://www.midiaindependente.org.pt/blue/2003/08/260961.shtml>	13th	August 2003.
Stédile, Miguel, (2003) ‘STF suspende maior desapropriação do RS’ <http://www.midiaindependente.org.pt/blue/2003/06/256226.shtml> 10th June 2003.
Silva, José Alfonso da (2004) O Curso de Direito Constitucional Positivo (São Paulo, Malheiros).
Vajda, Istvan, Zimbres, Patrícia de Queiroz Carvalho and Souza, Vanira Tavares de (trans.) (1998) Federative Constitution of Brazil, 1988 (Brasília, Senado Federal).
LGD 2007 Issue 1	http://go.warwick.ac.uk/elj/lgd/2007_1/meszaros	Refereed Article

2005
JCEPS
Education
Teacher Education for Social Transformation and its Links to Progressive Social Movements: The case of the Landless Workers Movement in Brazil
Júlio Emílio Diniz-Pereira[2]
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil

Abstract
This paper discusses the experience of a teacher education program that has been developed by the Landless Workers Movement (MST), one of the largest and most important social movements in contemporary Latin America. The MST has struggled for agrarian reform as well as social and economic justice in Brazil. One of the lessons that the MST has learned from its history in Brazil is that it is not enough to struggle only for land. Education is also a quite important dimension of the MST's struggles. The MST's pedagogy is linked to collective work and the construction of humanist and socialist values. The movement has established pre-service and in-service teacher education programs for those who teach at schools in its settlements and encampments. This paper discusses, then, the challenges and possibilities of teacher education programs linked to progressive social movements in their attempts to implement an effective social justice agenda.
Keywords: Teacher education; social justice; progressive social movements; Brazil

Introduction
The Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Workers Movement), or simply the MST, is one of the largest and most important social movements in contemporary Latin America and one of the most successful grassroots movements in the world. In its twenty years of existence[3], the MST has struggled for agrarian reform as well as social and economic justice in Brazil, achieving quite impressive results.
The movement is made up of people from some of the poorest segments of Brazilian society[4]. It mobilizes what Bales (1999), in the context of the current global economy, calls "disposable people."[5] The landless people are peasants whose lands have been expropriated and who have been excluded from other basic rights of citizenship. They are also rural workers and unemployed people who struggle to be reintegrated into the labor markets and social arenas from which they have been expelled as a result of the unequal process of capitalism development (Fernandes, 2000; Wright & Wolford, 2003).
The landless people in Brazil struggle not simply for land but for all the basic conditions of human existence. The Landless Workers Movement has three main goals: 1) to redistribute land to those who work it; 2) to achieve agrarian reform - which the movement considers to be much broader and more complex than land redistribution, and which must entail the attainment of the full scope of social rights that define full citizenship; 3) to build a socialist society.
The utopian vision of building a different society, a socialist society[6], is indeed in the mind of many MST's activists, as can be seen through one of my interviewees' statements: "We, who are from the MST, would like to show we want to construct another society. This is our utopia: to construct a different society."[7]
Actually, for the women and men who participate in the MST, there is no other alternative but to struggle for deep, structural transformations in Brazilian society. It is clear to them that the simple "reforms" of the current capitalist model of society would only postpone their suffering to some point in the future, leading them once again to the same situation of exclusion that first impelled them to establish this mass social movement.
The exclusion of the landless rural workers is the result of a history of huge inequalities generated by the development of capitalism in Brazil. Even facing huge difficulties and serious challenges, the landless people resist exploitation and expropriation and have been contributing to the transformation of social and economic reality in Brazil. They have developed and expanded by making mistakes, overcoming problems, and dealing with different issues as the political landscape changes.
Although conservative groups and the mainstream media in Brazil accuse the MST of being a major threat to Brazilian democracy, if one conceives of democracy in terms of social justice, equality, and shared power, "one could argue that the sort of revolution the MST supports is exactly what Brazilian democracy needs in order to become truly democratic" (Wright & Wolford, 2003, pp. 314-315).
Finally, the landless people are not only excluded from their lands, but also from other basic rights of citizenship. In order to conquer these rights, they have understood that the struggle for land is linked to the struggle for living with dignity. Through their struggles, they seek to trample other fences beyond those of the latifundium. Knocking down the invisible yet powerful fence around knowledge, through an ambitious educational project, is another challenge facing the MST. This specific topic - the MST's educational work - will be briefly discussed in the next section.
An Overview of the MST's Educational Work
One of the principal lessons that the Landless Workers Movement has learned from its history in Brazil is that it is not enough to struggle only for land. Education is another central dimension of the MST's struggles. Due to the high rates of illiteracy and low rates of schooling in the acampamentos (encampments) and assentamentos (settlements), the landless families consider formal education and schooling crucial. However, for the MST, education is not restricted to school and classroom. One's involvement with the entire movement is already considered the greater "school."
The MST's pedagogy, closely linked to a collective work ethic and the construction of humanist and socialist values, has been developing since the 1980s when the MST's education committees began discussing educational issues with the landless communities. The movement has also established pre-service and in-service teacher education programs for those who teach at schools in its settlements and encampments.
The educational principles of the MST have emerged from its praxis (practice and theory combined)[8]. They have been established collectively through what the movement calls "método de princípios" ("method of principles"). The main purpose of this method is "to transform the accumulated lessons of all prior experiences and discussions into pedagogical principles that could lead (without prescribing) the educational work in all encampments and settlements in the country" (Caldart, 2000, p. 166).
The MST does not follow a unique pedagogy or an educational theory developed by a specific thinker. It constitutes itself as a pedagogical subject that incorporates various pedagogies and elements from many educational currents, adapting and modifying them according to people's needs in each settlement and encampment (Caldart, 2000; Harnecker, 2002).
A crucial aspect of the MST education project is that landless people must become subjects of their own pedagogy. The process of transforming people into educators who reflect upon their own education takes place through a permanent relationship between theory and practice. It is also a direct consequence of the "fact that people are part of a social movement." Thus, "the landless people of the MST are not only the subjects of an educational experience and human development, but also challenge themselves to become the subjects of theoretical reflection upon the pedagogy that they live" (Harnecker, 2002; Caldart, 2000, p. 54).
As mentioned above, although this pedagogy goes beyond the school, it also passes through the school. However, in order that the school incorporates the MST's pedagogy, there has to be a process of what the movement calls "school occupation."
The MST uses the term "school occupation" because the strategy landless people employ to force the state or the municipality to provide schools for their children is very similar to the one they use in order to get land. By occupying the school, the movement means "establishing the school first, beginning the work and the formal enrollments that they know are mandatory, despite precarious material conditions, and thus initiating the negotiations with the government in order to legalize the school." The movement knows that if it starts first negotiating with local governments, the process of establishing a school may take months or even years (Caldart, 2000; Harnecker, 2002).
One of my interviewees told me about her experience of helping to establish a school in one of the MST's encampments, more specifically, in an old stable, by following the movement's strategy of "occupying the school:"
It was amazing! I've learned a lot from this experience. I had learned from my participation in the union and the party that we should first negotiate in order to win something. However, in the movement, the logic is just the opposite. First we conquer, we do something and so we start negotiating in order to keep that conquest. And in these terms, the establishment of the school wasn't anything different. We cleaned up the whole stable, decorated it, and so established the school there. So, we registered and enrolled all the kids, who were living in the camp, at the school. After doing that, we started negotiating the formal establishment of the school with the authorities in the town. But again, we did that after the school was already functioning.
[...]
I was trembling. I had never participated in a negotiation like this before. So, I said to the Municipal Educational Secretary: "I don't know how to use beautiful words, but I am really excited about seeing the kids studying at the school. We have already started planting a beautiful garden over there. They are learning Math through the lettuce and onion gardens. It is amazing! Madam, this experience has to go on."
Caldart (2000; 2003b) discusses three other meanings of "school occupation" in the movement. First, because, as mentioned above, the landless families have mobilized themselves in order to struggle for the right to attend school, "school occupation" means the process of ensuring the extension of the social right to attend school to landless people. Second, the movement has taken on the task of organizing and articulating this mobilization in an organic way, producing a specific pedagogical project in the schools that have been conquered and training educators in a way that they can work toward this perspective. Thus, "school occupation" also means a planned and systematic process of incorporating the school into the movement's dynamic. Third, because the school is also seen as a political matter, "school occupation" means that the school is part of the strategy of struggling for agrarian reform, linking the movement's general concerns to its participants' political development.
There are tensions and conflicts in this process. As other interviewees argue, the "school occupation" process is more complex and longer than the process of occupying latifundia. According to these educators:
It is easier to knock down a latifundium fence than to overcome the invisible fence around knowledge.
It is very easy to knock down a latifundium fence. However, it is very difficult to knock down the other "fences" of exclusion. For instance, the "educational fence" is very hard to knock down. Knowledge has been very concentrated...
Caldart (2000) states that traditional schooling and the movement demonstrate logics that contradict one another. Their identities are usually conflicting identities. On the one hand, as mentioned above, the MST, as a progressive social and cultural movement, increasingly insists upon humanist and socialist values in education. On the other hand, traditional schools usually subordinate themselves to the immediacy of market demands. For instance, in her research, Ribeiro (2001) found that parents and teachers in some settlement schools seemed to agree that it is really difficult to introduce cooperative relationships in teaching, even in the MST's schools, because school tends to promote competition, individualism and submission.
As also mentioned above, in the MST's educational work, the children and the teachers are conceived as "pedagogical subjects." They are seen as privileged links in the dialogue between the movement and the school (Beltrame, 2000).
The active participation of the MST children, who are also called the Sem Terrinha (little landless ones)[9], is a crucial element in the movement's educational work. Although the movement wishes to avoid transforming the pupils into premature adults, the MST strongly supports its children's active participation in the movement and, more specifically, in their schools. There have been different ways for children's participation in the MST. As one of my interviewees puts it:
The Sem Terrinha is in the MST because of her/his father and mother... The children are there for the occupation, they are there when evictions occur, they are there when the Sem Terra [the adult] is arrested, and for the mobilization... so, they are together and the little kids also participate in this process. The little kids are not appendages; they are an important part of the process and they have to be understood as subjects in this process, while recognizing that they have a different role... So, it is really important that the kids realize they are part of a struggle and this is one of the reasons that their school has to be different...
Caldart (2000) states that, since the very beginning, the children have been an important part of the movement's dynamic through their participation, with their parents, in important MST actions such as mobilizations, demonstrations, and even land occupations. Moreover, the author argues, children have also been able to create their own space in the movement. They have organized themselves in order to demand their rights and make negotiations in their own communities.
Harnecker (2002) states that in settlements where work is organized in a collective way, the children often feel motivated to create their own organization. The author cites one settlement where "the children got used to holding weekly assemblies to analyze their daily problems and distribute the tasks they could take on in the settlement" (p. 92). In her opinion, these experiences make it easy for the school to be a miniature organization of the committees and work teams in the encampments and settlements.
Children's active participation also takes place at their schools. For instance, they may put pressure on teachers to change the curriculum to connect it more closely to their lives and realities. In Caldart's opinion, the children "are ready to assume their condition as subjects and, who knows, lead themselves in the process of occupying the school" (2000, p. 173).
Since 1996, the MST has organized an annual meeting - the Encontro dos Sem Terrinha (meeting of the little landless ones) - which, according to Wright and Wolford (2003), "brings together the children of MST settlers and educates them about the ongoing struggle for the land" (p. 333).
One of my interviewees told me a bit about the entire process of organizing the Encontro dos Sem Terrinha in the state of Pernambuco. According to her, one topic is chosen each year and the children work on this topic at the schools, writing essays, drawing pictures, doing research, and discussing the subject with their classmates. At the end of the year, usually in October, the kids attend this meeting and share their ideas and their opinions. She assessed how this process has taken place in the movement. She explains:
Of course there is a purpose to this activity. All of our activities have intentionality. When we think about this meeting, we think about what we have to do before, during, and after it takes place. The "before," which is the preparation process, and the "during," which is the three-day meeting, have been very rich; however, we have had problems with the "after." Unfortunately, the teachers have not been able to explore and take advantage of the experiences which the kids have had during these three days.
The MST also emphasizes the importance of teachers' participation in the movement and their active involvement in the community. Caldart (2000) states that the MST's history of schooling has had the transformative effect of giving these teachers a specific collective identity that goes beyond their profession without abandon it. To be a Sem Terra teacher, as Caldart argues, means to have "an identity that has been constructed simultaneously with the MST's progressive 'occupation' of the school" (p. 187).
According to the author, "Sem Terra teacher" is the name that can be given to an MST character who within herself[10] combines three different identity components: "first, the condition of being a woman and the whole grid of meanings that this implies from a human, social, political, and historical point of view; second, her professional identity as an educator; and third her participation in an organization that struggles for land and that, in turn, produces new meanings for her condition as both a woman and an educator" (p. 187).
Caldart argues that at the same time that the MST is able to shape the educator's new identity, the emergence of the Sem Terra teachers leads to new characteristics for the movement's identity as well. One of the results of the construction of this new collective identity for teachers has been a significant increase in women's participation in the MST (see also Diniz-Pereira, 2005).
The teachers - more specifically, the female teachers - who began to participate in the MST as the wives of landless rural workers, brought a serious concern about the teaching profession to the larger struggle over land. According to Caldart (2000), "In the same sense that, earlier, [they] were important actors pressuring the MST to struggle for schools, [they] continue on the stage today, pressuring the MST to create more space for education on its agenda" (p. 186).
McCowan (2003) states that although the MST's national education committee formulates the principal orientations of the movement's educative work, and coordinators at the state and regional levels play the chief role in enforcing them, "teachers do have influence on pedagogical and organizational decision-making in schools" (p. 8). He argues that teacher participation seems to have a dual function in the MST: "firstly the 'organizational' aspect, creating a cooperative and efficient body of workers, and secondly to increase their identification with and commitment to the community and the movement" (p. 8).
At the beginning of the MST's history of education, there was a tendency to have tensions and conflicts concerning "inside" teachers versus "outside" teachers. The movement soon realized that the inside/outside difference should not be seen in absolute terms. The point was not to exclude all those teachers who did not live in the settlements or encampments, but to demand that each teacher - no matter where s/he came from - be truly engaged with the children and the community (Harnecker, 2002).
As mentioned above, the movement has highlighted teacher education as another crucial activity and strategy within its educational work. This topic, as the main topic of this paper, will be discussed separately in the next sections.
The MST's teacher education program
Among the MST's educational actions, teacher education is indeed one of its priorities. In the MST's view, teacher education should not be restricted to attending a training program[11]. Actually, the movement considers its "teacher education program" as a set of several strategies and educative practices that includes attendance in a "pre-service" teacher-training program. Similar to its entire educational project, the MST's teacher education program is also politically committed to a broader strategy of social transformation.
The MST's educational and teaching principles are presented in the three main dimensions of its teacher education program:
	•	Technical and professional preparation: It promotes scientific and practical knowledge, skills, behavior, care, and ethical attitudes regarding thinking and doing education, with special attention to the needs of rural areas, agrarian reform and social justice;
	•	Political preparation: It entails the development of an historical and class consciousness to help educators understand that their practices are linked to a larger purpose of positive social transformation;
	•	Cultural preparation: It emphasizes being able to creatively organize and build a culture of cooperation and solidarity (Caldart, 1997).
From these three dimensions of its teacher education program, it is possible to discern the MST's political and ideological intention toward a structural transformation of Brazilian society. Actually, it is difficult to separate the major goals of the movement, in terms of promoting agrarian reform and social justice, from its educational objectives. They are completely interwoven. Even the technical and professional dimension of this program has a clear connection to its broader political purpose. In an attempt to overcome the isolation and apolitical character of schoolteachers, the MST also tries to promote collaborative teacher research in its schools. Grounded in Freirean ideas, research is conceived here as a mutual process for students and teachers to question existing knowledge, power, and conditions[12]. Thus, community research by teachers, with students as co-investigators, establishes a student-centered, democratic process through which curriculum is built from the bottom up rather than from the top down[13].
Therefore, the MST intends to construct a teacher identity that is not neutral. It is rather a professional identity that is explicitly committed to social justice. Rather than reinforcing individualism in teaching, this professional identity is developed through experiences of solidarity and collective work.
In the MST's teacher education program, there is a multiplicity of initiatives that take place at the local, regional, state, and national levels and that represent fundamental spaces both for the pedagogical and political growth of the teachers and for the acquisition of knowledge to be socialized in the classroom (Beltrame, 2000, p. 139).
As I will discuss below, there are many strategies and activities that the movement considers to be part of its teacher education program. Examples include: participation in the collective struggles of the MST's education committees; systematization of pedagogical practices; participation in collective production and socialization of materials for the MST's educational project; attending and participating in meetings, seminars, workshops and short courses; and so forth.
MST's "pre-service" teacher-training programs[14]
There are two different types of formal "pre-service" teacher-training programs in the MST. Both are responsible for preparing and certifying elementary schoolteachers for the movement. One of these programs, the Magistério, is taken at the high school level; the other one is called Pedagogia da Terra, and it is taken at the college level. Both programs are divided in two parts: Tempo Escola (School Time) is the period of time when the student teachers get involved in academic and political discussions about teaching and education, take several academic courses, participate in political discussions, and study the movement's materials; and Tempo Comunidade (Community Time) is the period of time when the "student teachers" stay at a school in one of the MST's settlements or encampments and become involved with a set of activities in the community.
1.The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério)
The MST's teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério) has been developed since 1990. Its main goal is to train and certify elementary schoolteachers and educators who are teaching at schools in the MST's encampments and settlements.
In terms of its legal situation, this teacher-training program is a high-school level adult education program that provides an elementary teacher certification for the attendees.
The total duration of this program is two and a half years. As mentioned above, it is split in two parts: In the first part, or what the MST calls Tempo-Escola (School Time), the student teachers must attend classes (six hours a day) during the school vacations[15] and get involved in many other pedagogical activities, including participation in the self-management of the program. Portuguese, mathematics, and methods are among the required academic courses. The structure and dynamics of Brazil's political conjuncture and the history and goals of the movement are some of the political issues that are debated. According to Caldart (1997), the Tempo-Escola (School Time) is divided in three smaller "tempos" ("times"):
	•	"Times" linked to the official curricular development of the program: attending classes (six hours a day); attending and participating in seminars for the studying and discussion of specific topics (two or three hours per week); individual and collective reading (around 30 minutes a day); keeping a diary (20 minutes each day); and physical education activities (also 20 minutes a day).
	•	"Times" linked to the self-management of the program and the development of specific skills: working in the committees created to manage the program; attending workshops and short courses for developing specific skills needed for the self-management of the program; attending and participating in meetings and assemblies which are part of the collective administration of the program.
	•	"Times" linked to the cultural development of the group: celebration of the mística (spirit or spirituality/dramatization)[16]; individual and collective entertainment; keeping informed through the news; attending parties; visiting other places in the region; artistic workshops and so forth.
In the second part of the program, or what the movement calls Tempo-Comunidade (Community Time) the student teachers develop interdisciplinary activities that are socially useful to the community. Drawing upon Caldart (1997), the Tempo-Comunidade (Community Time) is divided into the following five smaller "tempos" ("times"):
	•	"Time" to continue the work they have been doing for the community, but now reflecting upon their pedagogical actions and taking notes about their practices (keeping a journal);
	•	"Time" for putting into practice different pedagogical activities, experiencing methodological challenges in each of the MST's educational frentes (fronts);
	•	"Time" to begin to do research activities that will culminate in a Trabalho de Pesquisa-Ação (Action-Research Project), the TPA. Student teachers will then write a final report (Monografia) on their research and present it to their teacher educators and classmates in the program.
	•	"Time" to develop additional involvement in community activities in order to deepen their knowledge about the broader reality of the settlement or encampment and to cultivate "an ethic of engaging, commitment, and solidarity."
	•	"Time" to apply the collective self-management logic that they have experienced during the Tempo-Escola (School Time) to their schools.
The main purposes of the MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério) are: 1. to train agrarian reform educators[17] with technical skills to work in the MST; 2. to train and certify teachers to teach in settlements and encampments schools; 3. to continue the construction of the MST's educational project and a specific pedagogy for the schools in the Brazilian countryside.
The MST's educators who attend this program are chosen through a selection process that takes place at the state level and adheres to certain criteria, such as: candidates be at least eighteen years old and have graduated from elementary school[18]; they must be involved in developing some educational activity in settlements or encampments; they must be recommended by the community or any other level of the MST organization; and finally, they must be committed to the continuation of their educational work in the settlements or encampments after graduation.
2. The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra)
Like the high-school program, the MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra)[19] is divided in two parts: Tempo Escola (School Time) and Tempo Comunidade (Community Time). Besides taking academic courses, the "student teachers" also discuss political issues and study the MST educational materials during the Tempo Escola (School Time). In the Tempo Comunidade (Community Time), they read other materials, do "concrete activities" at the schools, keep a journal and participate in an action-research project. The program was established in order to deal with both rural education and the movement's specific needs.
MST participants from different Brazilian states have attended this program. They are selected by the MST national education committee following recommendations that come from the education committee at the state level and which meet some political and ideological criteria. For instance, the attendees of this program have to be "politically committed people," that is, people who are very active in their communities. They must be involved with educational tasks in the encampments or settlements and must return what they learn in the program to the community. Besides holding a secondary school diploma, they should have already demonstrated some "aptitude" for academic matters. Finally, they have to be people who hold an "advanced critical consciousness."
The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra) has been developed through a partnership between the movement and certain public and private Brazilian universities[20] Although it is not an easy task to find teacher educators from the university who are willing to teach in this program, the MST counts on those who have some political and ideological affinity with the movement. Moreover, some of the teacher educators who teach in the program come from the MST.
MST's in-service teacher education activities
As part of its teacher education program, the MST also develops a set of activities for certified teachers who have been teaching at schools in the MST's settlements and encampments.
These teachers regularly receive pedagogical materials, which are produced with great care, involving input from educators, professionals with expertise in specific areas, and MST leaders. The language is very accessible to teachers and members of the community. The teachers, who must discuss these materials in the local education committees, generally report that the materials are very helpful for developing a better understanding of the MST's educational and political purposes.
Teachers' participation in local education committees is one of the most effective activities in terms of their in-service education. Once a week, they study the MST educational materials, discuss the school curriculum, and plan lessons together. Students and members of the community also participate in these committees. As one of my interviewees remarks,
We have worked really hard on the organization of these committees... as well as the necessity of teachers continuing to study and the importance of the pedagogical committees...
However, it is not enough to simply set up these committees at the local level and to send the MST's materials to the schools. The teachers request and receive support in terms of discussing and analyzing these materials. Thus, teachers' pedagogical support is also integrated with the MST's in-service teacher education program. This is one of the activities developed by the MST education committee at regional or state level (Beltrame, 2000).
One of the strategies to provide pedagogical support to the teachers comes through the oficinas de trabalho (training workshops). These workshops have become privileged spaces for the teachers who teach at different schools to discuss and share their practices and experiences. Practical activities are emphasized in these workshops. Celebration of the mística is another pedagogical activity developed during the workshops.
According to Beltrame (2000), while the activities developed during these workshops attempt to value the group's knowledge and culture, they also offer elements to help teachers rework and improve their teaching practices[21].
Another activity in the MST's in-service teacher education program is participation in meetings at regional and state levels for teachers who work at schools in the MST settlements and encampments. These meetings usually take place monthly during a whole weekend. MST members from the regional or state education committee help set up and coordinate these meetings. Discussions about the teachers' pedagogical practices in the settlement schools are emphasized in these meetings. Participants discuss issues such as life in the Brazilian countryside, the teaching profession, and political participation in the MST.
However, during these meetings educators not only discuss their practices and other pedagogical issues and attend workshops in order to learn different activities to be developed in their classrooms, but they also intentionally do "ordinary things." As one of my interviewees says,
We organize these meetings as we do any other MST educational event. The teachers have to do the dishes, clean up the restrooms, the courtyard... We organize the meeting splitting people in groups ("núcleos" ou "brigades") and splitting up the tasks among them... This is very important for their coexistence. It is from these groups that they are going to learn to listen to each other, respect each other's opinion, to work as a team... So, more than talk about the MST pedagogy, what we do during these meetings is to give them the opportunity to live the MST pedagogy... For us, it is crucial not only "knowing how to do" but also and mainly "knowing how to be."
They also celebrate the mística, plan the political actions that are scheduled for that month, discuss how to organize events in their local communities, and choose representatives to attend other MST meetings at the state and national levels.
The main purposes of the MST's events on education at national and state levels are to provide spaces for sharing experience, to allow educators to develop the critical distance with which to view their own school reality and, at the same time, to motivate teachers in transforming their practices. According to Beltrame (2000), these events count on expressive attendance of teachers and constitute important spaces to reflect upon and redefine their educational practice.
Other MST's teacher education strategies
Teachers' political participation in different social spaces in their local community is also another very important strategy of the MST's teacher education program. The movement considers teachers' involvement in political demonstrations, protests, marches, land occupations and public building occupations crucial.
Attending and participating in MST political events is integrated into its teacher education program. These events are quite important because they are able to reinforce a sense of belonging to the movement among the teachers and educators (Beltrame, 2000).
In considering other teacher education strategies, my interviewees also mentioned the Sem Terrinha meetings, which comprise meetings for pupils between eight and fourteen years old in the MST encampments and settlements and the MST Youth meeting which is for adolescents from the movement between fifteen and seventeen years old. During these meetings, the children study and discuss humanist and socialist values, their constitutional rights as children and adolescents, and problems that they have in their communities. After three or four days discussing these issues, the children and adolescents bring this discussion to their communities and schools.
According to my interviewees, the pupils who attend these meetings are more assertive and challenge their teachers and principals, demanding a space at the schools to discuss the meeting issues. They believe that this kind of behavior also has an impact and influence on the teachers' education.
Finally, there have been many problems and challenges in establishing the MST's teacher education program, as well as in putting the MST's educational principles into practice at schools in the settlements and encampments. I briefly discuss this topic in the next section.
Problems and challenges
The MST has a political commitment to struggle for the establishment of public schools in its settlements. Most of the schools in the MST's settlements are municipal schools. The movement believes in and agrees that public education should be a task that is performed by the state and one that should remain a state task. Thus, the MST does not want to replace the state in accomplishing this social responsibility.
The fact that the municipal or state government has financial or administrative responsibility for the schools represents a problem and a contradiction for the movement: the MST has no fiscal or administrative control over these schools. For instance, the teachers who teach at schools in its settlements have to be hired following the same rules as any public school. Consequently, most of the teachers who teach in the MST's settlements are non-activist teachers who have been assigned by the official system to teach in these schools. According to Beltrame (2000), most of them "assume these positions against their will and, in some cases, hold a prejudiced view of the MST's educative work" (p. 46).
Many of these "outsider" teachers are unable to grasp the specific issues confronting rural education or to understand education as part of the MST project for social transformation. It has not been an easy task to make the schools and the teachers follow the movement's educational principles. As one of my interviewees puts it,
Our first challenge is to win over the teachers or bring them closer to the movement. This is a tough task because the mainstream media, the government, and the local powers help keep them far from the movement. So, our challenge is to bring these people closer to the movement in order to make them realize how the movement conceives of education...
This same problem is a rarity among educators who teach at the Escola Itinerante (Itinerant School)[22] in the MST's encampments, or who teach literacy for adults both in camps and settlements, or for those who work with early childhood education. These educators are able to understand the specificity of the MST schools because most of them are from the movement and live in the same communities as their students do, and because the movement has invested in their political and professional training.
Another challenge for the movement is the turnover of non-activist teachers at schools in the MST settlements. There is a high dropout rate among the teacher cohort in the settlement schools. Due to bad working conditions[23] and difficulties in access to the settlements, many schoolteachers teach at these schools only because they are obligated to do so. They leave these schools as soon as their probationary period ends. Moreover, because of their low salaries, the teachers have to teach at two or even three schools on the same day. One of the interviewees in my research also mentions this problem in the MST settlement schools:
The teachers don't like to work at rural schools. They teach at rural schools only until the end of their probationary period. After that, they ask to be transferred to schools located in the town. As a consequence, every year we have new teachers teaching at our schools and we have to re-start the whole educational process again and again... So, it is terrible because it is hard to concretize or move forward with this work.
Indeed, as Cleonice observes, in terms of the movement's teacher education strategies, this is a serious problem because the movement "invests" in the education of teachers who end up staying at the school only for a short time.
Another problem for the movement is the still-existing gap between MST pedagogy and its practical implementation in the classrooms. The relationship between the MST and the school has been a conflictive one. There remains a power conflict between the "legitimate" knowledge transmitted by the school and the knowledge constructed through social struggles and practices, which is considered either marginal to worthless or dangerously "subversive and opposing the established order" (Ribeiro, 2001; Harnecker, 2002).
Moreover, there is an antagonism between cooperative work, which as previously mentioned is a central MST educational principle, entailing values of cooperation, solidarity and autonomy, and those the school usually transmits to the children - values of competition, individualism, dependence - which are characteristic of capitalism and which are daily incorporated into people's lives in various venues including their schooling (Ribeiro, 2001).
Thus, to break with people's individualism and start working toward a notion of cooperativism is also a very difficult task even in the MST's settlements. As one of my interviewees says:
When people come to the movement, they are interested first in their own plot of land, in their houses, in their own business... So, it takes time to work toward a cooperative mentality. The agrovila is a very important educational space in order to achieve this goal. As I said before, to conquer the land is easy. The whole educational process is much harder and takes years or even generations to change...
Another challenge is to ameliorate the school-community relationship. The MST strongly believes that school has to be conceived as part of the whole community. As the research developed by Ribeiro (2001) shows, although settled farmers recognize the importance of school for their children, "they criticize the traditional teaching that does not include in its activities either the culture or the values linked to agricultural work" (p. 33). Another critique from the community studied by Ribeiro is the mismatch between the agricultural and school calendars. The later is guided by an urban reality and, as a result, many farmers' children have to miss classes during harvest time. Members of the movement communities also complain about the discrimination their children suffer in the school.
In some states, the organization of local education committees is another challenge to the movement. For instance, in the southern state of Santa Catarina, where Beltrame (2000) did her research, "the movement has not developed any routinized contacts in the schools, such as visits or support for teachers. The contacts [between the movement and the teachers] take place in the training workshops, in the monthly meetings or in the big political events" (p. 65).
In fact, the movement faces challenges specific to each Brazilian state. As one of my interviewees points out that in the Northeast region, for instance, the main challenge is to overcome the inherited cultural background of subordination among poor people:
In this part of the Brazilian Northeastern region, named Zona da Mata, the patriarchal relationship is still very strong. The patriarchal inheritance is very strong... The coronelism[24] is still very strong. The culture of the sugar cane plantation owners, who are called Senhores de Engenho, is still here. According to this culture, ordinary people cannot get involved with political issues. They have only to obey. The town is considered a kind of extension of the sugar cane plantations - Engenho. (...) In order to give you a better idea about what I am talking about, there is a town close to here where everyone called the mayor's wife "mom." Can you believe that? So, it is really hard to break with this culture of subordination.
Finally, the lack of formal education among landless people in the MST's settlements and encampments, the precarious structure of rural schools and perennial funding shortages also remain major obstacles the movement must overcome.
Tendencies and possibilities
Despite the existence of the various problems the MST confronts in its educational project, it has also won important educational battles, both from a quantitative and qualitative point of view. It has consolidated its efforts to define a proposal for education - in a critical and participative way - that aspires to the development of new women and men. As a result of all of its efforts, MST communities tend to have markedly better schools than other comparable rural communities in Brazil (Harnecker, 2002; Wright & Wolford, 2003).
Caldart (2000) discusses certain educational tendencies and possibilities for terms of education in the MST. One of these tendencies is the movement ability to overcome traditional separations among education, schooling and training. She argues,
...training in the MST is no longer only the political and ideological training of the young and adult landless activists; education is no longer only schooling of the camped and settled children; training can also take place in the school; education does not take place only in the school; training and education are historical tasks, in a long term, that have in common not only the preparation of people for immediate action but also an horizon of generations (p. 179).
At the same time that the school has no pedagogical power to guarantee the development of the "keepers of the struggle" and the school is not the sole place for the development of the Sem Terra subject, as Caldart argues, "in its relationship with a social movement such as the MST, the school represents much more than an educational institution centered upon itself" (2000, p. 180).
The movement has been working increasingly with the idea that "the MST school" is also a rural or country school. Thus, "the MST school" can contribute to "the construction and recovery of the identity of rural schools. In the same way, rural schools can help construct the identity of Brazilian public schools" (p. 182).
The author also refers to a new emphasis in the pedagogical discussion that integrates the MST's educational project. "The initial discussions of the MST's educational project were focused on more traditional schooling matters such as, what to teach and how to teach it, highlighting the classroom" (p. 183). The emphasis today, according to Caldart, has been on the cooperative school, the necessity of cultivating the MST's mística (spirit or spirituality), the importance of teachers becoming activists, the importance of planning lessons collectively, and the students' involvement in the political activities of the MST. Caldart writes:
As reflections upon the school style begins to combine with a concern on the part of the movement for cultivating the Sem Terra identity, and the values and the stance of the "keepers of the struggle," the emphasis moves from the school toward the subjects of the pedagogical process (p. 184).
These new subjects, among them the Sem Terra teachers and the Sem Terrinha, each with their own specific identity marks - gender, age cycles, type of actions and activities that they get involved, styles of participating in the movement - participate in the construction of the Sem Terra identity as a whole.
Implications for a socially transformative teacher education
In this part of the paper I briefly discuss some implications of the major aspects of the MST experience on the teacher education field and, more specifically, what I call "teacher education for social transformation." While the term "teacher education for social justice" has been increasingly adopted by the specialized literature in the United States, instead, I prefer to use the term "teacher education for social transformation." Thus, before focusing on the implications themselves, I would like to briefly explain the reasons for this semantic and political choice.
Zeichner (2004), drawing on literature from the U.S. during the last 75 years, states that social justice teacher education has now become a slogan that has been used to describe the orientation of many teacher education programs throughout the world. The author argues that, as was the case with "reflection" in the 1980s, we have come to a point where it is difficult to discern, beyond the "social justice" refrain, what actually goes on in a teacher education program. Although the conceptions and practices that fall under the umbrella of social justice oriented teacher education vary greatly, he states that there has been little discussion of this variation in the literature.
Zeichner suggests that it is necessary to unpack the slogan of social justice in teacher education. He examines a variety of ways that it has been conceptualized and implemented, discusses some contradictions between rhetoric and practice, and provides an assessment of what has been achieved through these efforts.
"Social justice" is a term that has been used by progressive people, social movements and organizations for a long time and has recently been co-opted and rhetorically adopted by conservative individuals and institutions. For example, "neoliberals" have rhetorically expressed a commitment to "social justice." However, for its neoliberal advocates, "social justice" means "the equality of opportunity" for "citizens" (conceived largely as "consumers") to compete in the global marketplace. The fact that "opportunity," freedom and choice in other spheres of most citizen-consumers' lives are increasingly diminished, subject to the demands of corporate needs, is not part of the neoliberal sales pitch.
For me, being committed to "social justice" is a political position, which unlike the neoliberal view, explicitly opposes the status quo and attempts to promote deep changes in terms of power relations at the personal, local, national and international levels. Opposing the status quo means to be simultaneously anti-capitalist (against class exploitation) and anti-imperialist (against old and new forms of economic, symbolic, and cultural colonization), anti-patriarchal (against gender inequality), anti-racist (against race oppression and "White supremacy"), anti-homophobic (against sexual orientation discrimination) and, anti-ableistic (against the social exclusion of people with disabilities).
Even attempting to be as clear and explicit as I can about the meaning of "social justice," I prefer to use the term "social transformation." Although, it may seem that I am constructing a false dichotomy, in my view, the emphasis on "social transformation" differs conceptually and politically from the emphasis of several educational programs, including teacher education programs, concerning the issue of "social justice" and/or "social inclusion;" the latter has been more frequently used in Brazilian educational programs. I believe that an educational program and, more specifically, a teacher education program that is committed to promoting profound social transformation is also necessarily committed to "social justice" and "social inclusion." However, I believe that using the term "social transformation," instead of the "social justice" or "social inclusion," may avoid intentional co-optation by the right in the case of the former and, in the case of the latter, it reminds us that "social inclusion" may be seen as an end in itself, leaving unquestioned the actual sources of inequalities.
The assumption here is that a capitalist society (which is also patriarchal, racist, homophobic, and ableistic) is predicated on exclusion. In this sense, the conquest of little packages of "social inclusion" or "social justice," or things wrapped and presented as such, should not be prematurely and naively celebrated. This is because such "inclusion" or "justice" is co-optive. Besides being bestowed by those who rule (the oppressors) as a way to minimize certain social tensions and, consequently, to maintain their privileges, such "justice" usually takes place in a marginal and temporary way. In other words, subjects who are socially, racially, culturally, and economically excluded and segregated (the oppressed) must be the principal agents of social transformation. They must be able to conquer, through social collective struggles, their own freedom. As Freire (2000) states, freedom "is acquired by conquest, not by gift. It must be pursued constantly and responsibly" (p. 29).
Allow me to focus now upon some implications of the MST experience for what I call "teacher education for social transformation." This experience has shown that the MST teacher education program is likely more effective, if it is combined with the attendees' involvement with the movement as a whole. In turn, the impact of progressive social and cultural movements and organizations on teacher education programs for social transformation can be tremendous.
However, the existence of teacher education programs that are directly ruled by progressive social and cultural movements and organizations is rare[25] Therefore, one needs to ask: how can we transform a teacher education program, which is held by universities and higher education institutions, usually conservative but contradictory institutions, into a teacher education program for social transformation? There is no simple answer to this question and it is not my intention to provide a recipe for "how to develop a teacher education program for social transformation."
On one hand, if a teacher education program has a true commitment to social transformation, those who participate in this program - student teachers, staff, and teacher educators - should be able to find solutions for their specific problems and design a curriculum for that purpose. In addition, I would say that possibilities depend on the level of autonomy that each program has - which in turn depends on continuous struggle - in order to transform them into teacher education programs for social transformation.
On the other hand, I believe that we can learn important lessons from the MST experience concerning the development of teacher education programs for social transformation. In my view, one of the main challenges in developing teacher education programs for social transformation is the challenge of building links to progressive social and cultural movements and organizations which are involved with actual transformations of society[26]. In addition, there are at least four other aspects of these programs to which we should pay close attention.
First of all, it is impossible to think about the idea of developing a teacher education program for social transformation if we do not have a cohort of teacher educators who truly believe that "another world is possible." Thus, it is crucial that the teacher educators involved with this program share similar dreams and a political commitment to social transformation. Instead of a preoccupation with their individual careers, these teacher educators should demonstrate, through their praxis, a commitment to the program and its students and to their development as activist educators.
In addition, because there is no recipe or magic formula for developing a teacher education program for social transformation and designing its curriculum, the teacher educators involved in this program should be able to create spaces for reflecting collectively upon and making collective decisions about the program as well as for sharing and discussing their practices as teacher educators and the challenges of developing new activist educators.
The second aspect is the selection of the participants. Traditional teacher education programs usually draw only upon academic standards in order to define those who will attend these programs. Teacher education programs for social transformation should also take into consideration the experiences that the candidates bring to the programs and their ability to reflect upon these experiences - even if this reflection is still embryonic. Because, as Freire (2000) argues, reflection "cannot be purely intellectual but must involve action," (p. 47) these programs should privilege candidates who have been involved with collective social struggles, and, more specifically, with progressive social and cultural movements and organizations.
Ideally, the new student teachers should arrive to the program with at least a sense that there is something fundamentally wrong with society in terms of justice and equality. Therefore, the program should privilege candidates who come from disenfranchised backgrounds (those who come from working class families independent of their gender, race and sexual orientation; women; people of color; homosexuals; and people with disabilities). The assumption here is this: while it is easier for the disenfranchised to understand the basic principle that "there is something fundamentally unjust about society," privileging the attendance of college by people from disenfranchised backgrounds is already helping to promote change in society. Candidates who come from privileged backgrounds can, of course, also be accepted to teacher education programs for social transformation but they should be able to show that they have already begun Freire's process of "dying in order to be reborn" - again even if this process is still very embryonic. In this case, autobiographies and interviews would be crucial instruments for this selection process[27].
A third important aspect is the active participation of the student teachers in making decisions about the curriculum during their trajectories in their teacher education programs for social transformation. Although the MST "pre-service" teacher-training programs are similar to traditional ones, at least in terms of their formal structure, the attendees are quite active and very willing to participate in the construction of the curriculum. According to their accounts, my interviewees wanted to negotiate every single step in their programs and refused to accept a prepackaged education from their teacher educators or from the university. It would be essential that the program itself not only allow but encourage this type of participation in designing the curriculum. In this sense, the previous aspect (the selection of program attendees) would help to foment the participation of the student teachers in the program. As in the case of the attendees of MST teacher-training programs, the selected candidates will not likely accept a "prepackaged education" from the program.
Finally, it is also crucial to pay attention to the practical experiences (practicum and student teaching) that a teacher education program for social transformation provides to its participants. It is important to select schools[28] and other educative placements which have been involved in collective social struggles as well as schoolteachers and other educators who identify themselves as activist educators.
As mentioned above, it is important to emphasize that all these aspects will depend on the level of autonomy of the program: to hire teacher educators, through taking into account political and ideological criteria rather than pseudo-neutral academic criteria by itself; to define the criteria and the instruments for the selection of its students; to allow and encourage student teachers' active participation in making decisions about the curriculum of the program; and finally, to decide about the most progressive placements for the students to have their practical experiences.

Notes

[1] This paper was presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting in Montréal, Québec (Canada), on April 15th, 2005.
[2] Professor at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil. E-mail address: juliodiniz@fae.ufmg.br
[3] The MST was officially established on January 20, 1984.
[4] The MST is basically made up of poor people (peasants) from Brazil's rural areas. In Brazil, poverty remains more acute in rural areas than in urban areas. However, since only 21% of Brazilians live in rural areas, the urban share in the composition of poverty is higher. Moreover, poverty varies markedly across regions, with the Northeast and the North reporting higher poverty rates than the Southeast or the South.
[5] This expression is used as the title of Bales' book about new slavery in the global economy. In order to discuss new forms of slave labor in global capitalism, the author does comparative research across five different countries - Thailand, Mauritania, Brazil, Pakistan, and India. In his chapter about Brazil, although Bales does not mention the MST, he cites the Comissão Pastoral da Terra (the Pastoral Land Commission), the CPT, as an antislavery movement in the country.
[6] Paulo Freire, a well-known Brazilian educator and one of the most important theoretical references for the landless movement, also criticizes capitalism and "its intrinsic perversity, its antisolidarity nature" (1997, p. 88). Freire states that capitalism is absolutely insensitive to the ethical dimension of human existence. As for alternatives, he says "I have no reason to admit that a truly democratic socialism is an impossible proposition" (1997, p. 49).
[7] This paper draws on the author's Ph.D. dissertation which discusses the identity construction of activist educators through an analysis of life stories (testimonios) of women educators who have participated in the Landless Workers Movement. These testimonios, collected through semi-structured interviews, sought to uncover the main elements that account for the development of their identities as activist educators. In addition to the interviews, documents of various kinds - books, booklets, magazines articles, journal articles, dissertations - about education in general and, more specifically, about its teacher education programs that have been published by people working with or in the MST since the late 1980s - have been collected and analyzed.
[8] Paulo Freire defines praxis as "the unity between action and reflection." He argues that "one cannot change consciousness outside of praxis. But it must be emphasized that the praxis by which consciousness is changed is not only action but action and reflection. Thus there is a unity between practice and theory in which both are constructed, shaped, and reshaped in constant movement from practice to theory, then back to new practice" (1985, p. 124).
[9] This nickname identifies the children as Sem Terra subjects and an effective part of the MST dynamic. Sem Terrinha has at least three identity components: their condition as children, as students, and their participation in the movement which, in turn, changes the meanings of their childhood and school experience. As Caldart (2000) states, "For the children, to participate in the MST has represented the possibility to live the childhood in a different way" (p. 195).
[10] Most of the teachers who teach at schools in the MST's settlements and encampments are women of different ages and multiple ethnic origins. At the beginning of the MST's history, the movement reproduced the tradition that education is something for women and female teachers Education was not deemed important enough in order to become an issue that the leaders and the landless men should bee interested in (Caldart, 2000, pp. 186-187).
[11] Freire (1998) agrees that "Teacher preparation should never be reduced to a form of training. Rather, teacher preparation should go beyond the technical preparation of teachers and be rooted in the ethical formation of selves and of history" (p. 23).
[12] The most widespread teacher education approaches in Brazil are those related to the model of technical rationality (Schon 1983). According to this model, also known as the positivist epistemology of practice, there is a hierarchical division between research and practice which is also reflected in the normative curriculum of the professional school. The normal course of events is to first teach the relevant basic and applied science, and second, to apply the findings to real-world problems of practice.
[13] Freire (1996) argues that "all teaching implies research and all research implies teaching. There is no real teaching in which one does not find research, as questioning, inquiry, curiosity, and creativity; just as there is no research in which one does not learn why one knows" (p. 132).
[14] Most of the attendees of these programs are people from the MST's settlements and encampments who have taught in one of the educational frentes (fronts) - adult education (literacy), childhood education, elementary education - and/or professores leigos (uncertified teachers) who have also taught in settlement schools. Thus, since most of the attendees of these programs are people who have already been teaching and working in other educational activities in their communities, the term "pre-service" is not quite appropriate in this case. I have decided to keep using this term only for facilitating the readers' comprehension.
[15] In Brazil, the school vacations are in the months of January and February (Summer vacation) and July (Winter break).
[16] The word mística has two main meanings in the landless movement: "spirit or spirituality" and "dramatization." First, the MST mística (spirit or spirituality) is what Caldart (2000) calls "the spice of the struggle" or "a passion that stimulates the activists." According to Caldart, "It is not simple to define mística because its definition is not expressed through words but through gestures, symbols, and emotions. The limit to understanding it is rooted in the word itself: mística (spirit or spirituality) means 'mystery,' that is, if it is completely revealed it loses the essence of its meaning" (p. 134). Mística in the movement stems from the Christian traditions of liberation theology (Wright & Wolford, 2003). Second, mística (dramatization) has also become a cultural act where the landless people use different language forms - theater, songs and dances - in order to portray their struggles and their hopes as well as to facilitate discussions of difficult issues such as the FTAA (Free Trade Area of the Americas). Thus, in order to explain what might be difficult concepts, to present information and to inspire people, MST activists employ what is called mística (dramatization).
[17] Agrarian reform educators are all of those people who struggle for land and social justice in the Landless Workers Movement (MST), including schoolteachers (Caldart, 1997).
[18] As an adult education program the Brazilian educational legislation only allows that people who are eighteen years old or older and hold an elementary school diploma are eligible for attending the MST's teacher-training program at high school level (Magistério).
[19] The MST established its first "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level in 1998 through a partnership between the movement and a private university - the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS) - in the state of Rio Grande do Sul.
[20] The Federal University of Espírito Santo (UFES) and the Federal University of Mato Grosso (UFMT) are two public universities that have participated in this partnership with the MST. In the state of Rio Grande do Sul, a private institution, the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS) has also developed a program along with the movement. The federal government has provided funding in order to cover the expenses of these programs.
[21] Most of these activities come out of the experience of some progressive groups associated with the Catholic Church and are also used by other popular groups and progressive social movements in Brazil (Beltrame, 2000).
[22] Escola Itinerante (Itinerant School) - "a school that goes wherever the camp goes in its struggle for the land" - is a successful experience that has been developed in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, through which the educators try to bring the school close to the movement's logic.
[23] In general, teachers' working conditions at Brazilian rural schools are not good. There are many difficulties for the teachers who teach in these schools: precarious school buildings usually far from the students' houses, multiage classrooms, children who have neither notebooks nor pencils, and teachers without formal training who earn a small salary and do not have many opportunities for attending in-service teacher-training programs (Beltrame, 2000).
[24] The term "coronelismo," meaning "despotism or tyranny," stems from the agricultural elites in Brazil's Northeast, which were represented by the iconic colonel, a typical figurehead of the agricultural sector.
[25] It is important to clarify that the MST "pre-service" teacher-training programs at the college level are not "directly ruled" by the movement. The MST has to negotiate with the universities in order to bring these programs as close as possible to the aims of the movement. The landless movement has more autonomy to develop its "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level though.
[26] There have been some examples of teacher education programs in the United States such as, the "New College" at Teachers College Columbia University in New York City (see Liston & Zeichner, 1991) and the Putney Graduate School of Teacher Education (see Rodgers, 1998), which have been linked with broader social movements for social transformation.
[27] One of the first tasks of teacher education programs for social transformation should be to promote a critical analysis and a collective reflection upon the attendees' experiences, using their autobiographies, toward building a feeling of indignation against social and economic injustice.
[28] Ideally, teacher education programs for social transformation would favor working with "democratic schools," as those described in the book edited by Apple and Bean (1995), or, through their partnerships with schools, help these schools to help themselves to become more democratic and committed to social transformation.

Bibliography

Apple, M.W., & Bean, J.A. (Eds.). (1995). Democratic schools. Alexandria: ASCD.
Bales, K. (1999). Disposable people: New slavery in the global economy. Berkley: University of California Press.
Beltrame, S.A.B. (2000). MST, professores e professoras: Sujeitos em movimento. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universidade de São Paulo.
Caldart, R.S. (1997). Educação em movimento: Formação de educadoras e educadores no MST. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Caldart, R.S. (2000). Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Caldart, R.S. (2003a). Movimento Sem Terra: Lições de Pedagogia. Currículo Sem Fronteiras, 3 (1), 50-59.
Caldart, R.S. (2003b). A escola do campo em movimento. Currículo Sem Fronteiras, 3 (1), 60-81.
Diniz-Pereira, J.E. (2005). "How the dreamers are born." The identity construction of activist educators: Life histories of women educators from the Landless Workers Movement in Brazil. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Fernandes, B.M. (2000). A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Freire, P. (1985). The politics of education: Culture, power and liberation. Westport/London: Bergin & Garvey.
Freire, P. (1996). Letters to Cristina: Reflections on my life and work. New York/London: Routledge.
Freire, P. (1997). Pedagogy of the heart. New York: Continuum.
Freire, P. (1998). Pedagogy of freedom: Ethics, democracy, and civic courage Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. (20th-anniversary ed.). New York: Continuum.
Harnecker, M. (2002). Landless people - Building a social movement Havana: Research Center Latin-American People's Memory (MEPLA).
Liston, D.P., & Zeichner, K.M. (1991). Teacher education and the social conditions of schooling New York: Routledge.
McCowan, T. (2003, March). Participation and education in the Landless People's Movement in Brazil. Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, 1 (1), Article 5. Retrieved April 2, 2003, from http://www.jceps.com
Ribeiro, M. (2001). Trabalho cooperativo no MST e ensino fundamental rural: desafios à educação básica. Revista Brasileira de Educação, 17 (1), 20-39.
Rodgers, C.R. (1998). Morris R. Mitchell and the Putney Graduate School of Teacher Education, 1950-1964 Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.
Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the struggle for a new Brazil. Oakland: Food First Books.
Zeichner, K.M. (2004, July). Educating teachers for social justice in an era of accountability. Keynote address presented at the Annual Meeting of the Australian Teacher Education Association, Bathurst, Australia.

Correspondence
juliodiniz@fae.ufmg.br

2007
Political Science
Latin American Perspectives
An Ambivalent Legacy: Cardoso and Land Reform
Gabriel Ondetti

Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/34/5/9.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
An Ambivalent Legacy
Cardoso and Land Reform
by Gabriel Ondetti
Few policies implemented during the presidency of Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil provoked as much disagreement as land reform. While officials claimed to be under- taking a virtual revolution in the countryside, activists derided the program as little more than a palliative. Assessment of its extent and character drawing on a variety of sources indicates that many of the criticisms are on the mark. Only a small percentage of the land- less population benefited, and those who did often lacked even minimal infrastructure or support services. At the same time, Cardoso settled more landless than all of his predeces- sors combined. His reform pales next to the major reforms in Latin American history, but it was one of the most ambitious programs carried out under democratic conditions that was not later reversed by a coup d’état. Cardoso’s progress in this area was partly a result of two aspects of the political context at the start of his government: his own personal image as a progressive reformer and the growing strength of the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural Workers—MST). However, chance events also played a key role. Particularly important were two massacres of land reform protestors that occurred early in his first term, thrusting the land issue onto the political agenda at an opportune moment.
Keywords:	Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Land reform, Latin America, MST
During his eight years as president of Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso rarely lacked glowing terms to describe his government’s land reform program. On one occasion, for example, he referred to it as the largest “in history” by a democratically elected government—not only in Brazil but anywhere (Cardoso, 1999). The changes he was bringing about in rural land tenure, he boasted in a dif- ferent speech, were nothing short of “revolutionary” (Folha de São Paulo, January 6, 2002). Cardoso’s description of his program contrasted sharply, to say the least, with the account offered by land reform activists and other opposition groups. For the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural Workers—MST), the main organization leading the grassroots struggle for land reform, the president’s claims were laughable. Even if the official settlement figures were reliable, which MST leaders strenuously insisted was not the case, the program would be sadly insufficient, considering the magnitude of the land problem. For Bishop Tomás Balduíno, head of the Catholic Church’s Commissão Pastoral da Terra (Pastoral Commission on Land—CPT), Cardoso’s reform was a merely “compensatory” measure intended only to stanch social protest (Folha de São Paulo, January 6, 2002).
Gabriel Ondetti is an assistant professor of political science at Missouri State University. He is the author of Land, Protest and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil (Penn State University Press, forthcoming).
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 156, Vol. 34 No. 5, September 2007 9-25 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X07306235 © 2007 Latin American Perspectives
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
9
10	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
With such sharply contradictory claims presented by the main actors in the land drama, it has been difficult to arrive at a reliable assessment of the Cardoso land reform program.1 Nevertheless, a steady trickle of new academic studies, government reports, and press investigations in recent years has given us the wherewithal to formulate a somewhat richer, if by no means definitive, evaluation. This is one of three tasks I undertake in this article. First, I assess the extent and character of Cardoso’s land reform program, employing this growing stock of information. Second, I place this program in a broader per- spective, comparing it with both the land reform efforts of earlier Brazilian governments and past reforms in other Latin American countries. Finally, I try to resolve the apparent contradiction that Cardoso, despite presiding over a center-right government with a state-shrinking economic program, ended up becoming easily the most successful president in Brazilian history in terms of land redistribution.
The balance sheet for Cardoso’s land reform is mixed. Many of criticisms of the program are on the mark. Settlement production fell far short of the gov- ernment’s public claims, and the number of families actually settled amounts to only a very small percentage of all families involved in agriculture. Those that did receive land, moreover, often got little or nothing else. Many of the “beneficiaries” lacked such essential commodities as electricity, clean water, agricultural credit, and dependable roads. In numerous cases, settlements did not even have their internal and external boundaries demarcated. Arguably, however, the most realistic standard by which to judge Cardoso’s reform, since it takes into consideration the political constraints on reformism, is in relation to what other governments have done. In this regard, the program fares some- what better. Cardoso clearly settled more landless families than any Brazilian president before him—more, in fact, than all of the rest combined. The program pales in comparison with Latin America’s major land reforms, but only three democratically elected Latin American governments have implemented more extensive ones. Moreover, two of those were overthrown in military coups, attesting to the tremendous difficulty of carrying out a major land reform under democratic conditions.
From a political standpoint, probably the most curious aspect of Cardoso’s legacy in this area lies in the progress he achieved relative to previous Brazilian presidents. A number of characteristics of Cardoso’s government, including its legislative dependence on conservative parties and its commitment to limited government, secure property rights, and other elements of the “Washington Consensus,” appeared to militate against significant advances in the land reform policy area. Yet, in terms of settling landless families, Cardoso actually outperformed the next most productive president by a very wide margin. How are we to explain this?
Although Cardoso’s coalition and economic program did not bode well for land reform, two other aspects of the political context at the beginning of his government were more favorable. One was Cardoso’s personal image as a pro- gressive, modernizing leader. Although he showed few signs of commitment to land reform early on, the expectations of progressive change created by his election made him vulnerable to pressure in this area, particularly given the lack of other social initiatives. The other was the growing strength of the land- less workers’ movement, which was determined to put land reform back on the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	11
political agenda. To a large extent, the acceleration of reform can be understood as a product of the convergence of these two factors. It would be misleading, however, to portray Cardoso’s land reform as an inevitable result of the politi- cal context. Chance events also played a substantial role. Particularly critical were two shocking incidents of violence against landless protestors early in his presidency, which thrust the land issue onto the political front burner at an especially opportune moment.
In the section that follows I provide a synthetic overview of land reform and the struggle for land in Brazil, emphasizing the Cardoso period. Then I proceed to a more detailed description of the Cardoso reform program. The third section sets this performance in comparative perspective. Finally, in the fourth section I try to explain Cardoso’s land reform in political terms.
LAND REFORM AND THE STRUGGLE FOR LAND IN BRAZIL
Brazil is one of the most unequal countries in the world in terms of rural land distribution, with a Gini coefficient of 0.843 (Hoffman, 1998). Land concentration has a high cost in terms of rural welfare and has been associated with an array of other problems, including high food prices, urban overcrowding, and a rel- atively small consumer market for domestic industry. Although this reality dates back to colonial times, land reform became a major national issue only in the late 1950s, initially as a consequence of peasant mobilization in the poor Northeast. President João Goulart’s attempt to push forward land reform helped trigger the military coup of 1964 and usher in two decades of authoritarian rule. After briefly flirting with a land reform of its own, the military leadership focused its agricultural policies on technological modernization and frontier expansion. In many areas, inequality in land distribution deepened.
When Brazil returned to civilian rule in 1985, land reform was a rising issue. President José Sarney announced an ambitious plan to settle 1.4 million landless families in five years. At about the same time, the MST was taking its initial steps as an organization.2 Growing out of Catholic activist networks in the smallholder regions of southern Brazil, the MST was officially founded in January 1984 and held its first congress the following year. Although nominally an independent national organization, it was still mainly a Southern entity and strongly dependent on church support. Sarney’s national plan for agrarian reform generated excitement among rural workers but never really got off the ground. The newly formed União Democrática Ruralista (Democratic Rural Union—UDR), an alliance of large landowners, pressured Sarney to back down. A conservative with little appetite for conflict, Sarney easily caved in. UDR fundraising and lobbying efforts also helped anti-land-reform activists achieve an important victory in the constituent assembly of 1987–1988. The new consti- tution limited expropriation mainly to large farms not meeting minimum stan- dards of productivity.3 By the end of his term in 1989 Sarney had settled 89,950 families, less than 7 percent of his stated goal (INCRA, n.d.: 6).
Land reform slowed further under Fernando Collor, the most conservative of Brazil’s postmilitary presidents. Expropriations by the Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agraria (National Institute for Colonization and
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
12	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Agrarian Reform—INCRA) ground to a virtual halt. Repression against land- less mobilization grew. Collor’s removal from office in late 1992 was thus considered a major victory by land reform activists. His replacement, the for- mer vice president Itamar Franco, formed a less conservative coalition and became the first president to meet with the MST leadership. Although his sup- port was instrumental in the approval of important land reform legislation, Franco’s settlement efforts were disappointing. Between 1990 and 1994, the government settled 60,188 families, with Collor accounting for almost two-thirds (INCRA, n.d.: 6).
Victories were few and far between, but the MST continued to gain strength during the Sarney and Collor/Franco periods, expanding geographically, con- solidating its internal organization, and achieving greater autonomy from the church (Ondetti, in press). By the end of 1994 it was established in 21 of Brazil’s 26 states. A promising development was its campaign in the Pontal do Paranapanema, a region of São Paulo state known to have many illegitimate large landholdings potentially vulnerable to reform. Land occupations, the staple of the MST’s tactical repertoire, stagnated during the early Collor years but showed signs of reviving under Franco.
Nevertheless, land reform was not a major issue during the 1994 presidential election campaign. Fernando Henrique Cardoso did talk about the need to tackle Brazil’s profound social inequality, but land reform was not a prominent theme. His campaign literature outlined a plan to settle 280,000 families, but this proposal did not receive much attention from either the candidate himself or the media. Given the alliance that his centrist Partido da Social Democracia Brasileira (Party of Brazilian Social Democracy—PSDB) had established with the powerful Partido do Frente Liberal (Liberal Front party—PFL) and the Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (Brazilian Labor party—PTB), both conservative parties with strong ties to large landowners, this did not seem surprising. Cardoso’s economic program, emphasizing a reduced role for the state, also did not seem to augur well for land reform. If elected, the MST predicted, Cardoso would “bury” land reform (Jornal Sem Terra, July 1994). When the media did dis- cuss the land issue, it was usually in reference to the bold plan proposed by Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, candidate of the left-wing Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ party—PT), to settle 800,000 families in four years.
Land reform also seemed largely forgotten during the early months of Cardoso’s presidency. Media attention focused mainly on the economic situa- tion and the government’s proposed neoliberal reforms. Minister of Agriculture José Andrade Vieira, a banker, landowner, and president of the PTB, said in January 1995 that he would not have the resources to make good on Cardoso’s settlement goal for that year. In April, to make matters worse, a landowner and PTB leader who had helped lead the struggle against Sarney’s PNRA was appointed president of the INCRA. By mid-year the government had spent only 3.2 percent of its land reform budget for the year, according to media reports (Folha de São Paulo, September 6, 1995). The MST’s dire prediction seemed to be coming true.
MST leaders were therefore surprised by the force with which land reform reemerged as a national issue a few months later. This change began in late 1995 and was consolidated the following year. By mid-1996 land reform was easily one of Brazil’s hottest media issues. For example, Veja, Brazil’s largest
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	13
newsweekly, published more pieces on the land issue in 1996 than in the pre- vious five years combined (Ondetti, in press: Chap. 5). In the second half of the year, the struggle for land became the central theme of one of the most suc- cessful telenovelas in Brazilian history, The King of Cattle. Powerful organiza- tions in civil society began to pressure Cardoso for more aggressive action in this area, and land reform become one the central issues on which the PT, on the defensive since its defeat at the polls, sought to criticize the government.
A number of factors, including an MST offensive in São Paulo in late 1995, contributed to this change. However, the key cause was not protest itself but the repression directed against it. Two incidents of land-related violence in Amazonia played a central role. On August 11, 1995, a conflict between police and land occupiers in the rural town of Corumbiara, Rondônia, left 13 dead, 11 of them occupiers. Then, on April 17, 1996, a larger massacre occurred in the desolate mining town of Eldorado do Carajás, in southeastern Pará. Police opened fire on 1,200 MST protestors blocking a highway, leaving 19 dead. As with Corumbiara, there was evidence that some of the victims had been exe- cuted. Unfortunately for the authorities, a television news crew was on hand and captured much of the incident on film. Images of the Eldorado massacre were soon being shown on television news programs all over Brazil and abroad, including CNN.
The publicity surrounding these incidents, combined with pressure from civil society, forced the government to respond. Cardoso switched INCRA presidents in September 1995, replacing PTB boss Brasílio Araújo Neto with a close personal adviser. A week after Eldorado, he bowed to a long-time demand of land reform activists and removed the INCRA from the grip of the traditionally conservative Ministry of Agriculture, creating a new ministry to house it. Raul Jungmann, a former Communist Party of Brazil activist and head of the federal environmental agency, was appointed minister. Cardoso reaffirmed his commitment to land reform and pledged his government’s sup- port for a number of pieces of legislation intended to facilitate it and quell land-related conflict in the countryside.
Despite the president’s apparent embrace of the land reform cause, rela- tions with the MST grew more tense after Eldorado. On the government side, Jungmann claimed to be implementing the settlement plan outlined during the election campaign, along with a series of support programs involving agri- cultural credit, housing, infrastructure, technical assistance and education. In 1998, he established a World Bank–funded “land bank” to provide subsidized credit to poor farmers seeking to purchase land. The government touted its land reform in television advertisements, and Jungmann traveled widely to promote it. By the end of Cardoso’s first term, the president claimed to have granted land to more than 287,000 families, more than all his predecessors combined. Official documents also pointed with pride to initiatives such as an agricultural extension program and a settlement education program, as well as to a reform of the tax on unproductive rural properties.
Land reform activists took a dimmer view of the program. The MST, the PT, and the CPT said that the government was inflating its figures by settling families in frontier areas, where land is poor and there is little infrastructure, by legalizing existing squatter communities, and by introducing new families into old settlements (PT, 1999). They criticized the land bank as a ploy to undermine
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
14	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
the movement’s recruitment of rural workers. They also denounced the reform of the land tax as a fraud, pointing out that it had failed to generate any increase in revenue. Cardoso’s program, they said, was a “virtual” land reform aimed at hoodwinking a public truly desirous of change.
Meanwhile, demands for land reform intensified. Land occupations grew rapidly, especially in 1996, and new actors, including rural unions and new “landless” organizations, entered the struggle. Frustrated by Cardoso’s failure to implement deeper reform, the MST diversified its tactics (Ondetti, in press: Chap. 5). Its National March, involving three large groups of activists who made their way through the interior for two months in early 1997, was a big publicity success. Militants in the Northeast participated in looting during the drought of the late 1990s, and, at the national level, the MST intensified its occupations of public agencies, targeting the powerful Finance Ministry, which it blamed for restricting funding for land reform.
Cardoso’s second term brought changes in both policy and protest. In 1999, facing an economic crisis, the government cut deeply into land reform spend- ing. It also announced a restructuring of a program, dubbed the “New Rural World,” aimed at making land reform more efficient (INCRA, 1999a). Despite its optimistic name, the plan featured changes rejected by activists, including administrative decentralization, reduced agricultural credit, and an emphasis on weaning settlers off of government support more quickly. It was widely viewed as a ploy to reduce spending and make the federal government less of a target for movement pressure. The MST reacted in early 2000 by ratcheting up its protest actions. It helped disrupt the government’s elaborate commemo- ration of the 500th anniversary of the Portuguese arrival in Brazil and launched a major campaign of occupations of public agencies in state capitals and Brasília. Cardoso responded with unprecedented force. Most important, he issued a decree making occupied farms ineligible for expropriation for at least two years. As a result, land occupations declined greatly.4
At the end of Cardoso’s second term, the government claimed to have settled more than 300,000 families in the previous four years. Land reform activists again dismissed these figures as fraudulent. A series of investigative articles published in the Folha de São Paulo, Brazil’s largest daily newspaper, in 2002 seemed to support their view.5 The stories accused the Ministry of Agrarian Development of systematically “inflating” its figures by counting as settlements expropriated properties with no infrastructure whatsoever and, in some cases, no settler families. They pointed out that these “settlements” did not meet the definition outlined in the INCRA’s own “Settler’s Manual.” Minister José Abrão responded by summarily changing the definition to match the ministry’s de facto usage.
MEASURING THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM
There is still no primary data source on the Cardoso land reform that by itself can be considered both comprehensive and reliable. However, the exist- ing sources allow us to sketch a rough portrait. I take on this task here, draw- ing on both government and other sources. Three works provide many of the data. One is the INCRA’s massive wrap-up report for the Cardoso era, released
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	15
in mid-December 2002.6 The data for 2002 are mainly projections. Another, Heredia et al. (2002), is a survey of 1,568 land reform settlers conducted in 2001–2002 in six areas with high concentrations of settlements. It includes 92 settlements established under various governments and does not distinguish between them. However, since 67 percent of the settlements (and probably a higher percentage of families) studied were created under Cardoso, the find- ings mainly reflect the work of the Cardoso government. The third, Sparovek (2003), is a study undertaken in 2002 by the INCRA and the University of São Paulo School of Agriculture.7 Most of this study consists of a survey that attempts to gauge conditions in land reform settlements. Rather than inter- viewing “rank-and-file” settlers, researchers targeted three types of experts for each settlement: INCRA employees with oversight responsibility, leaders of the settlement association or other internal organization, and older settlers consid- ered community leaders. Interviews were conducted with people connected to 4,340 settlements, “almost all” the settlements in Brazil. The other component of the study tries to assess settlement conditions indirectly by examining the environmental and socioeconomic characteristics of the local areas in which a settlement is located and comparing them with the larger regional and national context.
RESOURCE COMMITMENT
How much of a financial commitment did Cardoso make to land reform? The federal government spent about R$12.1 billion on land reform and related policies through 2001, for an average of R$1.7 billion annually in 2001 reals (Gasques and Villa Verde, 2003: 22). Most of this was concentrated in Cardoso’s first term. Average spending declined from R$2.1 billion in the first term to R$1.3 billion in the second, not including 2002 (which appears to have been one of the leanest years). The peak was in 1998, when R$2.2 billion was spent. The declining commitment from the first to the second term can also be seen by looking at the INCRA budget as a proportion of the total federal budget, a figure that shrank from 0.52 percent to 0.19 percent (INCRA, 2002a: II.4.1.1). Reflecting budget constraints, the INCRA’s staff actually shrank by almost 14 percent during the Cardoso era.
LAND REDISTRIBUTION
According to the INCRA final report for the Cardoso era, the federal gov- ernment obtained 19,863,572 hectares of land for the purpose of land reform between 1995 and 2002. This land was used to establish 4,864 settlements con- taining a total of 608,655 beneficiary families (INCRA, 2002a: II.4.3.1). Table 1 gives the year-by-year figures. The land redistributed represents about 5.6 percent of total agricultural land, and the number of families settled equals 7.6 percent of total families involved in agriculture.8 Most of the land was obtained through expropriation, with the rest coming mainly from govern- ment purchases, public property, and private purchases with land bank credit. Through 1999, 66.5 percent of the land came from expropriation (INCRA, 1999b). Only about 9 percent of the beneficiaries received land through the land bank (INCRA, 2002b).
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
16	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TABLE 1
Official Cardoso Settlement Results
Year	Land Obtained (ha)	Settlements Established	Families Settled
1995	2,754,105 1996	2,742,947 1997	4,017,240 1998	3,140,714 1999	2,369,472 2000	2,256,036 2001	1,852,625 2002	730,435
394	42,912 471	62,044 723	81,944 875	101,094 826	85,226 682	92,986 610	82,449 283	60,000
4,864	608,655
Total
19,863,572
Source: INCRA (2002a).
Other attempts to assess the extent of land reform under Cardoso cast doubt on the accuracy of these numbers. Researchers at the government’s own Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (Institute for Applied Economic Research—IPEA) found a major discrepancy when they compared the settle- ment figures announced by the Ministry of Land Affairs in 1999 and 2000 with numbers from an internal INCRA data set not available to the public or the press.9 The announced figure was 38 percent higher in 1999 and 48 percent higher in 2000. In addition, as part of the investigation mentioned above, the Folha de São Paulo persuaded 20 of the 29 regional INCRA secretariats to report their own settlement totals for 2001. On average, these figures were 14 percent lower than the ones announced by the ministry.
Sparovek (2003) is the closest thing we have to a contemporary census of land reform settlements. This study also tells a different story from the official one. It found 3,534 settlements established in 1995–2001. These had a total area of 17,528,000 hectares and were home to 328,825 families (44). The official figures for these years are 4,581 settlements, 19,862,842 hectares, and 548,665 families. In other words, if the Sparovek data are accurate, the official figures exaggerate the number of settlements by 30 percent and the number of settler families by 66 percent. The degree of the exaggeration is less for the amount of land redistributed, about 13 percent. If we use these percentages to estimate figures for 2002, we get a new estimate for the Cardoso period of 3,752 settle- ments with 364,970 families on 18,174,403 hectares of land. Using this esti- mate, the Cardoso reform encompassed 5.1 percent of the total agricultural land and 5.6 percent of the farming families. Table 2 gives a regional break- down of the 1995–2001 settlements located by Sparovek, showing that they are concentrated mainly in the Northeast and the North.
Officials often attributed the disparity between publicly announced settle- ment figures and other findings to differences in the definition of the word “settlement,” an issue supposedly resolved by Abrão’s 2002 redefinition. With this order, the minister defined all properties acquired for the purpose of land reform as “settlements,” even if they contained no infrastructure or families, and all families approved for land reform as “settlers,” even if they had not actually received land. Obviously, this change did not satisfy critics. Evidence turned up by Folha reporters also suggests that in some cases the ministry
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	17
TABLE 2
Settlements Established 1995–2001 According to Sparovek
Region	Settlements	Land Obtained (1,000s ha)	Families
North 701 Northeast 1,626 Center-West 532 Southeast 318 South 357
Total	3,534
7,561 4,377 4,386
820
383 17,528
90,523 139,856 59,261 20,678 18,508 328,825
Source: Sparovek (2003).
added to its totals families that had received land under a previous adminis- tration but got some additional infrastructure or service from Cardoso (Folha de São Paulo, September 29, 2002).
Not surprisingly, there is little agreement about the impact of reform on land distribution. According to the INCRA, the Gini coefficient for land dropped from 0.856 in 1995 to 0.809 in 2000 (INCRA, 2002a: II.2.1.1). However, experts have questioned the latter figure, noting that it was obtained using methods not employed in other studies (Garcia, 2003: 22). In local areas where reform was particularly intense, at least a moderate impact on the landhold- ing structure is evident. In the areas studied by Heredia et al. (2002) the pro- portion of agricultural land redistributed ranged from 3.1 percent to 40.4 percent (in southeastern Pará). At the state level, however, the proportion of farmland in settlements exceeded 6 percent in only one case, Pará, through the end of 1999 (15).
Critics often argued that Cardoso distributed land of inferior quality in terms of soil quality, climatic conditions, access to markets, and other vari- ables. Other than scattered case studies of individual (mainly pre-Cardoso) settlements, Sparovek appears to be the only source for an answer to this ques- tion. The methodology employed is, as I mentioned, indirect, examining the characteristics of local areas where settlements are located rather than the set- tlements themselves. In addition, the results do not distinguish Cardoso-era settlements from earlier ones. However, since the former make up 81 percent of the total, the data largely reflect the character of the Cardoso settlements.
The results are mixed (Sparovek, 2003: Chap. 6). Easily the most favorable finding was for ease of access to urban areas. Nationally, only 6 percent of set- tlements were in areas below the average in terms of this variable. Results for urban population density (a proxy for local market size) were also acceptable: only half of the settlements scored below average. These results are surpris- ingly good, given the frequent complaints of settlers and activists on these issues. However, they probably reflect, at least in part, the fact that much of the Brazilian territory is still sparsely populated and very difficult of access. Performance on soil quality was also not alarmingly bad, with 56 percent of settlements in areas below the national average. Even in the key farming regions, such as the Southeast, settlements were located in areas of about aver- age soil quality. The results for other variables were less favorable; for example, 67 percent of settlements were in areas with below-average rainfall, and in the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
18	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
notoriously arid Northeast this figure was 81 percent. Perhaps most distress- ing, about 80 percent of settlements were in areas below the national average in terms of the average cash income and gross agricultural production of small- holding families.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Even when settlers do receive good land they may be unable to attain a decent standard of living if they or their communities lack basic infrastructure and services. According to the INCRA “Settler’s Manual,” settlers are to receive a variety of services and infrastructure, including start-up credits for housing and other expenses, demarcation of internal and external settlement boundaries by topographers, potable water, electricity, and sewage treatment (INCRA, 2001). They are also eligible to receive agricultural loans through special credit lines. Implementation of these standards under Cardoso was patchy and often poor.
The INCRA’s own data suggest that the provision of infrastructure and support services lagged behind settlement, especially if one takes the settle- ment numbers at face value. Each family is supposed to receive two loans, one for home construction and another for general expenses, when it arrives on the land. The INCRA final report shows that 333,083 families, 54.7 percent of the number the government claims to have settled, received a housing credit, while 440,121, 72.3 percent, received the other loan. Performance in other areas was worse. Only 265,529 families, 43.6 percent of the total, had their set- tlement boundaries demarcated. This is an obstacle to welfare improvement, since it creates disincentives for long-term investment. The following figures are from graphs lacking exact values and are therefore only approximate: 160,000 families (26 percent) received electric power; 150,000 (25 percent) got access to clean water, and 210,000 (35 percent) had roads constructed in their settlements (INCRA, 2002a: III.3.4).
During his first term, Cardoso improved the existing program of agricul- tural credit for land reform beneficiaries, increasing the maximum amount of loans and improving the terms attached to them. With the elimination of this program in 1999, however, settlers had to get credit from a different program with less favorable conditions.10 The total amount of credit conceded to settlers increased fairly steadily between 1995 and 2000 but plummeted in 2001 and 2002 (INCRA, 2002a: III.3.4). Strikingly, the amount lent out in 2002 was simi- lar to that in 1995 despite the fact that there were about three times as many set- tler families. The number of loan contracts signed under the two programs from 1995 to 2002 came to 565,851.11 Since farmers generally need credit each season to plant, this figure suggests rather limited coverage.
The data collected by Sparovek and Heredia et al. also point to deficits in infrastructure and services. Sparovek (2003: Chap. 5) found that 32 percent of Cardoso-era settler families lacked a permanent dwelling, 62 percent lacked access to emergency medical care, 49 percent lacked access to good water, 29 percent of families with elementary-school-age children lacked access to a school, and 55 percent of the settlements lacked electric power. As a rule, the North, the major frontier region, had the worst conditions. Pre-Cardoso set- tlements generally had better infrastructure, probably reflecting a gradual
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	19
process of improvement. Heredia et al. found that 86 percent of the settle- ments they surveyed had elementary schools, but none offered schooling above the elementary level. Electric power existed in 78 percent of the projects, but only in 27 percent were all the households connected. Only 21 percent of the settlements had health clinics, although 78 percent were reported to be visited by health workers. Sixteen percent of the settlements had telephone service. Most settlements were not connected to the outside world by fully paved roads, and in half of them families reported that the settlement was inaccessible during rainy periods (Heredia et al., 2002: 17–21).
SETTLER WELFARE
Sparovek reports an average monthly income for families that received land under Cardoso of R$198, with regional figures ranging from R$162 in the Northeast to R$244 in the Center-West (2003: 138). The average for pre-Cardoso settlers was R$232. Heredia et al. found a much higher average monthly fam- ily income of R$312, ranging from R$117 in the dry interior of Ceará, in the Northeast, to R$439 in Santa Catarina, in the South (2002: 35). The better results found by Heredia et al. may have to do with the advantages, in terms of access to public services, of being part of a large concentration of settlements. These figures compare rather unfavorably with the average family income in rural Brazil, which was R$428 in 2000, with regional figures ranging from R$245 in the Northeast to R$632 in the South (IBGE, 2000). However, it must be remem- bered that most settlements are fairly new and the families they include were often among the poorest of the poor before obtaining land.
Heredia et al. also asked settlers to compare their present situation with their situation before being settled (2002: 35–36). With regard to overall “life condi- tions,” 91 percent reported being better off now than before. Other results were less impressive but positive: 79 percent said that they had better housing, 70 percent said that the education available to their children was better, 66 percent said that they were eating better, and 62 percent said that they had more pur- chasing power.
THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE
To provide a better sense of the extent of the Cardoso land reform program, in this section I locate it in relation to two comparative frames: the efforts of previous Brazilian governments and past land reforms undertaken in other Latin American countries.
It is hard to dispute the fact that land redistribution accelerated markedly under Cardoso. According to official figures, Cardoso settled an average of 76,081 families per year during his two terms. In contrast, the combined total for all governments between 1964 and 1994 is 218,534, or 7,049 families per year (INCRA, 2002b). During the Sarney and Collor/Franco years 150,138 families received land, for an annual average of 15,014 (INCRA, n.d.: 6). Even if we use Sparovek’s more modest numbers we find an impressive accelera- tion. The 1985–1994 annual average of 12,966 families settled falls very far
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
20	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TABLE 3
Latin American Land Reforms: Brazil in Comparative Perspective
Land Redistributed	Beneficiary Families Country (Years)	(% of total farmland)	(% of total farm families)
Bolivia (1952–1970)	18.2 Guatemala (1952–1954)	33.6 Mexico (1934–1940)	12.6 Peru (1969–1976)	39.4 Venezuela (1959–1970)	15.7 Chile (1970–1973)	31.0 Brazil (1995–2002)	5.6 Peru (1963–1969)	3.0 Chile (1967–1970)	9.0 Colombia (1961–1972)	9.6 Ecuador (1964–1969)	1.1 Dominican Republic (1963–1969)	2.0
(5.1)
39.0 33.0 25.8 24.9 14.7 14.0
7.6 (4.6) 7.1 6.0 4.2
3.5 2.0
Source: De Janvry (1981) and author’s calculations.
short of the 46,975 average for 1995–2001. Cardoso’s eight-year total (using my projection for 2002) is almost three times larger than the total for the previ- ous decade. Since land redistribution before 1985 was minimal, it seems clear that Cardoso settled more families than all the previous Brazilian presidents combined.
The second comparative frame of reference is land reforms in other Latin American countries. Just about every country in the region has undertaken some rural land redistribution (De Janvry, 1981; Thiesenhusen, 1989). Table 3 situates the Cardoso reform in relation to some of the others, including most of the largest and all of the largest reforms undertaken by democratically elected governments. The numbers in parentheses were calculated using Sparovek’s settlement data, projected through 2002.12
Clearly, the Cardoso program pales in comparison with the major reforms, such as those of Cárdenas in Mexico and the MNR in Bolivia, but it is compa- rable to some of the minor but not altogether insignificant ones of the 1960s, such as those of Belaúnde in Peru and Frei in Chile. Cardoso officials often argued that their reform represented the maximum that could be accom- plished without a violent revolutionary rupture. Let us examine this claim. Seven reforms in Table 3 (Guatemala, Chile 1967–1970 and 1970–1973, Peru 1963–1969, Venezuela, and Colombia) were undertaken by democratically elected governments. In terms of its overall extent, the Cardoso reform falls roughly in the middle of this pack, suggesting that deeper reform is indeed possible under democracy. Tellingly, however, the governments (Arbenz in Guatemala and Allende in Chile) that carried out by far the largest of these reforms were subsequently overthrown in military coups, attesting to the real difficulty of undertaking a major land redistribution under democratic condi- tions. In both Venezuela and Colombia, moreover, much of the land redistrib- uted belonged to the state rather than to private owners, making the reforms less politically contentious than they otherwise would have been.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	21
THE CARDOSO LAND REFORM: A POLITICAL ANALYSIS
As the above discussion suggests, Cardoso’s land reform program did not approach a sweeping restructuring of the land tenure system. Relative to the past, however, the Cardoso years did bring a marked intensification of land redistribution. This change merits explanation both because of its magnitude and because a number of characteristics of this government seemed to make it an unlikely candidate to be its protagonist. As I have said, Cardoso’s coalition included all of Brazil’s major conservative parties. Just as important, Cardoso had won the 1994 election on a platform stressing macroeconomic stability and market reform. More than any other president since World War II, Cardoso had a mandate to restrain spending and reduce the scope of state intervention in the economy. These conditions seemed to bode ill for land reform.
How, then, can we explain Cardoso’s surprising progress relative to past governments? In broad strokes, there are two main perspectives on this issue. One is represented mainly by Cardoso allies and some intellectuals, who see the program as a largely proactive initiative by a progressive president bent on reducing inequality and modernizing society. Perhaps the most sophisti- cated case of this type is made by the sociologist José de Souza Martins (2000). While not entirely dismissing the role of social protest, Martins emphasizes a proactive attempt by the state under Cardoso to combat the backward, oli- garchic aspects of rural society by breaking up unproductive estates, exerting greater state control over land use, and making good on the constitution’s promises regarding the “social function” of land.
The second view is championed by land reform activists and most scholars of the agrarian question in Brazil. It sees the intensification of land redistribu- tion by the Cardoso administration as essentially a product of the unprece- dented strength and organization attained by the MST-led land reform movement during the 1990s. For Wright and Wolford (2003: 276), for example, the Cardoso government did not accelerate reform “of its own volition.” Instead, “a social movement has forced the steps of an incomplete reform while the government has played a complicated and demoralizing game, crippling rather than fostering any real societal commitment to reform.”
In my view, neither view is by itself entirely correct. However, each contains or at least reflects an important element of truth. The idea that Cardoso’s land reform was a proactive initiative is contradicted by the evidence that land reform was a low priority for the government until events forced it into a reori- entation in late 1995 and, more decisively, 1996. Surely, no president bent on restructuring rural society would have put leaders of the conservative, landowner-dominated PTB in the two major positions of authority regarding land reform, as Cardoso did early in his first term. A president committed to land reform, moreover, would presumably not have allowed the INCRA’s manpower to deteriorate or permitted the percentage of the national budget devoted to this policy to fall by more than half during his second term.
Nonetheless, in their enthusiasm for defending Cardoso’s progressive motives, champions of the first position unwittingly betray a significant factor in the acceleration of land reform, one often ignored by proponents of the second: the president’s need to fulfill the expectations of progressive change created by his election. Although Cardoso’s coalition and program were basically
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
22	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
conservative, part of his appeal as a candidate lay in his background as a leftist intellectual and an opponent of the military regime. This helped him attract the support of much of the urban middle class and the intelligentsia, groups that would otherwise have hesitated to support a candidate allied with the PFL and the PTB. By comparison, Sarney and Collor, both conservative Northeasterners, lacked the same enlightened image. Itamar Franco had no public image to speak of before taking office and, in any case, was a caretaker president of whom little was expected. The fact that Cardoso introduced no major social initiatives and aggressively confronted organized labor early in his government generated a growing gap between his image and the conservative reality of his policies. Land reform ended up filling this gap, especially during his first term. Although the acceleration of land reform was largely forced on him by political pressure, Cardoso used it to bolster his progressive credentials for his 1998 reelection campaign, turning a liability into an asset.
The second perspective on the Cardoso land reform also contributes an important element of truth. By the mid-1990s the MST was the most extensive and best-organized rural movement in Brazilian history.13 The gradual growth of this organization during the late 1980s and early 1990s made it more likely that the agrarian question would eventually reemerge as a major political issue, as it did under Cardoso. In accelerating the pace of land reform, moreover, Cardoso was clearly responding to the political problems created by both the intended and the unintended consequences of landless protest. In terms of the latter, I am referring mainly to the two major police massacres of landless pro- testors. As my earlier account suggests, the public outcry surrounding these events in Brazil and abroad was largely responsible for pushing the president to take land reform more seriously.
Employing elements from each perspective, then, we can explain the accel- eration of land reform during the Cardoso years as the product of a confronta- tion between a growing social movement and a president with a progressive, modernizing image to protect. It would be an error, however, to interpret the program as the inevitable result of this combination of circumstances. In my opinion, chance events also played a substantial role in determining the out- come. In particular, I would emphasize the importance of the massacres at Corumbiara and, especially, Eldorado do Carajás. Although violent conflicts over land have been quite commonplace in Brazil and certainly could have been expected to occur under Cardoso, these incidents were in some ways highly unusual, and their timing was extremely opportune as far as the land reform cause was concerned.
Eldorado was exceptional in a number of ways. First, at least to my knowl- edge, it was the largest single incident of land-related violence in Brazil in sev- eral decades. Second, it is quite possibly the only instance in Brazilian history in which deadly land-related conflict has ever been captured on motion picture film, providing a powerful image of “public security” forces attacking appar- ently unarmed protestors. Disturbing still photographs of the corpses taken after the massacre added additional fuel to the fire. Finally, the fact that the Eldorado killings followed another exceptionally large and brutal massacre of landless protestors, at Corumbiara, by only a few short months made it much harder to dismiss the event as an aberration. This unusual combination of circumstances ended up transforming the Eldorado do Carajás incident into a strikingly powerful and enduring symbol of injustice in the Brazilian countryside.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	23
In terms of maximizing their impact on land reform, the massacres also occurred at an advantageous moment. In mid-1996 Cardoso was just beginning to lay the groundwork for reelection, a difficult process requiring as an initial step a constitutional amendment. Since the main opposition was predictably going to come from progressive forces, Cardoso needed to shore up his weak social flank. The explosion of the land reform issue at this point, when he still lacked any other significant social initiative, virtually ensured that it would become an important element of Cardoso’s claim to being a progressive presi- dent. Although he would substantially reduce the resources devoted to this policy during his second term, this strong show of commitment to land reform early in his presidency made it harder for him to back down from land reform altogether in subsequent years.
CONCLUSION
Few issues during the Cardoso years were as polarizing as land reform. Disagreements sprang not only from differing interpretations of official figures but from doubts about the figures themselves. I have attempted to bring greater clarity to this issue by drawing on the slowly increasing stock of infor- mation on Cardoso’s program. I have also tried to give a better sense of the extent of this program by comparing it with both the efforts of past Brazilian governments and some of the reforms undertaken in other Latin American countries. Finally, I have sought to explain how Cardoso, despite leading a center-right coalition government with a liberalizing economic agenda, became easily the most productive president in Brazilian history in terms of settling landless families.
As the data I have presented suggest, many of the criticisms of Cardoso’s land reform are essentially correct. The government’s official settlement figures were substantially inflated, and only a small percentage of the agricultural population received land. Many of the new “settlements,” moreover, lacked even the most minimal infrastructure and services. In my opinion, however, the most realistic standard by which to judge this reform is in comparison with what other governments have done, since this standard takes into account the considerable political obstacles to land reform. In this sense, the Cardoso program does not look quite so bad. Compared with previous Brazilian presi- dents, Cardoso’s superiority is clear. Without a doubt, he settled more landless families than all of his predecessors combined. From a pan–Latin American perspective, the results are more ambiguous but, in a way, also fairly positive. Compared with the major land reforms in Latin American history, the Cardoso reform was a negligible achievement, but few, if any, democratically elected Latin American governments have undertaken substantially deeper land reforms and survived to boast about it.
Given the character of Cardoso’s government and economic program, one of the most interesting questions about his land reform program is why it did not simply replicate the pathetic results of past administrations. To a large extent, this outcome was the predictable result of two aspects of the political context at the outset of Cardoso’s government: the president’s personal image as a progressive leader (combined with his failure to implement progressive
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
24	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
initiatives) and the growing strength of the MST-led movement for land reform. As I have argued, however, it would be mistake to see the program as simply the inevitable product of these contextual factors. Chance events, par- ticularly the major landless massacres of the mid-1990s, also played an impor- tant role. Had these events not occurred, occurred at a different time, or occurred in a different way, Cardoso might well have felt substantially less pressure to push forward land reform.
NOTES
1. Nevertheless, a number of assessments of Cardoso’s land reform have appeared in recent years, including Wright and Wolford (2003), Pereira (2003), Malin (2002), and Branford and Rocha (2002).
2. The development of the MST has been studied extensively. Some of the more compre- hensive and more recent studies include Wright and Wolford (2003), Branford and Rocha (2002), Ondetti (in press), and Fernandes (2000).
3. Under the legal structure adopted by the military government in 1964, private rural prop- erties could be expropriated on the basis of size alone. The 1988 Constitution eliminated this pos- sibility, limiting expropriation to large properties that also failed to meet minimum requirements in terms of agricultural productivity or compliance with labor or environmental codes. In prac- tice, expropriation has been limited to large, unproductive properties.
4. By 2002, occupations had declined to slightly above 1995 levels. For data on land occupa- tions and other rural social conflicts, see the CPT’s web site, http://www.cptnac.com.br.
5. The first story appeared on April 21, 2002. The reports were written by Eduardo Scolese and Ivan Valente.
6. Unfortunately, this document, which is more than 500 pages long, does not have page numbers. I cite the sections in which information cited is located.
7. The commissioning of this study appears to have been intended to address widening crit- icism of the INCRA’s settlement figures. However, as my discussion suggests, its results solidify the impression that the government’s figures were inflated.
8. The figure for total farmland is from the 1995/1996 agricultural census, available from the federal census bureau web site, http://www/igbe.gov.br. The number of families involved in agricultural production is from Del Grossi and Graziano da Silva (2000: 73).
9. Results of the study are reported in the Folha de São Paulo, April 28, 2002. 10. This new program was established in 1996 to benefit family farmers. When the first program was abolished in 1999, the government established a special line within the second for land-
reform settlers. 11. This figure combines figures for the first program reported by INCRA (2002a) with those
for the second reported on its official web site, http://www.pronaf.gov.br. 12. I have used the official settlement numbers as the main frame of reference for the Cardoso land reform, since the data reported for other countries also come from government sources. As I have noted, the official Cardoso figures appear to be significantly inflated. However, it would
be naïve to assume that governments in other countries do not engage in this practice as well. 13. Although the rural workers’ union system is more extensive, many local unions are little more than conduits for the delivery of social services and thus are not really social-movement
organizations.
REFERENCES
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha 2002 Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Ondetti / LAND REFORM	25
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique 1999 “Discurso do presidente da República, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, em audiência ao presidente, diretores e superintendentes do INCRA—Palácio do Planalto.” Agência Brasil. http://www.radiobras.gov.br/integras/99/integra_2112_2.htm.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo and José Graziano da Silva 2000 “Ocupação nas familias agrícolas e rurais no Brasil, 1992–1997,” in Clayton Campanhola and José Graziano da Silva (eds.), O novo rural brasileiro: Uma análise nacional e regional. Jaguariúna, SP: Embrapa.
De Janvry, Alain 1981 The Agrarian Question and Reformism in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano 2000 A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Garcia, Ronaldo Coutinho 2003 O desenvolvimento rural e o PPA 2000/2003. IPEA Texto para Discussão 938.
Gasques, José Garcia and Carlos Monteiro Villa Verde 2003 Gastos públicos na agricultura: Evolução e mudanças. IPEA Texto para Discussão 948.
Heredia, Beatriz, Leonilde Medeiros, Moacir Palmeira, Rosângela Cintrão, and Sérgio Leite 2002 “Os impactos regionais da reforma agrária: um estudo sobre áreas selecionadas.” MS.
Hoffman, Rodolfo 1998 A estrutura fundiária no Brasil de acordo do cadastro do INCRA: 1967 a 1998. Campinas: Unicamp.
IBGE (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística) 2000 “Censo demográfico: trabalho e rendimento.” http://www.igbe.gov.br.
INCRA (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária) 1999a “Jungmann divulga Novo Mundo Rural projecto de reformulação da reforma agrária em discussão pelo governo.” Brasília. 1999b Balanço da reforma agrária e da agricultura familiar. Brasília. 2001 Manual dos assentados e assentadas da reforma agrária. Brasília. 2002a Balanço global de gestão: Relatório final. Brasília. 2002b Balanço da reforma agrária. Brasília. n.d. Resumo das atividades do INCRA—1985/1994. Brasília.
Malin, Mauro 2002 “Agricultura e reforma agrária,” in Bolívar Lamounier and Rubens Figueiredo (eds.), A era FHC: Um balanço. São Paulo: Cultura.
Martins, José de Souza 1999 “Reforma agrária: o impossível diálogo sobre a história possível.” Tempo Social 11: 97–128.
Ondetti, Gabriel Forthcoming. Land, Protest and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park, PA: Penn State.
PT (Partido dos Trabalhadores) 1999 Primeiro governo FHC (1995–1998): “Dossiê” reforma agrária e agricultura. Brasília: Secretaria Agrária Nacional, Liderança da Bancada na Câmara Federal.
Pereira, Anthony 2003 “Brazil’s agrarian reform: democratic innovation or oligarchic exclusion redux?” Latin American Politics and Society 45: 41–65.
Sparovek, Gerd 2003 A qualidade dos assentamentas da reforma agrária brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas & Letras.
Thiesenhusen, William C. (ed.) 1989 Searching for Agrarian Reform in Latin America. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford 2003 To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. San Francisco: Food First.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2003
JCEPS
Education
Participation and Education in the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil
Tristan McCowan

Laboratory of Public Policy, University of Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil
Citation information
1 (March 2003)
ISSN 1740-2743
Abstract
This paper analyses the significance of participation in the educational work of the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil (MST), a social movement for agrarian reform that has established a network of schools in its communities. In contrast to the tokenist approaches of many government and supranational agencies, the MST’s view of participation is rooted in principles of radical democracy and social justice. The movement aims not only to enable the landless to participate fully as citizens in society, but also to be active in challenging and reformulating societal structures. Education in the MST is related to participation in two ways: firstly the education system itself is participatory, allowing the involvement of all stakeholders in planning, implementation and evaluation; secondly, education is a means by which landless people can develop the skills and knowledge to participate more effectively in the wider society. While there are certain areas, such as gender, where the MST is still developing an effective strategy, the movement displays high levels of internal participatory equality, and has developed a pedagogy designed to enable transformatory participation in the political, economic and cultural spheres.  [Note [1] ]

The Landless People’s Movement of Brazil (MST[2]) fits uncomfortably into any simplistic categorization of contemporary society. It is a political organization engaged in the struggle for land reform, while at the same time developing radical new forms of grassroots democracy, environmental care and co-operative production. It is a constant foe of the government[3], implementing an almost unending series of occupations of land and public buildings, and yet runs its settlements and schools in partnership with state bodies. It has a strong hierarchical structure and at the same time a deep involvement of all members in short and long term policy making. While having an atavistic and romantic attachment to the land and traditional agriculture, the movement is committed to a modern progressive education for all in the communities.
Perhaps it is this unusual combination that explains its remarkable success. Starting in the early 1980s from a unification of various landless people’s mobilizations in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, the movement has grown into a vast national enterprise. Through its non-violent land occupations[4], intended to pressurize the government into fulfilling its constitutional obligations as regards the redistribution of idle farmland, the MST has won 15 million acres for land reform (an area almost the size of the Republic of Ireland), and created 1,500 agricultural communities, settling over 250,000 families (Brandford and Rocha 2002; Landless Workers Movement 2002; MST 2003)[5].
Its achievements have been no less remarkable in the area of education. Recognizing the needs of the many children in the new settlements, a series of makeshift ‘itinerant’ schools were established, led by the few qualified teachers from among the landless and by committed educators from the nearby towns. As the settlements became permanent communities, these were gradually converted into officially recognised public schools. In light of the specific needs of the rural world and those of a radical social movement a new pedagogy and philosophy of school organization emerged, based on the movement’s principles of social justice, radical democracy and humanist and socialist values (MST 1999a)[6]. The movement now runs over 1,200 schools, educating approximately 150,000 children, as well as 25,000 young people and adults in literacy courses (Brandford and Rocha 2002).
An area in which the work of the MST is of particular significance to social movements worldwide, and to public policy in general, is that of participation. Almost all the landless joining the movement come from a state of acute exclusion: the task of the movement is to enable them to participate in the different spheres of society - political, economic and cultural - and to exercise their full rights as citizens. However, in addition to this, the movement aims to enable a still deeper form of participation, one in which the individual and the community have a real influence on the formation of those societal structures in which they are participating.
Frameworks of participation
Participation is now so widely accepted as an essential feature of governance and policy formation that even unconstitutional dictators can hardly omit it from their manifestos. The understandings and practical applications of the concept are, however, startlingly diverse.
Participation has been defined as the principle that:
those who will be substantially affected by decisions made by social and political institutions must be involved in the making of those decisions. (EEC, quoted in Bullock et al. 1988: 630)
All democracy requires some participation, yet levels of political involvement in contemporary democratic societies are most often limited to voting in national and local elections (with a limited selection of viable candidates). According to Barber (1984) our representative democracies have a combination of authoritarian, juridical and pluralist approaches, none of which provide a genuine opportunity for citizens (with the exception of politicians) to be active politically. Only participatory democracy (in its strong and not unitary form) is seen to provide an adequate model.
While models of participatory democracy have been developed since the time of Rousseau, it is only since the 1960s that the concept has gained real prominence, with growing demands for participation in decision-making in the work place, universities and local administration, as well as national government.
The growing movement for participatory democracy today is largely a response to globalization, neo-liberal economic policy - and the consequently increasing concentration of wealth and power - and the disproportionate influence of multi-national corporations and unelected supranational bodies such as the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Trade Organization (WTO). Neo-liberalism is characterized by a conception of the individual as consumer, participating ‘freely’ in the market, rather than as a citizen achieving freedom through active participation in the political sphere.
Even elected democratic governments, while using the rhetoric of participation, are seen to provide few real opportunities for involvement in decision-making. Gentili (1998) describes the falsification of consensus[7] whereby neo-liberal policies are implemented on the basis of processes that are apparently democratic, but which deny the majority a genuine opportunity to consider alternatives and make choices. It is not only neo-liberalism, however, that is seen to be lacking: the centrally-planned socialist governments, and even the social democracies of the twentieth century rarely showed evidence of true participation by all members of society.
Participation, and lack of it, is today seen as a key indicator of quality of life. The oppressed suffer not just from poverty, but from exclusion, which can involve economic, political and cultural arenas. Social policy, therefore, must aim for the inclusion of all in society. As well as individuals within a society, whole countries and regions can be seen to suffer from exclusion. This has made the participation/exclusion rhetoric central to international development and the work of the large NGOs and transnational aid agencies. Increasing resistance has emerged to outside modes of development being imposed on communities without their active involvement. In addition to this, participation of local communities is also seen as leading to more effective implementation of development projects. All areas of development from the 1960s onwards began to consider participation as a vital ingredient.
One of the high gurus of participation in international development is Robert Chambers (1997), who has written extensively on the subject in the context of rural communities. He was closely involved with Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) in the 1990s, which aimed to harness rural people’s skills in order to plan, implement and evaluate their own development projects. These approaches are, without doubt, an improvement on externally planned development, but it is important to identify the exact nature of the participation involved. Are people able to define the structures of their participation for themselves, or are they participating in arenas that have been defined by others?
With PRA, although the villagers are strongly involved in the projects, there is little attention paid to their general ability to participate as citizens in society, or to challenge existing societal structures. Participation for Chambers is mainly technical, focusing on the geographic and economic without great emphasis on the political or the historical. Archer and Cottingham (1996) describe his view of culture as static and unproblematized and contrast it to the more dynamic approach of Paulo Freire.
One of the most scathing of attacks on the empty rhetoric of participation is made by Rahnema (1992). Opposing the forms of participation advocated by Chambers, he analyses the contradictions, dangers and hypocrisy associated with the term. Participation has universally positive connotations, but in reality people can participate in organizations that are harmful, or have a harmful effect on beneficent organizations. He shows how what was initially a radical proposal has been co-opted by governments and other powerful agencies. Far from being a threat to the state, participation is increasingly seen as an economically efficient and politically attractive form of governance.
Since the 1980s a major force in developing new forms of participatory politics (and a strong influence on the MST) is the Brazilian Worker’s Party (PT[8]). Rebecca Abers’s (2000) study on the PT in the Southern Brazilian city of Porto Alegre explores the decision-making process known as the participatory budget, which allowed widespread involvement in expenditure as well as local voting on neighbourhood improvements. The study seeks to show why the PT succeeded in mobilizing and empowering the poor where many other institutions have failed, defining as key elements of empowering participatory policy that it must be open to those hitherto excluded, involve discussion rather than just implementation, and involve effective citizen control.
Abers makes the distinction here between instrumental and empowering participation. The former is where participation is used as a means of implementing policy more efficiently, with no real desire for any power to be devolved to the participants. With the latter, people have genuine influence on decision-making and develop their own personal capacities in the process.
This instrumental participation is evident in many neo-liberal policies in the field of education. Researchers, such as Apple (1999) and Gentili (1998), have identified contradictions between elements of centralization and decentralization. While neo-liberalism is normally characterized by the latter, control over the content of education has actually been centralized in the form of national curricula and standardized assessments. Decentralization is often financial, and used by the state as an opportunity for abdication of responsibility. The individual is seen to be participating not as a citizen involved in policy formation, but as a consumer in the education market.
Hawes and Stephens (1990) in their research on primary schools in Africa found that in practice participation was often limited to financial or labour contributions with little local influence over the content or nature of schooling, raising suspicions that governments were more interested in reducing expenditure than decentralizing decision-making.
Apple and Beane agree:
Moreover, much of the talk about ‘site-based’ management, while appearing to reverse such centralization, actually amounts to little more than localising struggles over limited resources and accountability for policy and programme decisions made in different places. (Apple & Beane 1999: 21)
However, there are signs of hope. Gandin and Apple’s (2002) study on the ‘Citizen Schools’ in Porto Alegre shows radical new forms of participation in education, with community members having influence over school organization, curriculum and choice of staff, with no extra financial burden. Other inspiring examples are presented in Apple and Beane (1999). The MST, in a different context, is aiming to achieve a similar degree of radical democratic participation.
Research
Research into the educational work of the MST consisted firstly of interviews conducted with teachers and educational co-ordinators[9] in April and May 2002. These interviews (ten in total, with numbers varying from one to four interviewees) were carried out in six different communities - four assentamentos, one acampamento [10] and the building site of the new MST national school - in the states of Espírito Santo, Bahia and São Paulo.
The second main source of information for the research was official MST educational material. These pamphlets are written by the movement’s National Education Sector, are published centrally and distributed to all the communities. They are intended to act as teaching guides, to aid educational workers in establishing new schools, and to inform community members about the movement’s general principles of education. Six of these pamphlets were used for analysis.
These sources provide different perspectives on the educational work of the movement: while the latter give a theoretical outline of its organization and principles, the former consist of personal experiences and views of the work in practice. The research in general did not attempt to determine the ‘results’ or ‘effects’ of education in the movement, but to identify principles and understandings.
The MST is unusual among social movements in having a large and well-developed system of schools, providing an education that is directly linked to the aims of the movement. While the MST considers all movement activity as educational, this study will focus primarily on participation in the school system.
Understandings of participation in the MST
If it is to be part of the movement, a school must have the involvement of all, in an organised, participative and democratic way. (MST 2001b: 73) [11]
MST understandings of participation in education go beyond the involvement of parents in the schooling of their child, or pupil choice in curriculum matters (though these elements are also present). Participation in the MST is based on the movement’s ideal of radical democracy.
[F]or us democracy is not just a detail, a word. It is one of the fundamental pillars of our pedagogical framework and our plan of social transformation. (MST 1995: 8)
To consider democracy a pedagogical principle means, according to our educational framework, that it is not enough for students to study or discuss it; they need also, and most importantly, to experience an arena of democratic participation, educating themselves for social democracy. (MST 1999a: 20)
In other words in order to prepare people for democracy and participation through education, the educational system itself must be run on the democratic principles it is trying to promote.
The MST believes that socialism is only possible with grassroots participative bodies, rather than a centralized decision-making structure. For this end, each camp or settlement has elaborate systems of democratic representation, feeding information up to local, state and national levels who are intended to act as co-ordinating and not directing entities.
The relationship between the participative groups is that of ascending and descending democracy. That is to say the issues are discussed in the grassroots nuclei and then approved in the general co-ordinating body. They are then implemented with a distribution of responsibilities. (MST 2001b: 34)
The co-ordination has a part, but decisions in the MST are really taken by the people. (João, Acampamento Boa Vista [12])
Participation is seen here to be closely linked to the idea of the collective, a fundamental principle of the movement. Firstly, the educational work itself must be carried out collectively:
The big and even the little activities of day-to-day life in the school must be planned collectively…. Where the planning is concentrated in a few heads (from top to bottom) there is no democracy…. (MST 1995: 8)
The document is clear to point out that collective planning does not mean the involvement of all people in all decisions: there must be a combination of participation and division of tasks (MST 1995: 8).
Education must then prepare people for living collectively. Effective participation is usually seen as occurring via a group or collective, rather than as isolated individuals. This has implications in terms of the ability of members of the MST to participate in society outside of the movement, an important issue that will be discussed further below. Nevertheless, despite the emphasis on collectivism and rejection of the cultural legacy of individualism, the MST stops short of discarding the individual altogether:
However, this does not mean sidelining the person: on the contrary all the pedagogical principles that we are dealing with here have the person as their central focus; not the isolated individual, but the subject of relationships, with other people, with collectives and with a particular social and historical context. (MST 1999a: 23)
The individual that the MST theory of participation is built around, therefore, is not the homo economicus of neo-liberal development programmes, but one who exists in a particular historical and political context and as part of a collective identity.
Education must aim to promote amongst students the idea of participation itself. The values transmitted must be concerned with:
the collective production and appropriation of the material and spiritual goods of humanity, justice in the distribution of these goods and equality of participation in all these processes. (MST 1999a: 9)
The concept of citizenship was raised a number of times by the teachers and co-ordinators without prompting by the interviewer. This suggests that despite being part of a social movement with strong boundaries, they consider participation as something that must extend to society in general. While criticising the present government and politico-economic system they do not reject the idea of the state and the need to be a citizen within it. The comments on citizenship must be seen in the light of the fact that many people in Brazil, while nominally citizens, are not able to claim their rights and fulfil their duties, and therefore have been denied true membership of society.
Our schools work directly with the idea of the citizen…. We need the idea of a citizen so people don’t feel inferior to others. They have to learn their rights and respect those of others. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
With education a person becomes a citizen, becomes human…. People leave school and they say, ‘Look I’m a person too, I’m a citizen’. After that they have no difficulty with learning. The people in the settlements come from a complex poor background. Without school they can’t really be part of society on an equal footing. (Joana, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
It is interesting to observe here that as well as citizenship being enabled by education, it is seen to facilitate further learning.
Firstly, children need to have their constitutional rights to schooling met.
The movement…also needs a legalized school, so that the children of this struggle can exercise their rights as citizens…. (MST 2001b: 73)
This educational citizenship is by no means guaranteed in Brazil. Official figures show net primary enrolment to be 96%, although nearly half of these will repeat at least one year. Only 25% go on to secondary school, and 11% to university. Illiteracy nation-wide runs at 12.8%, with the figure much higher in rural areas, and there are many more who are only semi-literate (IBGE 2001). The first aim of the movement, therefore, is to obtain basic access to education for the landless. The practice of demanding government funding for their schools rather than seeking independent sources is an indication of the movement’s desire to claim for its members their rights as citizens of the state.
Yet these basic rights are not enough: participation must be taken to deeper levels. In Escola Itinerante: uma Prática Pedagógica em Acampamentos (2001) one of the stated aims of education is:
To awaken the organizational consciousness and spirit of leadership of the children, adolescents, educators and community, with political clarity in order to exercise citizenship. (MST 2001b: 72)
This suggests that true citizenship requires an element of conscientization, an idea that will be developed further below.
Citizenship is therefore seen to be an essential pre-requisite for effective participation. There are two stages: claiming one’s fundamental rights and then extending one’s own capabilities for exercising those rights.
There also appear to be two aims of participation in the MST. The first is organizational, contributing to the effective running of the community and the movement; the second is the conscientizing effect that the process can have on the participant. The ‘organizational consciousness’ described above is a bridge between the two, allowing the conscientizing process to feed into more effective organization. Ideally the organizing and conscientizing elements - both essential for a social movement - can co-exist, although they may be in conflict.
This, therefore, is the theoretical framework of participation in the MST; the implementation in practice will now be discussed. It is important to note that the movement freely admits that its ideals have not all been realised, and that their achievement is a long, slow process.
Participation within the MST education system
As with all aspects of MST organization, the education system has an elaborate series of structures designed to ensure the participation of all. This occurs at the level of the individual community [13] as well as in terms of the decisions made by the movement at the regional or national level.
The following entities are found in the communities:
The general assembly is composed of all the members of the community, meets once or twice a year and discusses and approves the overall plan for the school as well as other significant or controversial matters.
The education team[14] is composed of a representative number of teachers, pupils and community members and meets monthly. Here the details and implementation of the overall plan are discussed. Like all MST nuclei, the community representatives are chosen by direct vote by the community as a whole and are accountable to the general assembly. The pupils are generally chosen by their classmates, and all the teachers are normally represented.
The teachers’ collective involves all the teachers, and customarily meets once a week to organise the day-to-day running of the school, including lesson-planning, special activities and the ‘generative themes’ (cross-curricular topics of study).
The pupils’ collective organizes those tasks for which the pupils have responsibility, such as the school pharmacy, meals or assemblies. It also provides suggestions on the general plan of the school as it affects the students. The age of the representatives and the selection procedure depend on the individual community. (MST 1995: 8-9; MST 1999b: 19)
These bodies are intended to give all those with a stake in education the chance to contribute and have their voice heard. There are efforts to make the national co-ordination equally participative. Teachers from the different regions and states meet periodically to exchange ideas and to train; co-ordinators also meet to discuss progress and problems. The National Education Sector is comprised of representatives from each of the states, and elected by the co-ordinators, who pass on the experiences of the individual schools in their area. In this way decision-making at the national level is intended to emerge form the experiences on the ground. The same is true for the movement’s educational publications. However, while the pedagogical principles do without doubt emerge from practical experience, their formulation and expression in practice is the work of a core group, in particular the educationist Roseli Caldart[15].
The interviews provided a number of perspectives on participation within the communities, concerning parents and other community members, pupils and teachers.
i) Community
In educational work worldwide there is little argument that the involvement of parents and the local community in the schooling of children is beneficial to the general efficiency of the school and to pupil’s learning (Hawes and Stephens 1990). The MST shares this view, but extends it in significant ways.
Community members are seen to be able to participate in the following ways:
	1.	Being part of school council or educational team
	2.	Working on projects for school improvements
	3.	Helping to maintain the memory of the struggle
	4.	Inviting teachers to take part in community events
	5.	Giving technical help to the school
	6.	Contributing their skills to the learning in school
	7.	Using the school space for meetings and courses
	8.	Adopting the school as part of the community
(MST 1999b: 18)
There is therefore a two way process: involving the community in the activities of the school and giving the school a more active role in the community.
Parents were seen to be closely involved:
Whenever a decision needs to be made about the school, it’s always parents, pupils and teachers together: in all the schools there’s this concept. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
To organise you have to evaluate. The parents come in every month and say what was good, what helped and what didn’t help. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
They are also seen to be prepared to mobilize in support of the school:
Here the government can’t just decide to remove a teacher. I for example don’t have pedagogia, just magistério[16], but the governor won’t get rid of me because the families would react and he’d have to put me back. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
However, some teachers had reservations about the extent to which parents actually involved themselves.
There are some families that send their children to the school in town. It’s a democracy, everybody chooses: some choose not to send their children to the MST school. Some don’t like the alternância[17]…. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
This is particularly true for families that have come into the settlements from outside the movement:
Because people who come in from outside don’t have any identification with the schools or the movement or anything. We did some research to find out about the families: some didn’t even respond, they had no interest in the school whatsoever. (Paulo, Assentamento Marajó)
This shows how community participation is dependent not only on concern for children’s schooling but also on an identification with the body running the school.
In contrast to the community consultations of many development programmes, members of the MST communities are seen to have a real influence on the running of the school, particularly since in most cases it was they who built it, set it in motion and fought for state funding. The extent of involvement in day-to-day management and curriculum decisions, however, will always depend on the capacities and inclination of the individual community members.
ii) Students
We understand by self-organization the right of pupils to organise themselves into collectives, with their own space and time, to analyse and discuss their own issues, to elaborate proposals and make their own decisions with a view to participating as subjects in the democratic management of the educative process, and of the school as a whole. (MST 1999b: 14)
In addition to community members, students are also intended to participate in the development of their own education and the running of the school in general. ‘Student self-organization’ is one of the thirteen pedagogical principles of the MST, intended to help young people develop skills in leadership, co-operation, problem solving and critical thinking (MST 1999a: 21).
When people are given everything, dependence is reinforced and the person never becomes a subject. It is part of the process that people wanting to become literate organise themselves to achieve this objective. (MST 1994: 15)
This statement refers to adults: clearly the nature of participation for younger children is going to be different. The interviews, however, revealed strong perceptions of pupil involvement at all levels:
The teachers decide the themes, but it is the children who elaborate, fill out the content. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
Researcher: Do pupils also have involvement?
Renata: Yes, they do in the making of the rules: there are rules, duties and rights that the pupils have in the school….
Alexandre: We normally put them in groups and they debate problems and proposals. This can change things in the school.
(Assentamento Marajó)
This is contrasted with the attitude of pupils in government schools:
I arrived in the middle of the year as a supply teacher. Some of the pupils had already got the grades they needed so they weren’t interested in the work any more. Learning’s not important to them, just passing.(Paulo, Assentamento Marajó)
Evaluation is an important area for participation:
Together with them we evaluate the work, through dialogue. In this evaluation everyone gives their opinion, teachers, pupils, other staff, some people from the community. Everyone can get involved in order to improve things. (Wagner, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
There are also efforts to increase participation within the classroom itself, by encouraging students to express themselves and organizing seating arrangements to encourage contributions from all (MST 1999b: 39). The classes observed during this research generally had the chairs arranged in semi-circles rather than the traditional rows.
Good examples of student participation in the MST are the teacher training courses, described in detail by Caldart (1997), where course management and organization are the responsibility of the students and not the trainers.
Efforts to encourage student participation in the MST are clearly oriented towards the conscientization of the individuals and community. These types of involvement are seen to enhance the school learning of the pupil, as well as provide opportunities for learning not normally present in school. The participation of children in decision-making will always be limited to a certain extent by their age: however, a genuine commitment to listening to and acting on their views can be seen.
iii) Teachers
Thirdly, it is necessary to assess the organization of the teachers themselves. The Principles of Education in the MST (1999) goes as far as to say that:
Without a teachers’ collective there is no real educative process. (MST 1999a: 21)
These relations between teachers are encouraged to ensure that all have a stake in the management and success of the school. Assentamento Chico Mendes did not have a headteacher at all: the staff organised themselves in an entirely horizontal manner, supported by MST co-ordinators. During the time I spent at the school they were discussing plans to create the position of organizer to co-ordinate school activities, rotating between the different members of staff.
Teachers frequently emphasised the involvement they themselves had in the community, particularly in contrast to those in government schools.
There’s a huge difference. Teachers outside [in non-MST schools] are just worried about their salary: they teach their lesson and then off they go. They don’t worry about what the child is doing at home, what he or she ate. The link with the family isn’t there. At least we are trying to do it. We have a great concern for these things. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
Here we’re always involved in the community. We know everyone, we know all the parents. When we have parents’ evenings we send out invitations and everyone comes. (Mercia, Assentamento 1 de Maio)
It must be noted that this level of involvement is present in those teachers that are part of, or sympathetic to, the movement; there are some teachers in MST schools that have simply been allocated by the state and do not have a strong connection to the community.
Teacher participation seems to have a dual function in the MST: firstly the ‘organizational’ aspect, creating a co-operative and efficient body of workers, and secondly to increase their identification with and commitment to the community and the movement. Although the fundamental orientations are formulated by the National Education Sector and enforced by the co-ordinators, teachers do have influence on pedagogical and organizational decision-making in schools.
iv) Gender
Finally, there is the question of the extent to which other factors affect an individual’s participation in the education system, most importantly that of gender.
This kind of exclusion exists in Brazil. Recently in the movement it is getting better, but it still exists. Now you see a group of boys playing football, but there is a girl with them, or girls playing in a ring but with a boy. We have our Gender Sector and women’s groups to debate all of this. (Maria, Assentamento Caraiva)
Why should men’s work be valued more? There’s a great difference in the job market…. So we work with these issues in the camp, women and men being valued equally for going out to the fields. So this way we break what the media has been giving us since the time of our ancestors. (Olga, Acampamento Boa Vista)
It is clear that there are efforts to change the arenas of participation of both genders, and to change attitudes. However, despite the positive impressions, the official rhetoric and the prominent role of some women in the movement, there is undoubtedly survival of traditional machista attitudes and exclusion of women. Further research would be necessary to determine the exact extent of women’s participation in the movement.
Some mention was also made of racial discrimination:
Despite the ending of slavery years ago, Black people are still the objects of prejudice. So this is brought out in the classroom and the camp in general. (João, Acampamento Boa Vista)
There is also some concern for other types of exclusion:
We need, as educators, to keep an eye on each child, since in the games, an overweight girl couldn’t participate in the race and gave up. That is to say, she was excluded. We really have to work with this. (MST 2001c: 21)
However, there is not as yet any significant provision for students with disabilities or special educational needs. These elements of exclusion that occur within a system of full enrolment have yet to receive full attention in the MST, which, for obvious reasons, is still primarily concerned with the extension of schooling to all.
Participation in society
These, therefore, are the ways in which the MST perceives and practices participation within the movement and its schools. However, the influence is not mono-directional: the movement creates the schools in its image, but the schools in turn create the movement of the future. The effect of education on the ability to participate in the movement and the wider society will now be considered.
It can be seen that there are two processes necessary to enable participation: firstly the transformation of external factors - such as discriminatory legislation - and secondly that of internal factors - such as literacy, self-confidence and other personal qualities needed to be able to take advantage of opportunities.
In terms of the former, the MST organises a range of mobilisations to pressurize the government into fulfilling its constitutional duties. The most prominent of these are the land occupations, but there are many concerning education.
This school is the product of the struggle. It’s not here because the government wanted it here; it’s here because the families marched in Salvador and struggled and finally got it. Everything you see in the settlement is the product of the struggle.(Claudia, Assentamento Caraiva)
Researcher: Do all the funds for an assentamento school come from the local council?
Claudia: Yes, apart from the actual structure…. It was marches in São Paulo and Salvador that won grants from the state to put the buildings up.
Researcher: Does the community make a contribution?
Maria: Their contribution is mobilizing, marching.
(Assentamento Caraiva)
Literacy courses for adults are also won only after long battles with the authorities.
Yet once the government has been forced to fulfil its constitutional duties or make legislative changes, reducing the structural influences affecting participation, there are still significant internal factors. Effective participation cannot simply be granted to an individual or community: it depends on a gradual process of human development.
Our experiences have demonstrated that the structures of participation of students, teachers, parents and administrative staff do not in themselves guarantee the process. (MST 1999b: 20)
A vote in a national election, for example, cannot be taken advantage of if the voter does not have the skills and knowledge to access and analyse information about candidates. Education is a key factor here. This is not a question of educational qualifications - which, after all, are only removing external barriers to participation - but of personal capabilities. Literacy, knowledge, analytical skills, self-confidence and communication are all essential if an individual is to be able to use the participative opportunities available. [18]
The aim [of literacy] is to give workers marginalized from academic life access to the knowledge accumulated by humanity.… Grasping this will make them individual and collective subjects of the historical process of which they are a part. (MST 1994: 9)
Without this access it is not possible to participate in society, since participation depends on having particular knowledge about the functioning of one’s own social context and the wider world. MST efforts to implement a politicized and conscientizing pedagogy based on the ideas of Paulo Freire are directly linked to this ability to participate.
There is a final important question. The MST prepares its members for participation, but is this participation confined to the movement? Participation within the education system is fundamental, but is not meaningful unless it is contributing to an increasing ability to participate in society. It is necessary to assess the ways in which the MST empowers its members to participate individually and collectively in the political, economic and cultural spheres.
While not participating in electoral politics as a movement, the settlements do put forward candidates (landless people themselves) for positions as local councillors. MST sympathisers from outside the movement stand for election at all levels under the aegis of the PT.
However, political activity in the MST generally involves pressurising the government and forming strategic links with parties such as the PT, rather than standing for office directly. For Sem Terras, political participation is a part of everyday life from the time they enter the movement. The MST aims to enable people to participate more effectively in elections - by having a more critical perspective on candidates - and by taking direct political action through mobilizations and occupations. The participatory democratic structures of the schools - described above - while valid in themselves, are also a preparation for political participation in the wider society.
A large part of the work of the MST is to enable landless people to participate effectively in the economy: exclusion form this sphere was, after all, the main impetus for the founding of the movement. The main means of achieving this was originally, and still is, the acquisition of land for families; yet the failure of many government-led land reform programmes convinced the MST that this was not enough. Newly settled families needed financial support to get them started and training to increase their skills.
One way of supporting this is the alternância system, where pupils spend alternate weeks at school and at home. In this way children can put into practice the technical skills they have learnt, and are also able to help their families. They attend double the amount of classes in the week they are at school. The movement has the one proviso that contributing to family income must never take precedence over participation in school activities (MST 1999b: 37). While some parents are opposed to the alternância format, it is widely implemented in settlements.
The formal school system is intended to provide for agricultural life, but there are also specialist courses for adults, particularly those who have missed the opportunity of conventional schooling. Most important of these is the TAC[19] (co-operative administration) course in Rio Grande do Sul.
The MST does not intend to prepare young people for work in the cities (in fact it is looked on as something of a failure if a young person leaves the settlement). There is no desire for a neo-liberal conception of participation consisting of entry into the job and consumer market, which for the landless will almost invariably mean exploitative and precarious work. However, the completion of primary education - and the chance of further education - which the MST can guarantee to nearly all of its children, is clearly allowing them the opportunity of participation in the labour market beyond that of the rural environment.
Cultural participation is also a concern of the MST. This is strongly linked to the idea of dignity and the valuing of the rural world from which the majority of the members come.
Perhaps the central part of the movement’s cultural work is the promotion of the Sem Terra (landless) identity. This, however, while intending to combat exclusion, can cause problems in terms of integration. While the cultivation of this identity helps achieve movement aims, it also creates a distance between the members of the movement and the rest of society. Ironically it might be seen that while valuing citizenship, the movement is encouraging participation in society as Sem Terras and not as ordinary citizens. The difference of identity can be difficult for young people: some teachers referred to their students’ shyness at admitting to living in a settlement.
The MST is trying to transform the whole of society and not create an isolated enclosed world of its own. The concern with citizenship seen above also seems to show a commitment to integration into society. Yet, some people might question the degree to which the MST is really preparing people for participation outside the movement. The residents of camps and settlements are not restricted in their activities, nevertheless the vast majority of arenas in which members participate are mediated by the movement, and the education is intended to prepare for participation in society via the movement.
However, the movement as whole is becoming progressively less insular and increasingly linked to the larger movement for social justice. Caldart (2000) describes the stages of historical development, from a local to a national movement for land reform, and gradually towards incorporation in a wider project for popular national development and social justice. Events such as the World Social Forum, and the anti-capitalist/globalization movement in general, have introduced the MST to an even larger world platform.
*
Nancy Fraser has as one of her axes of social justice the Principle of Participatory Parity.
According to this principle, justice requires social arrangements that permit all (adult) members of society to interact with one another as peers. (Fraser 2001: 6)
This is dependent on two factors: distribution and recognition. The former, the ‘objective’ factor, requires that participants must have the material resources to ensure their independence and access to goods. The second, the ‘intersubjective’ factor, requires that cultural values express respect for all members of society and do not discriminateagainst some because of their ‘difference’.
The MST appears to have gone a considerable way in ensuring equal interaction of individuals as peers according to this conception. The movement is attempting to bring social justice to society as a whole in terms of Fraser’s factors of distribution - by providing stable livelihoods for landless people - and recognition - by building a positive identity of the Sem Terra.
As has been seen above, there are some limitations of MST participation, particularly in terms of the extent to which its members are able to participate in the wider society. In addition, further research will be necessary to show the extent to which participation is hindered in subtle ways by factors such as gender and race. However, on the whole the movement shows considerable depth in its understandings and implementation of democratic participation.
Participation in the MST is based on direct and not representative democracy, and is empowering rather than instrumental, in that it leads to an increase in control over decision-making rather than more efficient implementation of externally-formulated policies.
The act of participation itself is seen to lead to further conscientization, leading to a cyclical process of development. This process is described in the context of children in the acampamentos:
With time these children gain a greater consciousness of the struggle: this happens…where they have the right to speak, to sing. They have a strong desire to participate, they have pleasure in contributing to the assemblies, meetings, celebrations, building toys and the school tent…. It is this space for participation that makes the children critical, so they don’t accept things as they are…. (MST 2001b: 26/27)
One of the central aims of the MST is to enable its members to become subjects and not objects of historical events (the fundamental base of conscientization as described by Freire). The end of the process - becoming a subject of history - is nothing more than participation itself, in its truest sense. This is not just appearing in consultation groups, or even deciding how an international agency’s money will be spent in the village, but the ability to have a deep and lasting influence on society and history.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dave Hill for his comments on a draft of this paper, Elaine Unterhalter for orienting the original research, and the numerous teachers and co-ordinators of the MST who assisted me in the field.

Notes

[1] This paper is based on research conducted by the author in 2002 for the dissertation of the MA in Education and International Development, Institute of Education, University of London.
[2] Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra
[3] At the time the research was carried out, Fernando Henrique Cardoso was in power; the relationship of the MST to the new government, led by Luis Inácio Lula da Silva, should be considerably more amicable, although the movement has stated that land occupations will continue.
[4] At the first National Conference in 1984 the significant decision was made not to co-operate with the newly elected government which had succeeded the military dictatorship. Since then the following strategies have been used: land occupations, road marches, hunger strikes, occupation of public buildings, urban camps and public demonstrations (MST 2001a: 199-203). The use of violence is not sanctioned by the movement.
[5] Of all nations, Brazil is second only to Paraguay in terms of unequal distribution of land. 1% of owners control around 50% of the agricultural land (Brandford & Kucinski 1995). An estimated 60% of the productive agricultural land in the largest farms in Brazil is lying idle. At the same time there are about 25 million agricultural workers in precarious and poorly-paid temporary jobs.
[6] A fuller description of the general aims of the movement is presented in Como Fazer a Escola que Queremos: o Planejamento (1995):
	i.	To build a society without exploitation where labour has priority over capital.
	ii.	To ensure that the land is at the service of all in society.
	iii.	To guarantee work for all, with a just distribution of land, income and wealth.
	iv.	To constantly strive for social justice and equality of rights, whether economic, political, social or cultural.
	v.	To encourage humanist and socialist values in human relations.
	vi.	To combat all forms of social discrimination and promote equal participation for women.
(MST 1995)
[7] A similar concept, described as the ‘engineering of consent’, is analysed in Graebner (1987) with reference to US national governance in the 20th century.
[8] Partido dos Trabalhadores
[9] These co-ordinators provide pedagogical support for teachers and carry out general administration at the local and state level.
[10] Assentamentos are permanent settlements; acampamentos are temporary camps of landless people who have made an occupation and are waiting to be settled.
[11] All the quotations found in this study, both from the documents and the interviews, are the author's translations from the original Portuguese.
[12] Pseudonyms have been used for individuals and communities.
[13] The structures are usually more clearly defined and energetically implemented in the acampamentos than in the assentamentos, as the former have a greater degree of communal living and a greater necessity for co-operation.
[14] This is known as a school council ‘in those places where collective management of the school with the participation of pupils and the community is legally possible’ (MST 1995: 10). In this case it is an officially recognised body: examples of these are found in the PT-run schools in Porto Alegre described by Gandin and Apple (2002).
[15] Caldart is an activist of the movement and the most important writer on MST education. An academic from the South of Brazil, she has published two books on the subject as well as a number of articles, and is a major contributor to the official MST publications.
[16] These are teacher-training qualifications: magistério is a secondary school course, and pedagogia a university course. The government is proposing to ensure all teachers have the full university teacher training by 2005: this will be difficult to achieve in rural areas.
[17] A system in which pupils spend alternate weeks at school and at home.
[18] Gandin and Apple (2002) found that the most important variable affecting the extent to which individuals contributed in public meetings was not gender or class, but number of years of involvement. This indicates that the act of participating itself provides the required training for effective participation. The same argument is also given by Taylor (1998) in her research on political participation in Chile and Argentina.
[19] Técnico em Administração de Cooperativas

Bibliography

Abers, R. (2000) Inventing Local Democracy: Grassroots Politics in Brazil. London: Lynne Rienner.
Apple, M. W. (1999) ‘Rhetorical Reforms: Markets, Standards and Inequality’, Current Issues in Comparative Education 1(2)on line at http://www.tc.columbia.edu/CICE/articles/ma112.htm
Apple, M. W. and Beane, J. A. (eds.) (1999) Democratic Schools: Lessons from the Chalk Face. Buckingham. Open University Press.
Archer, D. And Cottingham, S. (1996) Reflect Mother Manual: a New Approach to Adult Literacy. London: ActionAid.
Barber, R. (1984) Strong Democracy : Participatory Politics for a New Age. University of California Press.
Brandford, S. and Kucinski, B. (1995) Brazil: Carnival of the Oppressed. Lula and the Brazilian Workers’ Party. London: Latin American Bureau.
Brandford, S. and Rocha, J. (2002) Cutting the Wire. London: Latin American Bureau.
Bullock, A., Stallybrass, O. and Trombley, S. (eds.) (1988) Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought. London: Fontana Press.
Caldart, R. S. (1997) Educação em Movimento: Formação de Educadoras e Educadores no MST. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
Caldart, R. S. (2000) Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra: a Escola é Mais que Escola. Petropolis: Editora Vozes.
Chambers, R. (1997) Whose Reality Counts? London: Intermediate Technology.
Fraser, N. (2001) ‘Social Justice in the Knowledge Society’. Paper presented at the conference of the Heinrich-Boell Foundation, Humboldt University, Berlin.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Sheed and Ward.
Gandin, L. and Apple, M. W. (2002) ‘Challenging Neo-Liberalism, Building Democracy: Creating the
Citizen School in Porto Alegre, Brazil’, Journal of Education Policy 17(2), pp. 259-279.
Gentili, P (1998) A Falsificação do Consenso Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
Graebner, W. (1987) The Engineering of Consent. Democracy and Authority in Twentieth-Century America. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Hawes, H. and Stephens, D. (1990) Questions of Quality: Primary Education and Development. Harlow: Longman.
IBGE (2001) ‘Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística’ on line at http://www.ibge.net (updated 2003).
Kaufman, M. and Alfonso, H. D. (1997) Community Power and Grassroots Democracy: the Transformation of Social Life. London: Zed Books.
Landless Workers Movement (2002) on line at http://www.mstbrazil.org (updated October 2002).
MST (1994) Alfabetização de Jovens e Adultos: Como Organizar (Caderno de Educação no. 3). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1995) Como Fazer a Escola que Queremos: o Planejamento (Caderno de Educação no. 6). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1999a) Princípios da Educação no MST (Caderno de Educação no. 8). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1999b) Como Fazemos a Escola de Educação Fundamental (Caderno de Educação no. 9). Veranópolis: ITERRA.
MST (2001a) Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra; Acompanhamento às Escolas (Boletim da Educação no. 8). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (2001b) Escola Itinerante: uma Pratica Pedagógica em Acampamentos (Coleção Fazendo Escola). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (2003) ‘Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra’ on line at http://www.mst.org.br/ (updated February 2003).
Rahnema, M. (1992) ‘Participation’ in Sachs, W. (ed.) The Development Dictionary: a Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed Books.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1993) The Social Contract London: Dent.
Taylor, L (1998) Citizenship, Participation and Democracy. Changing dynamics in Chile and Argentina Basingstoke: Macmillan

Correspondence

Tristan McCowan Laboratório de Políticas Públicas Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524 Pavilhão João Lyra Filho - 2º andar - Sala 2001 - Bloco B Maracanã Rio de Janeiro - RJ Brasil
tristan@lpp-uerj.net

2010
Economics
Journal of Health Psychology
Heeding the Push from Below : How Do Social Movements Persuade the Rich to Listen to the Poor? 
Catherine Campbell, Flora Cornish, Andrew Gibbs and Kerry Scott

J Health Psychol 2010 15: 962 originally published online 14 July 2010 DOI: 10.1177/1359105310372815
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://hpq.sagepub.com/content/15/7/962
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Journal of Health Psychology can be found at: Email Alerts: http://hpq.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://hpq.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://hpq.sagepub.com/content/15/7/962.refs.html
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Heeding the Push from Below
How Do Social Movements Persuade the Rich to Listen to the Poor?
CATHERINE CAMPBELL
London School of Economics, UK
FLORA CORNISH
Glasgow Caledonian University, UK
ANDREW GIBBS
University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
KERRY SCOTT
Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI), India
Journal of Health Psychology
Copyright © 2010 SAGE Publications Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, Singapore and Washington DC www.sagepublications.com
Vol 15(7) 962–971 DOI: 10.1177/1359105310372815
Abstract
This article discusses three successful pro-poor social movements: the Brazilian Landless Workers’ Movement, the Indian wing of the People’s Health Movement and the South African Treatment Action Campaign. These have mobilized poor people to demand access to land, health services and life-saving medical treatment respectively. We show how each group has succeeded not only through building the ‘voice’ of the poor to make forceful demands, but also through facilitating the development of ‘receptive social environments’ in which the rich are willing to take these voices seriously. Community psychologists need to pay more attention to the latter challenge.
Keywords
I community psychology I Landless Worker’s Movement I People’s Health Movement I social movements I Treatment Action Campaign
ADDRESS. Correspondenceshouldbedirectedto: CATHERINE CAMPBELL, London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK. [email: c.campbell@lse.ac.uk]
962
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
Introduction
THIS article examines the processes through which social movements succeed in empowering poor people and facilitating social change. Mass move- ments, such as the feminist movement in the West, and anti-colonial movements in countries such as India, have long been linked to positive social out- comes. With globalization creating new forms of poverty and inequalities, and the failure of ‘tradi- tional’ forms of development to change these (Hoogvelt, 2001), there is currently a renewed inter- est in the potential of social movements as a means of challenging inequalities.
Escobar (1992, 1995) argues that social move- ments are of interest because they offer an alterna- tive form of development and politics to ‘conventional’ or mainstream non-governmental organizations (NGOs), whether local or interna- tional. He argues that many of the disappointing outcomes of mainstream development approaches are the result of the ‘depoliticization’ of poverty by NGOs and other organizations such as the World Bank and bilateral donors. These organizations’ focus on technical solutions, such as income gener- ation projects or welfare grants, fails to challenge the wider inequalities undermining the ability of poor people to improve their life chances (Ferguson, 1994).
Social movements are argued to open up new possibilities for social change insofar as they
tend to bypass established development organi- sations, local elites and parties, or engage them on different terms. But they are by no means apolitical; instead of a depoliticized develop- ment, they politicise the rights of the poor. (Escobar, 1992, p. 422)
Social movements seek to reshape power rela- tions rather than gain power. They offer an alterna- tive, political and locally grounded vision of the struggle for development and poverty reduction compared to mainstream NGOs.
Social movements and community psychology
Psychology, particularly community psychology, stands to gain significantly from greater attention to people’s participation in successful large-scale social movements. The little attention that has been given to social movements in psychology has focused on
social psychological questions concerning why individuals do or do not affiliate themselves with par- ticular social movements (e.g. Klandermans, 1997), or on community psychological concerns regarding processes of participation. Neither the social psy- chology of collective action nor community psychol- ogy have given much attention to the processes through which social movements have an impact in society, or how social movements create an environ- ment in which the demands of marginalized people are heard and acted upon.
This article contributes to the community psy- chology literature on collective action. In principle, community psychology is strongly committed to understanding the role that collective action can play in facilitating the empowerment of the poor through challenging large-scale power relations (Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2006; Seedat, 2001). However, in practice, community psychologists tend to engage in analysis and action at the level of small-group activism and empowerment through small, bottom-up projects, usually involving nar- rowly defined excluded groups (Orford, 2008). While their efforts may improve the lives of project participants, they seldom result in significant sus- tainable or generalizable social change. In final pro- ject write-ups, wider social hierarchies (based on factors such as gender or socio-economic status) are depicted most often as obstacles to long-term pro- ject sustainability and to the ‘scale-up’ of innova- tive project strategies to other similar communities. Such final reports often conclude that such power hierarchies are too entrenched for small-scale groups of marginalized people to mount an effec- tive and sustainable fight against their ill-effects (Campbell & Cornish, forthcoming 2010).
In the terminology that we seek to develop in this article, such projects are frequently successful in building the ‘voice’ of the poor, but less successful in building ‘receptive social environments’. ‘Voice’ includes the capacity of poor people both to develop critical analyses that link their poverty to wider social inequalities and to articulate forceful demands on the basis of these critical understand- ings. Projects develop voice through providing ‘transformative social spaces’ for dialogue (Campbell & Scott, in press), in which poor people are able to engage in critical thinking about the social roots of what might previously have been regarded as individual problems (we use the term ‘critical thinking’ to refer to Freire’s (1973) ‘consci- entisation’). This builds their sense of empowerment
963
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
and their confidence to challenge the negative social relations that place their well-being at risk (Gaventa & Cornwall, 2001).
Such projects are often less successful in creating ‘receptive social environments’ in which the power- ful are willing to listen to the voices of the poor— which would be a precondition for sustainable and generalizable change (Campbell & Cornish, forth- coming, 2010). The projects assume that poor peo- ple themselves will be able to capture the attention of the powerful, once they have been empowered (Jones, 2001). Yet frequently, this is not the case. Community psychologists still have much to learn about how best to supplement their bottom-up work with marginalized communities with appropriate parallel efforts to create receptive social environ- ments in which powerful social actors are willing to heed the demands of the marginalized.
Against this background, successful social move- ments are of particular interest because they are dri- ven by similar aims and strategies to those of small-scale community psychology projects seek- ing to build the confidence and capacity of the poor. However, they implement them on a much wider scale and are more ambitious about the power rela- tions that they seek to challenge. Social movements seek not only to build the voice of the poor to make forceful and articulate demands, but also to create social settings in which powerful people—locally, nationally and globally—are open to hearing what the poor have to say and to supporting them in achieving the movement’s goals.
In this article we explore three different social movements, each of which, we will argue, has suc- ceeded through not only building the voice of the poor, but also creating receptive environments in which the powerful are willing to take these voices seriously. The Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST; Landless Workers’ Movement), has mobilized some of Brazil’s most marginalized and dispossessed inhabitants to suc- cessfully demand the redistribution of land from the rich to the poor. Through its constituent organiza- tions, Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (JSA), an Indian wing of the global People’s Health Movement (PHM), has successfully organized more than one million poor people to demand better health services from government, and played a key role in wider social movements to put primary health care back on the global public health agenda. Finally, the Treatment Action Campaign (TAC) has channelled the voice of one of South Africa’s most marginalized
groups—young, black, unemployed, HIV positive women—into a movement which has successfully challenged their highly resistant government to pro- vide free universal access to otherwise unafford- able, life-saving anti-retroviral therapy (ART).
These three social movements address issues that are wider than economic poverty per se, but all of which are urgent concerns for people living in poverty. Sen (1999) argues that poverty should be defined beyond a narrow focus on economic resources, instead being understood in terms of human capabilities, such as the ability to make effective political demands around issues such as health and education. However, drawing on the work of Bourdieu (1986), Nair and Campbell (2008) emphasize that poor people are seldom able to bring about effective social change without the support of actors and agencies holding the political and economic power that is necessary for the poor to achieve their goals. Spivak (1988) refers to the vital role that such ‘strategic alliances’ need to play, if marginalized groups are to be heard and flourish.
In this article we examine how these three social movements have succeeded in creating environ- ments which have both developed the political capabilities of groups of poor people in Brazil, India and South Africa, and mobilized significant politi- cal and economic actors to heed their demands.
Three case studies
We discuss our three case studies in the light of our review of the published academic literature on each one. However, one co-author has interned with one of JSA’s leading constituent NGOs and another has volunteered for TAC in South Africa. Inevitably, these experiences will have informed our accounts of these two social movements. We present our dis- cussion of each case study around four themes in turn: the aims and achievements of the group; strate- gies for building the voice of its members; strategies for building receptive social environments; and the key challenges faced by the movement.
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra In Brazil, 70 percent of agricultural land is owned by 3 percent of the people. Since 1984, MST has fought for agrarian reform and a more just society. It pressures the government to redistribute idle farmland to landless workers, reverse land concen- tration, and reallocate state resources to benefit
964
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
small cooperative farms. It draws its legal argument from the Brazilian constitution’s statement that ‘land has a social responsibility to be productive’ (Walford, 2003, p. 506), arguing that it should be redistributed from landowners who are not using it to landless people who are willing to work it.
MST has more than one million members. It has organized more than 230,000 land occupations, winning 15 million acres for land reform, creating 1500 agricultural communities, and settling more than 250,000 families. It has established schools and clinics on occupied land, running more than 1200 schools, and educating approximately 150,000 children and 25,000 adults in literacy courses (Brandford & Rocha, 2002).
MST’s activism has included road blocks and long-distance mass marches to government min- istries. In 2005, 12,000 landless peasants marched 200 kilometres to Brazil’s capital, demanding speed- ier action on land reform promises (Kingstone, 2005). MST leaders readily meet government minis- ters and actively seek media attention to publicize its demands (Hammond, 2004).
Building strong voice MST’s success has depended on its ability to unite the geographically isolated and economically marginalized rural poor and to offer a strong organizational framework and coherent action strategy for change. Beginning in 1979, local autonomous land occupations mush- roomed throughout Brazil. In 1983, two Catholic groups hosted a conference of land reform activists and agreed to form one national organization: MST.
MST develops strong ‘voice’ through promoting critical thinking among its members. When inviting the landless poor to take part in occupations or demonstrations, it builds momentum through con- sciousness-raising meetings about the injustices of Brazilian society, introducing land occupation as part of a potential solution (Welch, 2006). Rather than focusing on individual legal battles, the move- ment gains momentum from its conceptualization of landless and small-scale farmers as engaging in class struggle with the large landowners who stole land from society as a whole.
At this advanced stage, most of MST’s members are no longer landless, opening up the risk that it might become a victim of its own success. However, landed workers have continued to support the movement, using their improved circumstances to donate resources and to express solidarity with continuing struggles. This continuity is generated through linking MST membership not only with
land, but also with a strong rural identity and sense of community. Coordinators communicate with membership through meetings, a newspaper and magazine, and numerous pamphlets.
Building a receptive social environment MST gained recognition in the Brazilian public sphere through favourable media coverage emphasizing peaceful activism, and the legality, economic logic, and moral correctness of its actions. Mass marches in cities gained it the support of urban groups and elites. It reached the ‘the pinnacle of recognition by Brazilian popular culture’ (Hammond, 2004, p. 81) by being portrayed favourably in a popular national telenovela.
MST has emphasized its legal correctness by using the Brazilian constitution to formalize rights to occupied land and engaging the legal system. Furthermore, the common-sense economic argu- ment that unused land ought to be used to increase food production and stem urban migration has appealed even to those with little ideological soli- darity with the rural landless. The violent oppres- sion faced by the landless activists, especially the widely publicized murder of 19 activists by police in 1996, generated much sympathy, positioning the movement firmly on the moral high ground (Hammond, 2004).
However, there is still some resistance to MST, particularly from wealthy landholders, urban elites and the mainstream media, some of whom have branded occupiers as ‘unemployed vagabonds’ or dangerous radicals (Walford, 2005). Nevertheless, MST remains a popular organization regarded as a credible and authoritative voice on land issues. A Brazil-wide poll in 1997 found that 52 percent had a positive view of MST, with 85 percent approving of occupations provided that they were non-violent (SEJUP, 1997 in Hammond, 2004). Another poll ranked them the fifth most esteemed institution in Brazil (Welch, 2006).
MST’s successes can be partially understood within the wider context of Brazilian activism, especially the ‘liberation theology’ preached by the Catholic Church’s radical wing in the 1960s and 1970s—a religious worldview encouraging activism among the poor. As MST’s founder put it:
Before, the line had been: ‘No need to worry, you’ll have your land in heaven.’ Now it was: ‘Since you’ve already got land in heaven, let’s struggle for it here as well.’ (Stedile, 2002, p. 79)
Support from other Brazilian grass roots move- ments, the Catholic Church, unions and international
965
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
organizations have strengthened MST further. It has developed a close relationship with the Brazilian Homeless Workers Movement, consoli- dating urban support (Duffy, 2007). Brazilian trade unions and churches, as well as international sup- porters such as the US-based Friends of MST, have helped MST with training courses, funding and pos- itive publicity.
MST’s horizontal and collective structure empha- sizes the equality of all its members. Neighbourhood groups form its base units, sending two representa- tives to the ruling council of its cooperative, settle- ment or temporary encampment. Each ruling council sends representatives to regional and state con- gresses. The National Coordinating Council is made up of 102 representatives, illustrating how, even at national meetings, leadership is shared among many members (Vanden, 2005).
Challenges A significant and ongoing ideological conflict exists between the more affluent and edu- cated leaders and the rank-and-file member base. Leaders support a vision of rural communal life characterized by peace and communitarianism, while workers point out that historically, Brazilian rural life has been characterized by exploitation on plantations, actively resisting this idyllic ‘mytholo- gizing’ of rural life (Caldeira, 2008). Despite differ- ences of this nature, MST leaders and members have managed to work together successfully: settlers have gained land and leaders have sustained political and legal debate on Brazilian agrarian reform.
The People’s Health Movement: India’s Jan Swasthya Abhiyan The PHM is an international network of organiza- tions seeking to place primary health care back on the international health agenda and challenge the impact of neo-liberal policies on health and devel- opment since the mid-1970s. PHM operates as a loose network, with individual organizations sign- ing up to its broader objectives but operating autonomously. There is ongoing communication between different member groups for support and knowledge-sharing (Turiano & Smith, 2008).
One particularly prominent member of PHM is the JSA, meaning ‘people’s health movement’ in Hindi. JSA is particularly active in advancing the comprehensive primary health care agenda in India. Along with PHM, JSA supports a social determi- nants approach emphasizing how poverty, privati- zation and gender inequality undermine health. Indian member organizations join the JSA by
endorsing the Indian People’s Charter for Health, rooted in similar primary health care tenets as the PHM Charter.
Rather than a unitary organization, JSA is a national coalition of Indian NGOs, people’s organi- zations, activists, health professionals and acade- mics, all working towards the goal of ‘Health for All’ via universally accessible, accountable, high- quality public health care incorporating meaningful community participation in health services (Turiano and Smith, 2008). Since its inception in 2000, JSA has organized or supported more than 15 nationally coordinated initiatives, including the Right to Food Campaign, Rural Health Watch, Hunger Watch, and a campaign against the practice of gender-selective abortion.
JSA’s most significant achievement has been its role in shaping and monitoring the Indian govern- ment’s National Rural Health Mission. This included lobbying to create spaces for community monitoring of the programme, and setting up a par- allel independent monitoring system called People’s Rural Health Watch. Another success has been JSA’s Right To Health Care campaign where, with large political support, it has set up tribunals enabling poor people to express their discontent with local primary health care services to central government.
Building voice JSA developed out of India’s first National Health Assembly in 2000. The Assembly united 2000 Indian health activists who were frus- trated at government failure to make significant progress towards Health for All by 2000, the World Health Organization (WHO) campaign adopted by all WHO member countries in the 1978 Alma Ata Declaration (Beaglehole, Bonita, Horton, Adams & McKee, 2004). The Assembly aimed to prevent the Indian government from forgetting its pledge, and to enable civil society actors to play a stronger, more coordinated role (Richards, 2005). By joining JSA, small and medium-sized groups across India working on local issues could amplify their mes- sage, increasing their access to media, expert advice, and government attention.
Building receptive social environments JSA has become the primary voice for health issues in India, gaining legitimacy through its representation of a large group of activists, including politically promi- nent members and well-known doctors and acade- mics. Its representation of so many respected organizations has forced the government and media to take its campaigns seriously. In addition, JSA has
966
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
been supported by the wider PHM. The success of PHM’s publication Global Health Watch 2 (People’s Health Movement, 2008)—which was supported by many influential international organi- zations, including The Lancet—has helped to create a broader symbolic context that is increasingly receptive to claims around primary health care.
JSA has succeeded in building support for project goals within small communities, and building effec- tive bridges between health rights activists and pow- erful external agents. It has forged alliances between middle-class or well-connected activists and poor people fighting for social justice through people’s organizations and community-based organizations.
JSA has used its middle-class support base to access government and media attention, and funnel the voices of the poor to the heart of government pol- icymaking: for example, these contacts ensured vital support for the 2003 Right To Health Care campaign by India’s National Human Rights Commission. Such contacts facilitated the campaign’s extraordi- nary success in communicating firsthand accounts of ordinary peoples’ negative experiences of health care facilities to influential government policymakers. With the Commission’s support, JSA asked local member organizations to run people’s health tri- bunals across the country, where community mem- bers were able to express their personal experiences of systemic failure of the Indian health care system (Labonte, 2005; Shukla, 2005).
Using these findings, JSA convinced the govern- ment to hold a national public hearing on the right to health care in 2004. India’s top health ministers and officials attended. More than 100 JSA represen- tatives from 22 states testified to the depth, scale and range of health violations occurring in the pub- lic health care system (Turiano & Smith, 2008). Rural people were able to tell stories of their ill- treatment and neglect to some of the country’s most powerful government health ministers.
In 2005, the PHM picked up on the success of JSA’s Right To Health Care campaign, launching the international Right to Health and Health Care Campaign, drawing on JSA’s experiences (Labonte, 2005; People’s Health Movement, 2007). In this way, the PHM network enabled JSA to extend the scope and scale of its successful strategies from India to many other countries.
Challenges JSA has ongoing debates about how closely to work with government. For example, the government’s National Rural Health Mission has promoted many of JSA’s aims, including a primary
health focus and community participation. Some members are willing to work with the government, while others fear that such involvement compro- mises JSA’s critical stance. These conflicts have been overcome, at least temporarily, by enabling different JSA members to choose different paths of involvement.
Treatment Action Campaign
The TAC has been described as the most successful social movement in post-apartheid South Africa. Founded in 1998, TAC has been at the forefront of shaping the government’s HIV/AIDS policy through pushing the African National Congress (ANC) government to provide universal access to ART through the public health system (Ballard, Habib & Valodia, 2006). In addition, it has been involved in challenging former President Mbeki’s and former Health Minister Tshabalala-Msimang’s views that there is no relationship between HIV and AIDS, and their denial of the efficacy of ART.
TAC’s membership is around 8000, but it can mobilize many thousands more when necessary. TAC’s membership is primarily urban young black unemployed women, although it also includes students, academics and medical professionals cut- ting across lines of ‘race’, education and class. The central aim of achieving universal ART access has united these groups, with each drawing on different relationships, power and connections to advance the organization’s agenda. TAC has succeeded in attracting highly marginalized women by providing them with support and hope, and it has been remark- ably successful in placing this group at the heart of the body politic (Robins & von Lieres, 2004).
TAC has been extremely successful in shaping South African policies around HIV/AIDS and access to ART. In 2002, via TAC’s court action and mass public protest, the Constitutional Court con- firmed that the South African government had to provide Nevirapine to reduce the transmission of HIV from mother to child during birth in all public facilities. The following year, TAC effectively forced the government to sign a national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS, including an initial treatment programme (Deane, 2002). Subsequently, TAC was central in negotiating a widely praised national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS and sexually-transmitted infections (STIs), with TAC pushing to ensure the plan achieves 80 percent coverage of ART by 2011. These achievements have been remarkable in the context of a highly stigmatized illness, where the
967
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
ANC government sidelined social movements from policymaking, and where universal ART access was deemed financially unrealistic. To achieve such policy change, TAC has drawn on strategies such as court challenges, utilizing the constitution to secure socio-economic rights, mass public demonstrations, marches and civil disobedience, including occupa- tions of government offices and peaceful mass arrests, all supplemented by extensive grass roots mobilization.
Building voice TAC has worked hard to facilitate voice, critical thinking and collective agency among its members (Endresen & von Kotze, 2005). Increasing treatment literacy about HIV/AIDS and ART has been a central goal, and members are encouraged to use this knowledge to demand appro- priate care and medicines in public clinics and from the state more broadly. Also, it has been successful in working with members to link their personal troubles to the wider public challenges of building a democratic South Africa, incorporating human rights, democratic accountability and a just political economy (Endresen and von Kotze, 2005).
Building receptive social environments TAC—a household name in South Africa—has been excep- tionally successful in constructing a social environ- ment that is receptive to its demands, establishing itself as the central, legitimate non-governmental actor around HIV/AIDS. It has become the media’s civil society ‘voice of choice’ in South Africa for its ability to provide considered responses on a range of HIV/AIDS issues (Finlay, 2004). TAC has used the media strategically to provide clear information on its activities. When TAC started a civil disobedi- ence campaign in 2003, it took out full-page adver- tisements in newspapers explaining why it had decided to use such tactics. By framing its struggle as an uncontestable moral issue, it has mobilized the support of a wide range of prominent national and international constituencies, making it very difficult for the government to challenge its claims (Friedman & Mottiar, 2004).
TAC has relied heavily on a small group of prominent leaders whose individual talents have been central to TAC’s success. TAC’s leaders have managed skilfully to keep TAC rooted in a politics of mass mobilization while at the same time using more ‘elite’ processes, such as court actions, to push the organization’s agenda.
The organization often draws on anti-apartheid symbols and imagery, and has located its goals within South Africa’s wider anti-colonialist struggles
(Robins & von Lieres, 2004). The respected role played by certain key TAC leaders in the 1980s anti- apartheid movement has contributed to its legitimacy in post-apartheid South Africa. In addition, TAC founder Zackie Achmat played a pivotal role in coa- lescing widespread respect and support for TAC through his much-publicized and principled decision to not take ART, which he could well afford, until state-run, universal-access pilot ART programmes were established throughout South Africa.
TAC has forged strategic bridging relationships including academics, South African churches, inter- national activist organizations, the government at times, and trade unions. These alliances have been central to success, increasing its legitimacy nation- ally and internationally and allowing TAC to access high-quality research on HIV/AIDS.
The Congress of South African Trade Unions— the largest union coalition in South Africa and member of the ruling ANC tripartite alliance—has given strong support to TAC and occupied a seat on its national executive committee (Friedman & Mottiar, 2004). In 2003, when TAC moved towards civil disobedience, the Congress publicly announced that it was considering joining the action. While it did not, this expression of support added legitimacy and strength to TAC’s claims.
In addition, TAC has worked with the ANC government when appropriate. In 2001, TAC was a ‘friend of the court’, siding with the South African government when the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association took the government to court over its attempt to stop South Africa importing generic drugs. Furthermore, Zackie Achmat has always openly stated that he is an ANC member, and TAC has con- sistently tried to work with allies in government to change policies.
Challenges Other social movements and activists have criticized the TAC for being elitist and failing to be adequately antagonistic towards the state. Currently it has moved into a supportive relation- ship with the government. While remaining critical of government, Mark Heywood, a key TAC orga- nizer, is now the deputy chair of the South African National AIDS Council (a government body). TAC has taken on a role in supporting and monitoring the implementation of the new national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS and STIs, which resonates with TAC’s aims and objectives. The organization’s efforts to replace its original cadre of elite male leaders with women emerging from its poor grass roots membership are proving fraught and challenging
968
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
(Stephen, 2009). The organization’s ability to remain rooted in its grass roots membership, as well as con- tinuing to articulate a strong voice of conscience in its new relationship with the government, remains to be seen.
Conclusion
Globalization has created new patterns of inequality and new forms of struggle by the excluded. We have highlighted three social movements that have built what Sen (1999) would characterize as the ‘capabilities’ of the poor to make successful demands, using access to land, health care and life- saving drugs as the springboard for their activities.
Many community psychologists have tended to throw the bulk of their energies into small-scale, community-level activities to empower poor peo- ple from the bottom-up, without enough attention to the challenges of creating the wider environ- ments most likely to hear and support the voices of the poor. We argue that promoting receptive social environments is vital for the success of social movements, and thus should be a key concern for community psychologists.
While the goals and contexts of the three case studies are very different in many ways, a cross- case comparison highlights commonalities in their modes of operation that enable us to make some general comments about their pathways to success.
In relation to building the voice of the poor, each movement has devoted a great deal of time and energy to promoting critical thinking. As a result, members have come to see their poverty and social disadvantage as the result of social inequalities rather than the outcomes of factors such as individ- ual or community-level bad luck or incompetence. Each movement has been driven by a compelling political philosophy, with action strategies flowing out of critical analysis.
All these factors have served to motivate and enable the poor to engage in various forms of col- lective action, such as public protests, tribunals, and land or government building occupations. Moreover, the commitment of the poor to each movement’s particular core issue has been strengthened by the additional empowerment resulting from the provision of other forms of education and capacity-building, such as adult education and treatment literacy.
How have the movements managed to get power- ful politicians to listen to their demands? Here we dis- tinguish between the relational and symbolic aspects
of a receptive social environment (Campbell & Cornish, forthcoming, 2010). At a relational level, each movement has been able to unite a broad range of people behind its objectives both horizontally, among similar activists committed to similar issues, and vertically, involving strategic alliances with polit- ically and economically powerful actors, often at the national and international levels. By uniting different interest groups, the movements gained a strength in numbers that demanded politicians’ attention.
As well as providing resources to keep social movements going, alliances have provided links into elite political and legal networks. Such elite net- works have often played a key role in assisting poor communities to use the courts in order to challenge unjust social policies—drawing on existing laws or constitutional frameworks which may have been breached or not implemented. Elite contacts can channel the voices of the marginalized to the heart of high-level political debate and decision-making.
Furthermore, the successes of these alliances have had a symbolic dimension, using moral force to engage high-level decision-makers. For example, it is difficult to deny the claim that people with AIDS deserve access to life-saving ART, or that unused land should be used to facilitate the survival of the poor rather than lying idle. Clear and simple messages of this nature—skilfully transmitted via a ‘politics of the moral high ground’—allow different constituencies to coalesce around a clear objective. Highlighting connections to valued national ideals (such as the anti-apartheid movement, in the case of TAC) further enhances the legitimacy of the movements’ demands. The skilful framing of the demands as morally uncon- testable made unity possible and resistance difficult.
A cross-cutting theme, also at the symbolic level, relates to the success through which each move- ment gained wide social legitimacy as the most credible agents of their particular struggle. The media have played a key role in all three cases, pro- viding an arena in which topics are framed, and through which individuals and groupings are accorded the right to speak on particular issues.
At a broader level, and one that has been only hinted at in the case studies, is the role that the inter- national symbolic context has played in supporting these social movements. As international discourses evolve, they open and close spaces on which social movements can capitalize. Both TAC and JSA have benefited from changes in the international discourses on HIV/AIDS and primary health care respectively. For JSA, the re-emergent discourse on
969
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
primary healthcare, led by its global network PHM and clearly seen in the supportive international reception of PHM’s Global Health Watch 2, illus- trates how this changing international environment may open up receptive spaces for the claims of JSA within India. Similarly, TAC’s claims for universal access to ART have been significantly supported by increasing support for universal treatment access within international health and donor organizations. These international changes create a context in which such ideas are more likely to be listened to when advocated from below.
We hope that our characterization of the successes of MST, JSA and TAC has illustrated our claim that community psychology could learn from greater attention to the strategies they have used to create receptive social environments in which the voices of the poor are most likely to be heard. We are not sug- gesting that every movement will be able to replicate each of the success factors we have drawn attention to here. Furthermore, the success factors that we have highlighted in these case studies could be argued to suggest, for example, that only national organizations can build media support, develop links to other organizations, and channel the voices of the poor to the heart of national government in ways that significantly contribute to expanding human free- doms and challenging poverty.
While larger social movements are most likely to get widespread attention, we argue that smaller, local social movements could develop similar, con- textually-specific strategies for promoting receptive social environments in the local context. Gains in human freedoms are not only achieved nationally, but also may be achieved through struggles that never move beyond the local arena. However, sim- ilar challenges of building the voice of the excluded, and promoting a receptive social environ- ment is which this is heard, would be as necessary in these local settings as they are in national ones.
References
Ballard, R., Habib, A. & Valodia, I. (Eds.) (2006). Voices of protest: Social movements in post-apartheid South Africa. Pietermaritzburg: UKZN Press.
Beaglehole, R., Bonita, R., Horton, R., Adams, O. & McKee, M. (2004). Public health in the new era: improving health through collective action. The Lancet, 363, 2084–2086.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). New York: Greenwood.
Brandford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire. London: Latin American Bureau.
Caldeira, R. (2008). ‘My land, your social transforma- tion’: Conflicts within the landless people movement (MST), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Journal of Rural Studies, 24, 150–160.
Campbell, C., & Cornish, F. (forthcoming, 2010) Towards a 'fourth generation' of approaches to HIV/AIDS man- agement: Creating contexts for effective community mobilization. AIDS Care.
Campbell, C., & Scott, K. (forthcoming, 2010) Building transformative social spaces through mediated health communication. In D. Hook, B. Franks, & M. Bauer (Eds.) Communication, culture and social change. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Deane, N. (2002, May 2–8). Government cosies up to TAC. Mail & Guardian, p. 2.
Duffy, G. (2007, April 17). Brazil’s homeless and landless unite. BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/ 6563359.stm (accessed January 2009).
Endresen, K., & von Kotze, A. (2005). Living while being alive: Education and learning in the Treatment Action Campaign. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 24, 431–441.
Escobar, A. (1992). Reflections on development: Grassroots approaches and alternative politics in the Third World. Futures, June, 411–436.
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The mak- ing and unmaking of the third world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ferguson, J. (1994). The anti-politics machine: ‘Development’, depoliticization, and bureaucratic power in Lesotho. Minnesota, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Finlay, A. (2004). Shaping the conflict: Factors influenc- ing the representation of conflict around HIV/AIDS policy in the South African press. Communicare, 23, 68–93.
Freire, P. (1973). Education for critical consciousness. New York: Continuum.
Friedman, S., & Mottiar, S. (2004). A moral to the tale: The Treatment Action Campaign and the politics of HIV/AIDS. Centre for Civil Society, University of Kwazulu-Natal. http://www.ukzn.ac.za/ccs (accessed November 2008).
Gaventa, J., & Cornwall, A. (2001). Power and knowl- edge. In P. Reason and H. Bradbury (Eds.), Handbook of action research: Participative inquiry and practice (pp. 70–80). London: Sage.
Hammond, J. (2004). The MST and the media: Competing images of the Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Movement. Latin American Politics and Society, 46, 61–90.
Hoogvelt, A. (2001). Globalization and the postcolonial world. London: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Jones, E. (2001). Of other spaces. Situating participatory practices: A case study from South India. IDS Working Paper 137.
970
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
Kingstone, S. (2005, January 20). Modest gain in Brazil land reform. BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/ americas/4190335.stm (accessed January 2009).
Klandermans, B. (1997). The social psychology of protest. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labonte, R. (2005). Global right to health campaign launched. British Medical Journal, 331, 252.
Nair, Y., & Campbell, C. (2008) Building partnerships to support community-led HIV/AIDS management: A case study from rural South Africa. African Journal of AIDS Research 7, 45–53.
Nelson, G., & Prilleltensky, I. (2006). Community psychology: In pursuit of liberation and well-being. London: Palgrave- Macmillan.
Orford, J. (2008). Community psychology: Challenges, con- troversies and emerging consensus. Chichester: Wiley. People’s Health Movement (2007). Right to Health and
Health Care Campaign. http://www.phmovement.org/
cms/en/campaigns/145/page (accessed 10 January 2009). People’s Health Movement (2008). Global Health Watch 2: An alternative world health report. London: Zed Books. Richards, T. (2005). Assembly meets to tackle health
needs of the poor. British Medical Journal, 331, 128. Robins, S., & von Lieres, B. (2004) Remaking citizenship, unmaking marginalization: The Treatment Action Campaign in post-apartheid South Africa. Canadian
Journal of African Studies, 38, 575–586. Seedat, M. (Ed.). (2001). Community psychology: Theory,
method and practice. Cape Town: Oxford University Press. Sen, A. (1999) Development as freedom. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
CATHERINE CAMPBELL is Professor of Social Psychology at the London School of Economics, and Director of the MSc in Health, Community and Development. She is a community health psychologist who works on the links between collective action and health.
FLORA CORNISH is a Reader in the School of Health at Glasgow Caledonian University. Her research interests focus on community agency in promoting health and reducing inequalities. She has a longstanding research engagement with sex worker-led HIV prevention programmes in India.
Shukla, A. (2005). Jan Swasthya Abhiyan’s protracted fight for public care. Combat law, 4. http://www. combatlaw.org/information.php?issue_id=25&article_ id=651 (accessed January 2009).
Spivak, G.C. (1988). Can the subaltern speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.), Marxism and the inter- pretation of culture (pp. 271–313). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Stedile, J.P. (2002). A movement of movements? Landless battalions: The Sem Terra Movement of Brazil. New Left Review, 15, 77–104.
Stephen, J. (2009). ‘Saints and sinners’: The Treatment Action Campaign. In K. Cullinan & A. Thom (Eds.), The virus, vitamins and vegetables: The South African HIV/AIDS mystery (pp. 157–174). Johannesburg: Jacana.
Turiano, L., & Smith, L. (2008). The catalytic synergy of health and human rights: The People’s Health Movement and the Right to Health and Health Care campaign. Health and Human Rights, 10, 137–147.
Vanden, H. (2005, March–April) Brazil’s landless hold their ground. NACLA Report on the Americas, pp. 21–28.
Walford, W. (2003). Producing community: The MST and reform settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3, 500–520.
Walford, M. (2005). Agrarian moral economies and neoliberalism in Brazil: Competing worldviews and the state in the struggle for land. Environment and Planning A, 37, 241–261.
Welch, C. (2006). A preliminary history of the MST. Latin American Research Review, 41, 198–210.
ANDREW GIBBS is a Researcher at Health Economics and HIV/AIDS Research Division (HEARD), University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa. His research interests include the role of the media in creating an enabling environment for health promotion and community responses to HIV/AIDS.
KERRY SCOTT is a recent graduate of the MSc Health, Community and Development programme at the London School of Economics. She is currently living in Pune, India and working for Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI), an Indian health advocacy NGO.
Author biographies
971
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2006
History
Latin American Research Review
A Preliminary Historiography of the Brazil's Landless Laborers' Movement (MST)
Cliff Welch

Grand Valley State University
[Erratum]
Brava Gente: A Trajetória Do Mst E A Luta Pela Terra No Brasil. By João Pedro Stédile and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. (São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1999. Pp. 167.)
A Formação Do Mst No Brasil. By Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. (Petrópolis: Editora Vozes, 2000. Pp. 319.)
A História Da Luta Pela Terra E O Mst. By Mitsue Morissawa. (São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2001. Pp. 256.)
Sin Tierra: Construyendo Movimiento Social. By Marta Harnecker. (Madrid: Siglo XXI, 2002. Pp. 124. Also available in English as Landless People—Building a Social Movement at http://www.rebelion.org/harnecker/landless300802.pdf [accessed November 1, 2004])
Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. By Sue Branford and Jan Rocha. (London: Latin American Bureau, 2002. Pp. 305.)
To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. By Angus Wright and Wendy Wolford. (Oakland, CA: Food First Books, 2003. Pp. 365. $15.95 paper.)
La Scelta Della Terra: Studio Di Un Insediamento Rurale Del Movimento Sem Terra In Brasile. By Luca Fanelli. (Torino: Silvio Zamorani Editore, 2002. Pp. 169.)
Like many politicians, Brazilian president Luis Inácio Lula da Silva identified himself with different citizens by dressing like them. He seemed to delight in donning an Indian headdress or squeezing into a hard hat. Such images fit the populist message of this remarkable man, a man who rose from poverty to become leader of the labor movement that challenged the military dictatorship and helped restore democracy to Brazil, the world's eighth largest economy. But in July 2003 when [End Page 198] Lula placed the bright red cap of the Landless Laborers' Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra [MST]) on his head, all hell broke loose. Subsequent editions of nearly every news vehicle in the country featured alarmed criticism of this fateful act. Words like "rebellious," "revolutionary" and "irresponsible" characterized the reaction as dozens of reporters were sent to the field to document the dangers posed to the country by the MST. The controversy reached the United States, where concerns on Wall Street and in Washington threatened to undermine Brazil's fragile credit rating and international standing. By 2004, the Lula administration had carefully finessed most of the criticisms, supporting the right of the MST to mobilize and pressure the government while simultaneously investing in a conflicting agribusiness development scheme.
What is the MST? In contradistinction to the image projected by the Brazilian press, the collection of recently published books reviewed here describe it as an institutionalized social movement of unprecedented significance for Brazil and the world that does not pose an immediate revolutionary threat to society. On one book's jacket, Eric Hobsbawm, a frequent traveler to Brazil, validates the MST as "the most ambitious social movement in contemporary Latin America" (Branford and Rocha 2002). On another's cover, journalist Studs Terkel describes the MST as "a million or so ordinary people fighting for the right to live ordinary lives" (Wright and Wolford 2003). Founded in 1984, the MST fights for radical agrarian reform—that is, state intervention to reverse historic land concentration trends, distribute good agricultural land to needy workers, and reallocate resources to support small and cooperative farming as fundamental to the development of a stronger, more democratic and just society.
Today, the MST boasts a membership of more than 500,000 families—at least two million people—and has a presence in every state and more than 700 municipalities. The MST runs some 500 farm co-ops in the areas of production, marketing, credit, and technical assistance. It trains most of its own technicians, militants, and leaders. It has succeeded in redirecting government funds to support its administration of 1,800 elementary schools with more than 160,000 students, teaching basic literacy to 30,000 teenagers and adults, and operating a college. In the meantime, some sixty members are studying in Cuba to be doctors (MST 2004). In twenty years, the MST has become a vast and varied organization with many plans for growth and diversification.
A handful of foreign and many domestic analysts have been following the MST's development since its earliest days. With significant methodological variations, each of the books reviewed contributes to the institutional history of the MST. The first is based on a 1998 conversation between the MST's founding national coordinator João Pedro [End Page 199] Stédile and MST consultant Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, a geographer. The second is Fernandes's doctoral dissertation. Morissawa's A história da luta pela terra e o MST is a pictorial history published by the MST. Harnecker, a Chilean-Marxist and scholar living in Cuba, completed the third account. The fourth book, written by English journalists Branford and Rocha, promises to be a favorite for the university market. The historian Wright and geographer Wolford teamed up to produce an innovative book that emphasizes themes important to U.S. college curricula, such as gender and the environment. Luca Fanelli's small, carefully researched book is a fine example of the many monographs the movement has inspired. All the authors but Fanelli historicize the MST by beginning their books with a chapter or two intended to document the roots and origins of the movement. The next chapters recount the MST's formation and consolidation on a national scale. Remaining chapters analyze key features of the MST, such as the practice of land occupation, educational programs, and strategies of production once land is acquired. Concluding chapters evaluate the movement and comment on its future prospects.
Origins
Each of the books describe Brazil's southern-most state of Rio Grande do Sul as the cradle of the MST. A common narrative links the rise of the MST to dramatic changes in the primary sector initiated by the agricultural policies of the military regime that took power in 1964. With a commitment to national development, the military sought to "modernize" agricultural production. Rio Grande do Sul was an important setting for the introduction of mechanized soybean production. Credit structures and clientelism led to land concentration, forcing thousands of small and medium farmers off the land to make way for soybeans and other export crops. The displaced farmers had three alternatives: life in cities, looking for work in a saturated labor market; immigration to Paraguay; or migration to subsidized colonization projects designed to develop frontier areas in the central-west and northern Amazon regions of Brazil. The enterprising gaúchos (people born in Rio Grande do Sul) tried all of the strategies, yet the cards were stacked against them.
What many really wanted was land to farm in Rio Grande do Sul. A number of families, encouraged by the military, invaded a Kaingang Indian reservation (Nonoaí) but were forced out when conflicts resulted. Trying to decide what to do next, some families followed the advice of Stédile, an economist who was then working with a rural labor union. They organized and occupied an unproductive farm called the Fazenda Macali. This 1979 occupation resulted in the expropriation of the land, encouraging a number of copycat land [End Page 200] occupations and public manifestations by landless workers and sympathizers between 1980 and 1982.
While the books agree on the structural conditions and regional context for the birth of the MST, they differ in the attention given to its roots in historic rural social movements. Fernandes approaches the roots question with the most radical argument of the five histories. He says the MST must be seen as a "historic struggle" in the context of five centuries of a "busca continua da conquista da terra de trabalho, a fim de obter condições dignas de vida e uma sociedade justa" for and by rural workers (25). Thus, A formação do MST no Brasil begins with a chapter on the rural struggles that he believes contributed to the eventual formation of a self-conscious peasantry in Brazil. The sense of continuity expressed by Fernandes comes up again in Morissawa and Harnecker. Morissawa uses images and text to argue that the MST is something of the highest stage of peasant struggle against a long and continuous history of resistance by slaves, Indians, and Messiah-led peasants. Harnecker claims the MST "hereda una prolongada lucha por la tierra" (10) going back to the beginnings of Portuguese colonization.
Such continuity is not corroborated by the other histories. Each mentions most of the movements Fernandes describes but they are discussed explicitly as "invented traditions," regional cultural inheritances intentionally revived as such by MST militants to help organize landless workers. For instance, Branford and Rocha describe how MST organizing proceeded slowly in the northeastern state of Alagoas, "working within the cultural traditions of the people" (43). It proved wise there, the authors report, to stimulate militancy among the landless by organizing a pilgrimage to the ruins of Palmares, the seventeenth-century setting of Brazil's most famous runaway slave community, which was led for a time by a warrior named Zumbi. "The families paid homage to Zumbi, promising to carry on his struggle," the authors write (43). Wright and Wolford refer to the history of resistance in a six-page section of chapter 2. For them, too, the historic struggles have been used by MST militants to "contextualize the contemporary struggle for land" (124). Militants recall Zumbi's struggle, they argue, partly to project an anti-racist image to help build unity among Brazil's racially diverse population. Author Wolford has elsewhere rejected what she calls the "Official Genesis Story" and demonstrated how MST origins differed from place to place depending on local conditions and personalities (Wolford 2003).
Stédile refers to the list of conflicts assessed by Fernandes in the context of a discussion about historical and theoretical references for the MST. Peasant education is more successful, he says, when examples rather than theories are used. The details of historic struggles have influenced the ideological construction of the movement and its militants, Stédile says. He denies most direct or explicit connections, however. [End Page 201] Even in the case of the Landless Agriculturists' Movement (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra [MASTER]), which operated in Rio Grande do Sul from 1958 to 1963, Stédile emphasizes change rather than continuity. "O MST . . . não tem muito a ver com a memória histórica do MASTER," he says (17). Rather than seeing these other movements as roots of the MST, he sees them as examples of related struggles to be examined for lessons. Stédile argues that the specific roots of the MST are to be found in the Catholic and Lutheran Churches which together formed the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra [CPT]) in 1975 (19). On this point, all authors agree. Dedicated as it was to applying liberation theology to the problems of the rural poor, the CPT united priests, ministers and laymen working all over the country on the question of land access and control. Many of these people were strong advocates and steady supporters of the MST from its inception.
The authors tend to differ in the emphasis they place on another oft-cited MST origin, Brazil's rural labor union movement (Movimento Sindical dos Trabalhadores Rurais [MSTR]). On this score, Stédile is unambiguous: "O início da minha militância política foi nos sindicatos. Na época da ditadura militar [1964–1985], era o sindicato que fazia a luta pela reforma agrária" (29). But Fernandes shows how some unions offered explicit help while the resistance of others forced the landless to form separate organizations that would later unite in forming the MST. The sense of frustration some militants had with the unions receives emphasis in Wright and Wolford's interpretation (62–66). The books by Harnecker and Branford and Rocha document, however, that rural labor union leaders constituted more than 80 percent of the delegates who participated in founding the MST.
Founding
In gripping narrative style, Branford and Rocha open their book with a story of the initial meeting of peasant movement representatives that marked the beginnings of the MST. In 1982, Stédile and ten other gaúchos crammed into a VW bus to meet with about a hundred landless militants from neighboring states at a remote Lutheran church. Many had suffered displacement just like the Rio Grande do Sul farmers, but others were victims of the military's ambitious energy development projects that damned rivers and flooded huge agricultural zones, forcing many to flee. Branford and Rocha use the 1982 meeting to depict the semi-clandestine nature of the organizing effort, adding a certain tension to the story. In his effort to be comprehensive, Fernandes discusses the meeting itself in greater detail and also touches on a series of additional organizational meetings held outside Rio Grande do Sul over the course of the next two years. In less rigorous form, Stédile describes what he derived from each [End Page 202] of the intermediary regional meetings that culminated with the MST's founding at Cascavel, Paraná (PR), in 1984. Harnecker and Wright and Wolford neglect earlier meetings and start with the Cascavel encounter.
In her preface, Harnecker represents herself as interested in reconstructing the past, but on the question of founding the MST, her book provides the sketchiest of accounts. Wright and Wolford, on the other hand, insert historical background where it seems convenient to what is, in many respects, a compelling travelogue of the movement in three parts of the country, the south, northeast, and the Amazon region. We learn from the other authors, however, how various meetings contributed to building new regional relationships and provided insights that ultimately proved extremely important to the MST's success and longevity. A September 1982 meeting in Goiânia, Goiás, for example, formally brought together the landless and CPT apparatus. Among the CPT members was Brazilian sociologist José de Souza Martins, whom Stédile credits with inspiring the formation of the MST as a mass political organization with a national presence. (In the 1970s and 1980s, Martins worked as a consultant to the CPT while carrying on his duties as one of the University of São Paulo's most prolific scholars.) The Goiânia group formed a national organizing committee to assess the land struggle around the country, contact local leaders, and plan the Cascavel meeting.
The Cascavel encounter united representatives from agrarian reform movements in thirteen states, produced a number of mandates that continue to guide the movement and, as all of the books agree, debated and settled on the MST name. Responding to Fernandes's interrogation, Stédile describes the ideological discussions that went into the decision to adopt the name (46–49). It included both a process of elimination and profound search for an identity that could unite similar movements from such dissimilar places. The books also describe with relative consistency a number of other crucial decisions reached at the meeting, including a national presence, autonomy from other organizations, independence from political parties, open membership with special emphasis on women and families, and a participatory, democratic organizational structure, a revolutionary anti-capitalist ideological perspective. Branford and Rocha succeed in capturing the moment, concluding that "with hindsight today, it is evident that, if the participants had taken a different decision on any one of the key questions—and, at the time, it was by no means clear which was the better route to follow on all issues–-the dynamic of the movement would have been stalled" (24).
Consolidation
In 1984, the military regime was in its final year and dozens of popular meetings around the country contributed to organizing the [End Page 203] MST's first national congress. At the beginning of the next year, some 1,500 representatives from twenty-three states attended the congress in Curitiba, PR. In addition to the farmers, landless laborers and MST militants, congressional delegates also came from civil organizations such as the Brazilian bar association (Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil), the black movement, and the upstart national labor movement (Central Única dos Trabalhadores). With the presence of Workers' Party president Lula, the congress signaled the broad reach of the MST and the weight that would be given to building alliances. Representatives of peasant movements from other Latin American countries also participated, foreshadowing the global projection the MST was to pursue in the 1990s. Fernandes gives detailed attention to the event, which Stédile, Branford and Rocha, and Harnecker also highlight. Only Wright and Wolford, preferring a grassroots approach, mention it in passing.
While the history of the MST cannot be reduced to meetings, these first encounters deserve special attention because they established the basic structure and the guiding principles of the movement. Stédile and Fernandes's Brava gente proves insightful about the internal logic of the meetings, at least from his perspective. Fernandes's book is useful because it includes lists of participants and large segments of the concluding platforms. Branford and Rocha provide a vivid summary of the meetings as events and turning points. In the case of the congress, they turn to Stédile and Fernandes's book for several ideas, principal among them the organizers' decision to develop a direct-action approach to agrarian reform and not become dependent upon the new civilian government, despite pressure from some allies to simply support the government and follow its lead. This was a crucial decision, Harnecker emphasizes, as the new president soon revealed his opposition to the MST, working behind scenes to scuttle his government's own national agrarian reform plan. Anticipating trouble, delegates at the first congress coined the phrase, "sem reforma agrária não há democracia," Fernandes reports (90).
Fernandes uses the national congresses as periodization, organizing his chapters in five-year blocks. This is one more way in which his account remains uniquely loyal to the movement. While the book includes analysis and applies the discipline of geography in innovative ways, it comes close to being a MST publication. To write about the consolidation of the MST in the years following each congress, Fernandes traveled to almost every MST state headquarters to interview movement militants and structures his chapters around brief reports from each state or region. The congresses established a "word of order"—in 1990, it was "ocupar, resistir e produzir;" in 1995, it was "reforma agraria, uma luta de todos"—and Fernandes recounts what militants told him about the implementation of these mandates. [End Page 204]
The word of order emanating from the MST's first congress that had the most resonance for the consolidation of the movement was: "ocupação é a única solução." The phrase confirmed participants' lack of confidence in government support for land reform. It also underscored the direct-action approach that united the disparate movements in Curitiba. Through the occupation of unproductive land, the sem-terra family could become a com-terra family (with land, landed). While this is fairly obvious, the authors relate how occupying land became significant for the movement in other ways as well. In ideal circumstances, the process of building the movement began with consciousness-raising meetings with the poor about the injustice of Brazilian society and the role of land concentration in solidifying inequality. Organizers introduced land occupation as a collective act that could begin to resolve these problems, as an action that could build solidarity and contribute to a sem-terra identity among participants. Ironically, while the MST goal was land distribution, leaders wanted members to preserve a sem-terra identity until land reform had been exhausted as a solution to the profound misery of Brazilians.
Harnecker devotes her second chapter to land occupation, summarizing a seven-step procedure leading to a successful seizure. For her, the occupation is like a strike, a way of applying pressure to negotiate land distribution. In Brava gente, Stédile and Fernandes explain how significant occupations were to the birth and existence of the MST. Wright and Wolford also capture the centrality of the occupation to the MST, providing a comparative legal context for them. This seems to be designed to convince skeptical undergraduates, nonplussed by moral economy arguments, that MST occupations are a legitimate form of protest. "The Occupation" serves as the title of Branford and Rocha's fourth chapter. They introduce a number of personal histories about the transformative power of occupations by writing, "For the MST the act of occupying land . . . is the cornerstone of their movement" (65). The process of land occupation infuses Fernandes's book. Land occupation is key to the "socio-territorialization" concept he uses to analyze the MST's national consolidation.
No matter their approach, the books agree that the movement really took off in 1996, more than ten years after its founding. On April 17, in the Eldorado dos Carajás region of the Amazonian state of Pará, military police murdered nineteen militants. Stédile called the massacre one of the "maneiras . . . involuntárias" that attracted public support for the movement and forced the government to make agrarian reform a higher priority (143). Bar graphs that Fernandes reproduced from CPT sources show how the number of occupations and families involved more than doubled in this context, jumping from 146 occupations in 1995 to 398 in 1996, involving an increase of 30,476 to 62,880 participating [End Page 205] families (260). Wright and Wolford place the event in context and comment on the irony of how a thousand previous murders of militants "had never succeeded in seriously arousing the national conscience as El Dorado dos Carajás did" (209). Like the authors of To Inherit the Earth, Branford and Rocha devote a chapter to struggles in the Amazon and use the massacre as a starting point, offering the most detailed account of the event itself, its aftermath and implications. Polls conducted after the massacre showed soaring public support for agrarian reform and classified the MST as the fifth most esteemed institution in the country (Coletti 2002).
Organization
MST popularity peaked in 1997 with a cross-country protest march that brought thousands to Brasília on the anniversary of the Carajás massacre. But this seeming success inspired a negative reaction on the part of the landed classes and the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso. As the books recount, landlords organized armed groups to defend their property rights while the government sought to isolate the MST with an agile divide-and-conquer strategy. On the one hand, the government aggressively promoted land distribution and settlement projects with an array of groups while isolating the MST and criminalizing the tactic of occupation. In the eyes of the mainstream, the Cardoso government redistributed more land and settled more families than any in history (Martins 2003). To MST militants and sympathizers, however, the late 1990s brought little more than hard times. The authors are divided in their explanations of how and why the MST survived this period but united in emphasizing the movement's unique organizational agility.
Rare is the "movement" that lasts twenty years or so. By definition, movements come and go but not, it would seem, the MST. Stédile comments that organizational durability may be the MST's "grande contribuição histórica" (81). The secret for Stédile has been the MST's ability to balance mass-based movement practice with a flexible, non-partisan organizational structure, an institutionalized-movement, at one and the same time political and apolitical. He warns fellow travelers: "Vocês não têm futuro se não aplicarem princípios organizativos" (82). These principles involve the devolution of power to numerous thematic collectives that exist at local, regional, state, and national "instâncias," as Fernandes relates in detail (245–56). With fluctuating titles, the MST is awash in "secretariats," "setores" and "frentes" of production, communication, education, gender, health, mass organization and so forth. Periodic national and state meetings help coordinate the activities of these bodies. History has shown that the structure functions and that [End Page 206] its impersonal and decentralized characteristics have helped the movement weather tremendous challenges, from the assassination of important militants to persecution by the government.
Harnecker devotes the bulk of her book to organizational questions. Reading her admiring analysis of the MST's dedication to collective leadership, participatory democracy, and financial autonomy, one has to wonder if she was thinking about Castro's Cuba, Allende's Chile, or both as she wrote Sin tierra. Fernandes maps the spread of settlements linked to the MST as a means of demonstrating the formation and national consolidation of the movement as opposed to some seventy additional groups organized in the 1990s. Branford and Rocha include a chapter on the settlements and another on the movement's sustainable and organic production projects.
Wright and Wolford, in contrast, use the settlements they visit as a point of departure for their analysis of the MST. Using a case study approach, Luca Fanelli's La scelta della terra examines a single settlement in Paraná to evaluate the movement's fascinating and ultimately problematic experiment with collectivization, al modelo cubano. From both books, one gets a wonderful sense of place, a sense of the land and its value for the peasants. On the Palmares II settlement in the Amazon, Wright and Wolford met with several settlers and recount their experiences and make observations. "Everyone we spoke to, even those who were otherwise unhappy, agreed that producing enough food for the family was easy," they report (244). The MST placed a big emphasis on organization in the settlement, and it helped improve the quality of life and productivity, but some rejected movement pressures to live in villas—where movement theorist argued that class consciousness could be kept alive—rather than spread out on their individual plots, where many actually preferred to live. Fanelli documents the tension between collectivist ideas and individual desires in his detailed account of the Santa Maria settlement in Paranacity. The collectivist approach to production, which emphasized equal participation and profit-taking, did not sit well with the majority of peasants and was thus abandoned as a national model. Peasant resistance within the movement taught national coordinators that "as formas [of production] não podem ser rígidas, devem ser variáveis," Stédile writes. "Aprendemos que as formas de aplicação da cooperação agrícola deveriam ser flexíveis" (100–101).
Prospects
Perhaps the single most important question the various authors assess is whether the MST has succeeded in making agrarian reform in Brazil the political, even revolutionary, issue many think it must be in order for radical change to come about. The authors ask if the MST has [End Page 207] the potential for moving the question from one of social dimensions (land reform as one way of ameliorating but not ending Brazil's poverty problem) to one of political dimensions (land reform as socialism). The important distinction between agrarian reform as a social or political problem has been examined systematically by USP sociologist Martins (1989; 1997; 1999; 2000). He has praised the MST not as a revolutionary organization but as "o mais consequente movimento de modernização e ressocialização das populações do campo que já houve na história do Brasil" (Martins 1997, 59–60). In other words, it serves as an outside mediator to help resolve the social problem of a portion of Brazil's huge marginalized population by assisting their integration into capitalist society. The first historians of the MST disagree on these questions: some side with Martins, others endorse the organization's revolutionary self-image.
As a founder and chief strategist, Stédile offers something of an official assessment. Responding to a series of questions from Fernandes, Stédile differs with Martins on several crucial points without using the word revolutionary or denouncing capitalism. The MST supports reform in the social sense, Stédile says, but sees it as only the most basic of steps in a larger transformative process. The strategic objective of the MST is to end rural structural problems that contribute to poverty and social inequality. To do this, the first step is to distribute land titles, the second is to ease access to capital and the third is to facilitate educational access. From a pragmatic perspective, this cannot be accomplished by openly opposing capitalism and supporting socialism but only by organizing "milhões de pobres do meio rural para que lutem pela solução de seus problemas" (163). The step of land distribution aligns with government social policy but the MST must struggle to expand agrarian reform so that settlers contribute to "um acúmulo de forças para a continuidade da luta pela reforma agrária mais ampla" (163). Thus, Stédile and Fernandes's book supports the argument that the MST has a broad political mission to radically alter property relations and thus class relations in Brazil.
Writing as advocates, Fernandes and Morissawa offer a rallying cry for readers who probably are neither peasants nor outside mediators. The summary theme for both is "a luta continua." These authors see the MST not as the last but as the most recent organizational form the peasantry has taken to resist extinction, an end foretold for centuries by thinkers left, right and center. Fernandes underscores Martins's argument that characterizes the movement as an important means of economic integration for the rural poor. But he adds to this hypothesis the argument that the movement creates and recreates the peasantry in Brazil and that peasant insertion into the capitalist economy is counter-hegemonic because the peasant mode of production is essentially non-capitalist. Peasant [End Page 208] family labor and an emphasis on reproducing the family and the family farm withdraws the peasantry from expected market laws. Harnecker shares this assessment, describing the MST as a skillfully crafted social justice movement. It uses Marxism to evaluate capitalism, confront it, and construct sustainable systems for fighting poverty. The basis of the new society is not a grand socialist dream, writes Harnecker, but a family where patriarchy is banished by the empowerment of women. For these authors, then, the MST is not a reformist or revolutionary organization but a peasant resistance movement.
An emphasis on the politics of personal transformation summarizes fairly well the final assessment provided by Wright and Wolford. The MST is a pragmatic organization, they argue, and experience has taught militants to distrust theories of rapid and dramatic change and to endorse an eclectic array of ideas that extend from Mao to Gandhi to Chomsky, with Brazilian references such as the educator Paulo Freire prominently in the mix. But the authors come full circle: none of these limitations on the revolutionary prospects of the organization prevents it from having a dramatic impact on people's lives. "But just doing these things, things that we might take for granted [like having money to buy an appliance or a new pair of shoes], should be seen as revolutionary given where most of these people were coming from," they conclude (313).
Branford and Rocha end their book by placing the MST in comparative historical perspective with English Diggers, American Populists, Mexican revolutionaries, and Italian peasant leagues. The authors reject Martins's pessimism about the movement's ability to pursue revolutionary change. "The movement's hope," they note, "is to create an alliance of 'excluded Brazilians,' rural and urban, who favor radical change" (281). In their conclusion, they raise the MST from its national context to the international context of the broad-based anti-globalization movement where they see potential for a revolutionary reversal of the Green Revolution, recently re-energized by genetic engineering and relaxed trade rules. "The MST is well placed to join such a global revolution," they write. "As some sem-terra themselves are realizing, their future is not as economically unviable peasant communities living in a time warp but as modern, sustainable, green communities" (282). They admit to being idealistic but affirm their belief in the MST's potential to reinvent itself and play a role in realigning not only Brazil but the global economy as well.
The vehement reaction of the Brazilian media to Lula's symbolic support for the MST reflected ruling class concerns about potential threats as much as current ones. After twenty years, the MST has become part of the Brazilian socio-political landscape. Opposition to it remains great but its resilience has proven stronger. Few doubt that the [End Page 209] organization is here to stay. That it has transformed the lives of hundreds of thousands of Brazilians, empowering them to uplift themselves with comforts and hopes long buried in the mire of savage capitalist development, is unquestionable. As the authors of these books show, however, there is reason to question what the MST is now and what it will become in the short and long term. Its relationship with the Lula administration has tended to consolidate its role as a social service agency for the rural poor and small farmers. But its relationship with this dubiously working-class administration also has the potential for launching the movement on a broader and more radical mission. The sense of threat expressed by the mainstream press was not unfounded nor is the hope expressed by the authors of these books for the MST to help bring about a better world.
Cliff Welch has been teaching history at Grand Valley State University in Michigan since he received his Ph.D. from Duke University in 1990. From 2003 to 2005, he was a Visiting Foreign Professor of Social Sciences, Geography and History in the graduate schools of the Pontifícia Universidade Católica of São Paulo and the Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP) in Presidente Prudente. He is currently visiting research fellow at UNESP's Núcleo de Estudos, Pesquisas e Projetos de Reforma Agrária. Among his major publications are The Human Tradition in Modern Brazil (Schoalrly Resources, 2004), and The Seed Was Planted: The São Paulo Roots of Brazil's Rural Labor Movement, 1924–1964 (Penn State Press, 1999). His documentaries include Latino Voices (1998), Grass War! (2001) and Sonhando com futebol (2004). He is currently working on a book about land conflict in Brazil from 1959 to 1999.
References Cited
Coletti, Claudinei  2002 "Ascensão e refluxo do MST da luta pela terra na década neoliberal." Idéias 9 (1): 49–104.
Martins, José de Souza  1989 Caminhada no chão da noite: Emancipação política e libertação nos movimentos sociais no campo. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  1997 "A questão agrária e o papel do MST." In A reforma agrária e a luta do MST, edited by João Pedro Stédile and Frei Sérgio, 11–76. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.  1999 [1994] O poder do atraso: ensaios de sociologia da história lenta, 2. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  2000 Reforma agrária: o impossível diálogo. São Paulo: Editora da Universidade de São Paulo.  2003 "A reforma agrária no segundo mandato de Fernando Henrique Cardoso." Tempo Social—USP 15 (2): 141–75 (novembro).
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST)  2004 Quem Somos: 1984–2004, MST 20 anos de lutas, conquistas e dignidade! 24 de junho 2004. MST. http://www.mst.org.br/historico/historia.htm (accessed November 2, 2004).
Wolford, Wendy  2003 "Families, Fields and Fighting for Land: The Spatial Dynamics of Contention in Rural Brazil." Mobilization: An International Journal 8 (2): 201–215 (June).

















 

2009
Development Studies
Latin American Perspectives
The Politics of the MST : Autonomous Rural Communities, the State, and Electoral Politics 
Leandro Vergara-Camus

Latin American Perspectives 2009 36: 178 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X09338608
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/36/4/178
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/36/4/178.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
The Politics of the MST
Autonomous Rural Communities, the State, and Electoral Politics
by Leandro Vergara-Camus
Examination of the politicization of landless people in the encampments and settle- ments of the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (Landless Rural Workers’ Movement—MST) in Brazil suggests that the movement’s success rest on the fact that it generates relatively autonomous rural communities organized around autonomous political structures that facilitate mobilization. These communities persist because their members, by protecting their right to land from full commoditization, ensuring an ade- quate production of food, and avoiding the full monetarization of their subsistence needs, are able to mitigate the effects of the market. In addition, in order to secure the survival and development of its settlements, the MST has integrated participation in institutional politics into its mobilization strategy. However, because of the nature of President Lula’s policies, the continuity of the traditional alliance between the MST and the Workers’ Party is bound to become a major issue.
Keywords:	Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST), Land struggle, Politicization, Encampments, Settlements, Mobilization, Autonomy, Workers’ Party
Brazil’s Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (Landless Rural Workers’ Movement—MST) is one of the most important and successful peasant movements in Latin America today. Since its creation in 1984, the MST has been instrumental in the struggle of hundreds of thousands of poor Brazilian families to gain access to land and a decent standard of living through land occupations. Even though the MST has traditionally coordi- nated only between 25 and 50 percent of the land occupations, the 902,048 families that were granted land between 1988 and 2007 owe a lot to its devel- opment of a very successful political strategy around land occupations and social mobilization. At the end of 2007 there were still 69,769 families in 532 encampments throughout Brazil, 289 of which belonged to the MST (DATALUTA, 2008), preparing to occupy land that the state has the constitu- tional responsibility of distributing.1 Throughout the years, the MST has not
Leandro Vergara-Camus is an assistant professor in the Centre for Development Studies at the University of Groningen in The Netherlands. He is engaged in a comparison of the struggle for land and the development alternatives of the MST in southern Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas. He thanks Judith Adler Hellman, Lúcio Flávio de Almeida, and Paula Hevia-Pacheco, as well as Jack Hammond, Mônica Dias Martins, and Cliff Welch, the three reviewers, for their comments and suggestions. He is grateful to Cliff Welch for taking on the arduous task of correcting his English. He also thanks the MST for its openness to research and the sem-terra families for their enormous hospitality and for sharing their stories of struggle.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 167, Vol. 36 No. 4, July 2009 178-191 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X09338608 © 2009 Latin American Perspectives
178
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	179
only organized the struggle for land but has also taken on numerous tasks that range from child and adult education to medical care and the training of educators, health care providers, agronomists, and co-op administrators. In other words, in a context of profound economic and social crisis, the MST is providing a concrete alternative for poor families in the countryside and the cities.
As in many other parts of the underdeveloped world, the struggle for land is taking the form of a response by the popular classes to the growing frag- mentation of work and the insecurity of the informal economy, which has intensified with the implementation of neoliberal policies (Bernstein, 2004; Bryceson, 2000; Moyo and Yeros, 2005). In Brazil today, the struggle for land in the countryside and the city has gradually become one of the ways to secure subsistence and move away from social marginalization. However, in the case of the MST, this dramatic struggle for citizenship has not stopped when fami- lies gain access to land but has been channeled toward much broader struggles that challenge the way the popular classes relate to politics, the state, and political parties. Although it is widely known that the MST has collaborated closely with the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party—PT), surprisingly little has been written on the subject, especially considering the fact that the MST has gone much farther than simply supporting or participating in the party. In the southern states of Brazil, the region where it has been present for the longest time, some of its members have won local elections under the PT banner while remaining committed to the movement (Meszaros, 2000: 15; Wright and Wolford, 2003: 321). Based partly on fieldwork in southern Brazil in 2003, this article explores how partisan politics fit into the overall MST strategy of politicizing landless people, a strategy that privileges participatory democracy at the community level and pressure-group mobilization at the state level.
Certain scholars link the success of the MST to its combining direct action with institutional-legal pressure (Hammond, 1999: 485; Meszaros, 2000: 9). In this article I argue that its success and resilience rest also on the fact that through its struggle for land it generates relatively autonomous rural com- munities organized around autonomous political structures that promote the politicization of its membership and facilitate mobilization. In turn, these communities persist because their members, by protecting their right to land from full commoditization, ensuring adequate production of food, and avoid- ing the full monetarization of their subsistence needs, are able to mitigate the effects of the market. I use the term “relatively autonomous rural communi- ties” to highlight the fact that these communities are not completely indepen- dent from the “outside world.” They have ongoing relationships with various actors locally, nationally, and internationally. Moreover, MST settlements ben- efit from state funding and programs, and the MST also works with and receives donations from national and international solidarity groups and nongovernmental organizations. However, the way in which it is able to determine or negotiate the kind of external intervention in their member com- munities justifies the use of the term “autonomy.”
The next section elaborates on the theoretical orientation of my work. Thereafter, the article argues that the politicization that happens in encamp- ments and settlements is the basis of the MST’s strength. It continues by turning
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
180	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
to the struggle to remain on the land and presents the strategies through which MST settlers seek to secure their survival. Since pressuring the state for funding and favorable policies has been one of these strategies and has generated experiences of participation of MST members in municipal and state politics, in the last section of the article I focus on the MST strategy with regard to participation in institutional politics. Considering that Lula’s government has not yet fulfilled the promises it has made to landless people and small farmers, I conclude by raising the issue of a possible shift in the MST’s traditional alliance with the PT and the political challenges it could represent.
SOCIAL MOVEMENTS, CIVIL SOCIETY, AND THE STATE
Since the early 1990s, some researchers working on new social movements have emphasized the emergence of “new forms of doing politics,” the con- struction of “new forms of social power,” and the shift in strategy from a focus on the conquest of state power toward a “search for autonomy” or an “alterna- tive society” (Calderón, Piscitelli, and Reyna, 1992: 24, 28). Others have high- lighted that one of the main goals was the “transformation of the dominant political culture” (Alvarez, Dagnino, and Escobar, 1998: 9) and the develop- ment of “a project of a new sociability” (Dagnino, 1998: 52). Compared with movements 25 years earlier, which had “strong state/political orientations,” new social movements were “searching for their own cultural identities and spaces for social expression, political or otherwise” (Calderón, Piscitelli, and Reyna, 1992: 23). Regardless of theoretical perspective, analysts observed that these social movements shared a profound distrust of the state and political parties and were reluctant to collaborate with them. However, some observers could not but caution against hasty generalizations, stressing that social movements, although suspicious of manipulation and jealous of their autonomy, did not always shy away from political parties (Hellman, 1992; 1995; Dagnino, 1998: 56; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001).
My analysis of the politics of the MST and its relationship to the state and to political parties is inspired by Antonio Gramsci’s (1975: 577) notion of the extended state, which distinguishes political society from civil society in an attempt to grasp the complexity of class power in liberal democratic capitalist societies. In Gramsci’s work, political society is constituted by state institu- tions such as the government, the legislative bodies, the judiciary system, and the administrative apparatus of the state. I will use the term “institutional politics” to refer to political activities that are carried out within these institu- tions. In contrast, civil society is constituted by institutions such as the school, the Church, the mass media, and the voluntary civic organizations that pro- duce and reproduce bourgeois culture and values. This distinction leads Gramsci to rethink the role of the political party. For him, the party plays the role of an initiator and promoter of a revolutionary counterhegemony, leading or accompanying popular struggles and articulating, giving meaning to, and diffusing the hegemony of the subaltern classes (Gramsci, 1971: 328). Accordingly, the party is expected to be active not only in political society but also in civil society, contributing to the emergence of politicized citizens who
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	181
are capable of governing themselves. The party carries out a function of edu- cation, political formation, and empowerment of its militants and individuals in general, for it is one of the institutions in which the exercise of popular power is learned (Gramsci, 1975: 428, 447).
Gramsci’s understanding of the state and the role of the political party is useful for analyzing the strategies of Latin American social movements, espe- cially those, such as the MST, that aim at fundamentally transforming social relations of domination. It allows examination of the actions undertaken by social movements to politicize their membership and transform social relations within their organizations and in civil society at large and those conducted on the terrain of institutional politics. The Gramscian conception of the state also coincides with the politics of the MST, which uses social mobilization to effect change in state actions, policies, and programs.
LIFE IN THE ENCAMPMENT AND THE MAKING OF THE MST’S MILITANCY
Winning land is at once the end of a long and very difficult journey and the beginning of another one: the struggle to remain on the land. After a long conversation with Jacir Suáres, an MST settler in the Pirituba settlement in Itapeva, in the state of São Paulo, I asked him, “Would you sell your land?” This was his answer:
For me, land was always someone else’s. I think it’s because of that that I didn’t value it. After conquering a piece of land, I value land. Before I would have sold my land. Not today. With the struggle, all that I have I do because we conquered land. Land is the beginning of everything. Who could have told that everything starts under a plastic tent?
This plastic tent represents one of the symbols of the struggle of the MST, since encampments made of hundreds of these tents can be seen on the fringes of federal and state highways all over Brazil. It is under these tents that landless families, men, women, and children, live and organize for many years while they occupy unproductive latifundia to force the state to expropriate their owners.2 Life in these camps is very harsh. Braving all kinds of weather and illnesses, people must make ends meet with limited food, fuel, and drinking water. On top of that, in many locales they face constant intimidation and violence from gunmen paid by landowners. Families live under these condi- tions year-round without any guarantee of achieving their goal of agrarian reform. What can explain this perseverance and dedication?
The geographer Wendy Wolford (2003b: 501) argues that the capacity of the MST to maintain high levels of participation is due to its ability to create an “imagined community” organized around ideas, practices, symbols, slogans, and rituals but, more important, to its ability to remain an effective mediator between the state and settlers. These high levels of participation also derive, however, from the maintenance of organizational structures that encourage politicization and mobilization. Participation in these political structures creates not only an “imagined community” but also “real relatively
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
182	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
autonomous communities” that are easier to mobilize than the membership of other organizations.
The sociologist Wilder Robles (2000: 679) has underlined that for the MST “the first step toward overcoming systematic social exclusion was to estab- lish community-based political units.” According to Robles, the movement viewed these units as “autonomous spaces where the poor and the oppressed learn how to organize and educate themselves against exclusionary power structures.” It is through the everyday experiences and practices in the encampments and land occupations (ocupações) that landless families are transformed into a politicized and organized force of the poor. The encampment period constitutes a period of ultrapoliticization (Romano, 1994: 257; Fernandes, 2005) of everyday life, because almost all aspects of residents’ lives are dealt with through participation in various types of small committees (Almeida and Ruiz, 2000: 16, Fernandes, 2000: 184–185). However, the MST differs from many other organizations in that it controls an actual territorial space.
To capture this particularity of the MST, Bernardo Mançano Fernandes (2005) has developed the concept of “socio-territorial movements.” He argues that “territorialized movements are those that are organized and act in differ- ent places at the same time, made possible by their form of organization, which permits the spatialization of the struggle for land” (2005: 326). Socio- territorial movements, in their struggle against capital and proletarianiza- tion, also use the space they control as “a space of political socialization” (321) in which they create and re-create themselves through the experiences of their members. Indeed, being a sem-terra means not only being a member of an organization but, more important, living for a relatively long period of time in a community with its own norms, values, and objectives. This feeling of “belonging” to a real, geographically circumscribed rural community that is linked to a broader sem-terra community takes form gradually through parti- cipation first in the organizational structures of an encampment and later in those of a settlement and in the movement in general.
In an encampment or a settlement, most political decisions are made by the grassroots membership in consultation and coordination with regional, state, and national leaderships. In many interviews that I conducted the narration of the various times acampados had to move from one property to another was a common feature. In all cases, people remembered the discussions and nego- tiations with state and police officials with respect to the terms and details of their displacement. Although highly institutionalized, encampments and settlements maintain an important degree of local autonomy.
The negotiations, discussions, decisions, and actions undertaken during the period of encampment make up a concrete and practical process of politi- cization and empowerment (Fernandes, 2000: 174, Hammond, 1999: 482) that interferes with the bourgeois hegemony within civil society that seeks to depoliticize social and economic problems. Through their various political experiences either within or outside the encampment and later in their settle- ment, MST members, by solving problems and planning actions, learn to mobilize and organize. As they become aware of their rights and pressure, negotiate with, or confront state authorities from the various levels of gov- ernment, they learn to question the state, demystifying it and, as it were,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	183
depriving the king of his royal robes. One observes here that the MST plays the same role that the political party does in Gramsci’s (1975: 428, 447) thought. By empowering landless people, it is an educator in class power, citizenship, and self-government for the subaltern classes. Therefore, if we recognize the class character of the MST experience of construction of popular power, the politicization happening in MST’s encampments is the beginning of what new-social-movements scholars call “new forms of doing politics” or “the transformation of the dominant political culture” (Calderón, Piscitelli, and Reyna, 1992; Alvarez, Dagnino, and Escobar, 1998).
THE STRUGGLE TO REMAIN ON THE LAND
If the conquest of land comes only after a very long and extremely difficult struggle, remaining on the land is also far from an easy task. Becoming a set- tler means, first and foremost, the beginning of the battle to secure survival within the very hostile market controlled by agribusiness. Even researchers from the state Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agraria (National Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform—INCRA) recognize that this battle is fought with almost no real help from the government (Cardim, Vieira, and Viégas, 1998: 24).
In their struggle to remain on the land, MST settlers are faced with a major challenge: creating economic mechanisms that will generate permanent sources of income. The movement attempts to meet this challenge by focusing in the first place on the self-sufficiency of its settlers and where possible the diversification of agricultural production. The proportion of agricultural pro- duction that is geared toward household consumption, although generally small in relation to total output, represents an enormous difference from the food scarcity that many poor people experienced in the city or in rural towns. Indeed, most settlers interviewed underscored food self-sufficiency as one of the fundamental advantages of conquering land because it allowed them not to have to depend on money to cover that fundamental need. Thus, at least in this respect, by blocking the monetarization of subsistence needs and thus the full commoditization of social relations access to land helps to mitigate the effects of the market.
Nonetheless, for MST settlers self-sufficiency can only represent a first step toward the sustained development of settlements. The movement has tried to reach this objective by forming cooperatives and creating agro-industries (MST, 1991) and by developing new collective forms of organizing production (Martins, 2000: 38–39; Singer, 2002) that contain attractive elements of an alter- native model of sustainable development. However, experiences of coopera- tion have not been easy to sustain and have now been adapted to the settlers’ overwhelming preference for family farming.3 Thus, for the MST as for many other peasant movements in Latin America, it has proven much more difficult to generate alternative forms of production than to maintain politicized autonomous rural communities.
The current context of market liberalization in Brazil, which has resulted in constant price fluctuations and put small farmers in competition with highly subsidized agribusinesses, is very adverse to small farmers. In the coming
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
184	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
years, the main objective of the MST will probably continue to be pressuring the state for agrarian reform in order to see the small-farmer sector grow in size and security (Stédile in Amaral, 2003: 6). But the difficulties of current settlers also bring to the fore another imperative: sustaining political mobiliza- tion for government agricultural credits and technical assistance.
Mobilizing against neoliberal state policies and pressuring for the imple- mentation or improvement of particular programs are traditional tactics of MST political strategy, but maintaining high levels of mobilization and par- ticipation is much more difficult to achieve in settlements than in encamp- ments. The first years of settlement retain a certain continuity with the “ultra-politicized period of the occupation” (Romano, 1994) because settlers constantly have to pressure the state to provide the needed infrastructure (roads, schools, electricity, etc.). However, once most of the settlement’s infra- structure is in place, individual preoccupations often start to replace more collective ones. Settlements, in contrast to encampments, which to a certain extent function at the margins of the capitalist economy, are much more inte- grated into the logic of capitalist society (Abramoway, 1994). One of the main challenges for the MST is therefore to keep its decision-making and represen- tation structures in the settlement functioning so as to facilitate mobilization when required.
The extent to which this challenge can be met will vary according to the experience and internal dynamic of each settlement. Wolford (2003a: 210) observed that in some settlements the settlers gradually came to see the MST as a union, “a service organization that represented the settlers rather than a social movement of which they were members.” Although this tendency can be observed in older settlements where the struggle for land was character- ized by more informal and personalist leadership, it is difficult to argue that this is a general trend. In the settlements where the decision-making and representation structures have remained active, the MST is not simply a mediator between its members and the state. Even if the state provides most of the financial resources, contrary to Wolford’s (2003b: 513) assertion that “once MST members receive land, the government becomes their landlord, creditor, educator and overseer” the state is not the ultimate overseer in the settlement. On many issues, the MST settlers themselves are the overseers, deciding on questions that range from the pedagogy adopted in their schools to the type of health care philosophy they prefer to the type of technical assis- tance they want (Martins, 2000: 38).
Government programs are not implemented from above but have to be negotiated with the settlement and the MST. For instance, the settlement Fazenda Anoni in Sarandi, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, fought for many years to have the state finance the construction of a primary school.4 Once it was approved, the state wanted the school to function according to the programs and norms of the Ministry of Education, while settlers wanted to implement the program and pedagogy that the MST had developed in encampments and settlements over years of struggle (Caldart, 1997). After months of negotiations with the state secretary of education, the settlers won many of their demands. Their pedagogy was accepted as long as they also covered the objectives of the Ministry of Education, and a certain number of teachers were selected from the settlement. The current program of the Chico
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	185
Mendes school follows Paulo Freire’s precepts and emphasizes rural life, linking theory with practice, among other things, through the maintenance of a small plot on which students grow all kinds of vegetables. The governing body of the school is made up of a series of committees in which students have as much representation as teachers and parents.
As this example shows, MST settlers participate in and maintain relatively autonomous communities that set their own priorities and determine the ways to reach them in assemblies and later negotiate with the state to imple- ment programs that will meet their objectives. In general terms, it could be said that beyond the “normalization” of political life that characterizes settle- ments, the political structures in MST settlements tend to foster relatively high levels of participation and mobilization of the militancy that allow them to confront the state. However, the financial dependence of settlements on the state has meant that, in order to influence state policies or simply have a voice in traditional spaces of political power, the MST has had to find a way to enter the field of institutional politics.
THE MST AND INSTITUTIONAL POLITICS
In Brazil as in other countries of Latin America, peasant movements have historically had all kinds of difficulty creating alliances with—while maintain- ing their autonomy from—the state, political parties, populist politicians, and the Catholic and Lutheran churches (Welch, 1999: 222–227, 308–316, 328–331). This difficulty reached its peak when, in the aftermath of the military coup of 1964 and the subsequent brutal persecution of communist leaders and other progressive rural activists, rural unions became the “distributional arm of the state” in the countryside by providing rural workers and small farmers with a series of state services (Houtzager, 1998: 117–122).
In the 1980s, toward the end of the military dictatorship, when some politi- cal space opened up and the democratization of rural unions resumed, the question of alliances with political parties and politicians resurfaced. Because MST members shared similar political experiences with the new unionism movement that led to the creation of the Central única de Trabalhadores (Unitary Confederation of Workers—CUT) and the PT, the question of how to articulate the struggle for land with the electoral politics of the PT figured prominently in internal discussions. From its founding in 1984 to the present, the MST has emphasized both the importance of participating on all fronts in civil society (rural workers’ unions, small farmers’ organizations, churches, coalitions against neoliberal policies) and political society (government agen- cies and political parties) as well as the need to maintain its autonomy from each of these institutions (Wright and Wolford, 2003: 41; Fernandes, 2000: 83–93; Almeida and Ruiz, 2000: 26). Although officially the MST did not call for unconditional support for a single party, the great majority of its members, along with many other Brazilian social activists, saw the PT as the political voice of social movements (Keck, 1989).
Most of the mobilizations of the MST (for land, credits, housing, education, health care services, infrastructure, etc.), carried out within civil society, con- front or pressure state institutions directly and raise the issue of institutional
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
186	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
politics. Who controls a particular government has made a significant differ- ence in the way pressures from the MST have been dealt with. For instance, the first wave of settlements in the early 1980s in the state of São Paulo benefited from some support from Governor Franco Montoro (1983–1987), and more recently the PT government of Olívio Dutra in Rio Grande do Sul (1998–2002) found innovative ways to accelerate land expropriation and direct more financial resources toward that end. The movement has nev- ertheless been very cautious in its political strategy with respect to institu- tional politics.
Nationally, the MST has chosen not to run its own candidates for political office or have its leaders accept government positions, while at the municipal and state levels every local MST can decide its own position with respect to institutional politics. By and large, MST militants have worked alongside PT candidates during electoral campaigns, and some MST members have been active in the party. But the MST has explicitly rejected the idea of becoming organically linked to the PT. For many MST leaders, as well as for the grass- roots membership, collaboration with the PT should not be allowed to divert the movement from its mobilization strategy, especially when the PT is in government. For example, Armando da Silva, of Fazenda Macali in Ronda Alta, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, echoing the sentiments of many other settlers, was unequivocal: “When government is ours, it’s worse. The MST stops organizing protests. When government is from other parties, we go out to protest, to demand credits. When it’s ours, we are scared; we let them resolve things for us. We need to continue pressuring.”
In the case of some older settlements in southern Brazil, in order to have more influence and presence locally settlers have decided to get directly involved in local politics under the banner of the PT (Wright and Wolford, 2003: 321). Elected MST settlers have occupied seats in municipal councils of Paranacity, in the state of Paraná, as well as in Ronda Alta and Pontão, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul. In Sumaré, in the state of São Paulo, militants have been elected mayor. In Rio Grande do Sul, two well-known peasant activists, Dionilson Marcon and Frei Sérgio Görgen, have been elected on the PT ticket as representatives to the state legislature.
Although the decision to present leaders on the local PT ticket is discussed and agreed upon collectively by each settlement or the regional and state MST, these peasant leaders serve not as representatives of the MST but as individuals. Their actions are nevertheless closely followed and monitored by the settlers, and sometimes they have to give a percentage of their salary to the MST. This is the case because the movement sees political representa- tion as a way of amplifying its influence in Brazilian civil society. These MST members-turned-politicians work as public spokespersons for agrarian reform and related social issues. Judith Strozaki, a national MST leader, stresses that participation in local and state politics has to be in line with the overall mission of the MST, which is “to organize the poor in the countryside and in the city.” The idea behind this is that a political representative has better access to the media and ability to intervene in public debates and attract attention to protests, rallies, and meetings. In Gramscian terms, par- ticipation in institutional politics should serve the objectives of mobilization and organization in civil society. But, as the same national leader points out,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	187
experience has shown that political representatives are so busy with other issues that they end up “administering the institutional machine and are left with very little time to organize the people.”
In contrast to the peasant movements of the predictatorship period, the MST has clearly remained autonomous from the state and political parties. It seems to have been able to set the terms of its alliance with the PT and has even tried to find a way to use institutional politics as part of its mobili- zation strategy. However, the manner in which the MST has decided to deal with the issue of participation in institutional politics appears to be a conjunc- tural one.
Indeed, the recent presidency of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva has raised new issues regarding the MST’s strategy toward the PT and institutional politics. In terms of policy, this contradictory alliance has translated into some favor- able political measures affecting small agricultural producers: credits for small farmers have doubled and been made available before the harvest, debts have been renegotiated and partially cancelled, and marketing guaran- tees, such as minimum prices for cash crops, have been extended. With respect to the land issue, however, Lula’s record is timid at best. Although he has reaffirmed his sympathy for the land struggle, his administration has failed to fulfill the expectations of landless people and even his own promise of settling 400,000 new families, regularizing the status of 500,000 more, and facilitating purchase through credit for an additional 150,000 (Oliveira, 2006: 8). According to official numbers, Lula’s agrarian reform has accelerated the pace of land distribution by settling on average 81,430 families per year, while the former president, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, had settled on aver- age 65,548 families per year (Fernandes, 2007: 17). However, some analysts contest these numbers and their significance. Ariovaldo Umbelino de Oliveira argues, for instance, that of the 245,061 families allegedly settled in the first three years, only 89,927 were settled on new settlements, representing a mere 34.2 percent of the government’s goal for these years. The remaining families were families whose right to land was regularized or recognized or who ben- efited from the relocation program for a hydroelectric dam (Oliveira, 2006: 21). Fernandes (2007: 17), acknowledging Oliveira’s analysis, adds that Lula’s agrarian reform also represents a step back in relation to land concentration, since only 25 percent of the families have been settled on expropriated pri- vate land. This limited commitment to agrarian reform and the slow pace of land distribution raise questions with regard to the capacity or willingness of Lula’s government to carry out a vast and well-financed agrarian reform. For many members of the MST, it also raises the question whether supporting Lula and the PT all these years has been worthwhile.
CONCLUSION
The MST has grown because it has achieved concrete results. It has helped settle thousands of families on the land and fought to obtain resources for the various needs in those settlements (agricultural credits, technical assis- tance, elementary and secondary education, health clinics, etc.). It has been able to make those gains because, by controlling a geographic space, it has
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
188	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
built relatively autonomous rural communities (encampments and settle- ments) made up of politically active members organized around their own political structures, which are linked to those of other communities at the regional, state, and national level. Through their participation in these politi- cal structures beginning with the period of encampment and land occupation, MST members become politicized and active citizens who are easier to mobilize and can confront the state on specific issues. Thus, the MST plays for landless people the role that Gramsci attributed to the communist party with respect to the working class and that the PT embodied with respect to popular sectors until the early 1990s.
However, creating alternative forms of organizing agricultural produc- tion has been much more difficult than generating and maintaining a politi- cized and participatory membership. In the context of neoliberal policies of commercial liberalization (reduced and targeted credits that favor the inter- ests of agribusiness), the future for peasants or small farmers is bleak. With the relative failure of collective work and cooperatives and settlers’ prefer- ence for family farming, the MST’s approach to the challenge of agricultural production still depends on its experience in political organization and mobilization. Its objective is thus to mobilize enough landless rural workers and small farmers to force the state to distribute a substantial amount of land, provide resources for settlements, and support small farmers. At the same time, this mobilization, as the MST has come to realize over time, needs to be complemented with strategic participation in institutional poli- tics alongside the PT. Lula’s second term will be determinant for the future of this dual strategy.
For Lula’s reelection bid in 2006, the MST remained silent throughout the campaign, giving its support to Lula only a few days before the second- round vote. This attitude is telling of the ambivalence with which it approaches Lula’s second term. The composition of the new cabinet does not promise any significant change with respect to that of his first four years. In the light of its achievements and setbacks under an “allied government,” the MST must address some serious questions. If agrarian reform is not accelerated or agricultural policies do not change substantially, will the MST want to main- tain its alliance with the PT? Will the slow pace of land distribution push it to reconsider its relation with the PT and even its strategy toward institutional politics? If disillusionment with Lula’s policies generates new divisions within the PT, the participation of MST members in the PT will become more delicate. Will it be appropriate for members of the MST to compete in local elections under the PT banner? Can the MST stay on the margins of the new Partido Socialismo e Liberdade (Socialism and Liberty Party—PSOL), recently created by members of the PT expelled during Lula’s administration?
Moreover, if there are no major shifts in Lula’s policies, the disillusionment of the MST membership with the results of years of actively supporting him may initiate reflection on the limitations of the movement’s strategy with regard to institutional politics that could have important consequences for the future of the movement. Whatever the result of this reflection, the MST’s long experience of struggle, which has allowed it to create and maintain autono- mous rural communities, will most likely be at the heart of it.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	189
NOTES
1. The MST’s struggle for land has two stages. First, landless families temporarily live and prepare themselves for land occupation in encampments (acampamentos) on the fringes of federal roads near landed estates that meet the requirements to be subject to expropriation. Second, once they have been successful in their occupation, they are given the land they have occupied, and a permanent settlement (assentamento), divided into family or common plots and common areas and buildings (school, health care clinic, co-operative, etc.), is created under the supervision of the state. The people involved in land occupations are referred to as acampados and acampadas, while settlers are referred to as assentados and assentadas.
2. Because of the numerous legal instances a landowner can appeal to in order to contest and postpone expropriation, a landless family may live in one or many of these encampments for a period of two to four years or more.
3. In 1997, according to the agrarian reform census, the overwhelming majority, 94 percent, of MST settlers tilled their land as family units and only 6 percent produced as a collective or combined family farming with some kind of cooperation (Singer, 2002: 115).
4. The majority of the time, children go to school in nearby towns, and the struggle is more about having the municipality provide school buses from the settlement to the school.
REFERENCES
Abramoway, Ricardo 1994 “O mundo desencantado dos assentamentos,” pp. 313–320 in Leonilde Medeiro, Maria Valéria Barbosa, Mariana Pantoja Franco, Neide Esterci, and Sergio Leite (eds.), Assentamentos rurais: Uma visão multidisciplinar, São Paulo: UNESP.
Almeida, Lúcio Flávio de and Félix Ruiz Sánchez 2000 “The Landless Workers’ Movement and social struggle against neoliberalism.” Latin American Perspectives 27 (5): 11–32.
Alvarez, Sonia, Evelina Dagnino, and Arturo Escobar 1998 “Introduction: the cultural and the political in Latin American social movements,” pp. 1–29 in Sonia Alvarez, Evelina Dagnino, and Arturo Escobar (eds.), Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures: Re-visioning Latin American Social Movements. Boulder: Westview Press.
Amaral, Marina 2003 “A proposta do MST.” Caros Amigos, no. 18 (September 18), 4–6.
Bernstein, Henry 2004 “‘Changing before our very own eyes’: agrarian questions and the politics of land in capitalism today.” Journal of Agrarian Change 4: 190–225.
Bryceson, Deborah F. 2000 “Disappearing peasantries? Rural labour redundancy in the neo-liberal era and beyond,” pp. 299–326 in Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristobal Kay, and Jos Mooij (eds.), Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Caldart, Roseli Salete 1997 Educação em movimento: Formação de educadoras e educadores no MST. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Calderón, Fernando, Alejandro Piscitelli, and José Luis Reyna 1992 “Social movements: actors, theories, expectations,” pp. 19–36 in Sonia Alvarez and Arturo Escobar (eds.), The Making of Social Movements in Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
Cardim, Sílvia Elizabeth de C.S, Paulo de Tarso Loguércio Vieira, and José Leopoldo Ribeiro Viégas
1998 “Análise da estructura fundiaria brasileira.” Brasilia, INCRA. http://www.incra.gv
.br/_htm/serveinf/_htm/pubs/pubs.htm. Dagnino, Evelina
1998 “Culture, citizenship, and democracy: changing discourses and practices of the Latin American left,” pp. 33–63 in Sonia Alvarez, Evelina Dagnino, and Arturo Escobar (eds.), Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures: Re-visioning Latin American Social Movements. Boulder: Westview Press.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
190	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
DATALUTA 2008 Banco de datos da luta pela terra: Relatoria 2007. Ed. Bernardo Mançano Fernandes and Clifford Andrew Welch. Presidente Prudente, São Paulo: NERA/FCT/UNESP.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano 2000 A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes. 2005 “The occupation as a form of access to land in Brazil: a theoretical and methodological contribution,” pp. 311–340 in Sam Moyo and Paris Yeros (eds.), Reclaiming the Land: The Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. London: Zed Books. 2007 “O MST e a reforma agraria no Brasil.” Paper presented at the Encontro de Geógrafos de América Latina, Bogotá, March 26–30.
Gramsci, Antonio 1971 Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Ed. Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New York: International Publishers. 1975 “Notes sur Machiavel, sur la politique et sur le prince moderne,” pp. 415–580 in Gramsci dans le texte. Paris: Éditions Sociales.
Hammond, John 1999 “Law and disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Movement.” Bulletin of Latin American Research 18: 469–489.
Hellman, Judith Adler 1992 “The study of social movements in Latin America and the question of autonomy,” pp. 52–61 in Sonia Alvarez and Arturo Escobar (eds.), The Making of Social Movements in Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press. 1995 “The riddle of social movements: who they are and what they do,” pp. 165–183 in Sandor Halebsky and Richard Harris (eds.), Capital, Power, and Inequality in Latin America. Boulder: Westview Press.
Houtzager, Peter P. 1998 “State and unions in the transformation of the Brazilian countryside, 1964–1979.” Latin American Research Review 33 (2): 103–142.
Keck, Margaret E. 1989 The Workers’ Party and Democratization in Brazil. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Martins, Mônica Dias 2000 “The challenge to neoliberalism.” Latin American Perspectives 27 (5): 33–45.
Meszaros, George 2000 “No ordinary revolution: Brazil’s Landless Workers’ Movement.” Race and Class 42 (2): 1–18.
Moyo, Sam and Paris Yeros 2005 “The resurgence of rural movements under neoliberalism,” pp. 8–64 in Sam Moyo and Paris Yeros (eds.), Reclaiming the Land: The Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. London: Zed Books.
MST (Movimento de Trabalhadores Rurales Sem-Terra) 1991 “A experiência do MST na cooperação agrícola,” pp. 134–179 in Frei Sergio Antonio Görgen and João Pedro Stédile (eds.), Assentamentos: A resposta económica da reforma agrária. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Oliveira, Ariovaldo Umbelino de 2006 “A não reforma agraria do MDA/INCRA do governo Lula.” http://www.landaction .org/gallery/AnaoReformaAgrariaNoGovernoLula.pdf.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer 2001 “Are Latin American peasant movements still a force for change? Some new paradigms revisited.” Journal of Peasant Studies 28: 83–118.
Robles, Wilder 2000 “Beyond the politics of protest: the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement of Brazil.” Canadian Journal of Development Studies 21: 657–691.
Romano, Jorge Osvaldo 1994 “Poder, valores e conflito nos processos de organização no interior dos assentamentos: comentários a um debate,” pp. 249–258 in Leonilde Medeiro, Maria Valéria Barbosa, Mariana Pantoja Franco, Neide Esterci, and Sergio Leite (eds.), Assentamentos rurais: Uma visão multi- disciplinar. São Paulo: UNESP.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vergara-Camus / THE POLITICS OF THE MST	191
Singer, Paul 2002 “A recente ressurreição da economía solidária no Brasil,” pp. 83–129 in Boaventura de Sousa Santos (ed.), Produzir para viver: Os caminhos da produção não capitalista. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira.
Welch, Cliff 1999 The Seed Was Planted: The São Paulo Roots of Brazil’s Rural Labor Movement, 1924–1964. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Wolford, Wendy 2003a “Families, fields, and fighting for land: the spatial dynamics of contention in rural Brazil.” Mobilization: An International Journal 8: 201–215. 2003b “Producing community: the MST and land reform settlements in Brazil.” Journal of Agrarian Change 3: 500–520.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford 2003 To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland: Food First Books.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2009
International Service
NA
THE LANDLESS RURAL WORKERS MOVEMENT AND DEMOCRACY IN BRAZIL
Dr. Miguel Carter School of International Service American University

On the night of October 29, 1985, more than 200 trucks, buses and cars converged from 32 different municipal districts in Brazil’s southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul to occupy a mostly idle, 9,200-hectare cattle ranch known as the Annoni estate. Over than 6,000 people participated in what was then the largest and most thoroughly planned land occupation in Brazilian history. By morning they had erected a sprawling village of black-tarp tents and organized a security team to prevent police eviction. In a matter of days, the peasants established an elaborate internal organization: a network of family groups, a variety of task teams, a coordination council and a leadership committee. Everyday life at the encampment was a busy hive of activities and meetings. Next to a patch of dense forest, the landless gathered daily by a large cross for prayers, religious and protest songs, announcements and hearty words of encouragement from an array of supporters. A vast solidarity network was established to further the cause of the peasants at the Annoni estate. Shortly after the occupation, the local Catholic bishop and 80 priests showed up at the camp to bless the landless struggle.
Approximately 1,250 families obtained a landholding from the concerted pressure and long-sustained mobilization which followed the Annoni occupation. This involved a broad range of essentially non-violent collective action measures, varying from countless lobbying efforts with government officials, including three trips to meet with national authorities in Brasilia, and an array of high-profile protest tactics. The statistics of the struggle undertaken by the Annoni occupants are quite revealing. In the eight years it took to settle all these families, landless people from the Annoni estate were engaged in 36 land occupations; at least 30 major protest rallies; nine hunger strikes; two lengthy marches, including a 450 km, 27-day march to Porto Alegre, the state capital; three road blockades; and nine building takeovers, six of these at National Land Reform Institute (INCRA) and three at the State Assembly. Ten human lives were lost in these struggles, including seven children who died from precarious health conditions at the landless camp. Of the adults, two were peasants and one was a police officer killed
1
during a protest melee in Porto Alegre. The piecemeal settlement of all the Annoni families was completed only in 1993.1
Here stands a founding moment of one of the most important and long- lasting grassroots movements for land reform in world history: Brazil’s Movement of Landless Rural Workers, best known by its acronym MST (in Portuguese, Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra). By all accounts, the MST is nowadays Latin America’s premier social movement.
This article is written in the context of today, where the MST is often portrayed as a menace to Brazil’s democratic institutions. It thus seeks to address two basic issues: how does the MST relate to Brazil’s political process? And, what is the MST’s impact on democracy in Brazil? These queries, however, beg an initial question: what is the MST? Hence, this study begins with a contextual and historical overview of the MST. It then examines the movement’s main sources of endurance and power. The following two sections review the multifarious ways in which the MST engages the broader political process and affects democracy.
Influential Brazilian intellectuals like José de Souza Martins, Zander Navarro, Francisco Graziano and Dennis Lerrer Rosenfield argue that the MST’s confrontational relations with Brazil’s governing institutions are harmful for democracy. For Martins, Brazil’s most renowned rural sociologist, the MST is the local equivalent to the English Luddite movement, a short-lived popular uprising in the early 19th century famed for wrecking new factory machines. Incited by similar “fundamentalist” beliefs, the MST “refuses to recognize the institutional legitimacy and actions of the government and the state.” In fact, according to Martins, the movement’s actions and demands represent a “pre-political and precarious attempt to demolish the political order.” Navarro, a fellow sociologist, describes the MST as an “anti-systemic” and “anti-state” organization, driven by a hardened Marxist disposition toward non-institutional venues of action. According to Navarro, the MST stopped being a social movement in the 1990s.
1 These statistics are from Carter (2007). This article builds on Carter (2009b, 2009c, 2009e), and Carter and Carvalho (2009). An early version of this text was published in 2005 as a Working Paper for the University of Oxford’s Centre for Brazilian Studies.
2
Instead, it degenerated into a “semi-clandestine” organization propelled by the “childish Leninist” ideas of a small revolutionary cadre.2
Graziano, a former federal deputy and head of Brazil’s national land reform bureau under President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, depicts the MST as “an authoritarian guerrilla organization” that is “undermining democracy” with its land occupations, and even abetting “acts of agrarian terrorism.” Rosenfield, a philosopher and news columnist, treats the MST as a “paramilitary” organization bent on establishing a Soviet and Cuban-like regime in Brazil. MST calls for land reform, the reduction of record-high interest rates, a system of national plebiscites, and a humanistic form of socialism, merely mask, according to Rosenfield, the movement’s efforts to “suppress the market economy, the rule of law and representative democracy.”3
During the last decade, these four intellectuals have helped sanction recurrent media depictions of the MST as an “autocratic, violent, shady revolutionary organization.” As such, they have endorsed a public image that treats the landless movement as a “threat” to the Brazilian state and its democratic regime. The tacit proposition, here, clearly underpins conservative calls to restrain, and even eliminate the MST.
2 Martins (2000: 18-19, 26; 2003; 2007); Navarro (2002a: 206- 211; 2002b: 277, 279; 2007; 2009); also see Navarro in Arruda (2007) and Scolesce (2003).
3 Graziano (2004: 304, 72) (2006); Rosenfield (2006: 247, 252-253, 303, 309, 301, 311). The ideas espoused by all four analysts have received widespread attention in Brazil’s mainstream media. Martins is a professor emeritus of the Universidade de São Paulo and former advisor to the Cardoso government. Navarro is a professor at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul and a Research Fellow at the Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex. Graziano worked for the Cardoso administration and subsequently served as a PSDB (Party of Brazilian Social Democracy) federal deputy for São Paulo. He then set up an agribusiness consulting office; and is currently the Environment Secretary for the state of São Paulo. Rosenfield teaches at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul. Martins, Graziano and Rosenfield write regular columns published in Brazil’s leading newspapers. During the last decade, Navarro has given extensive interviews on the MST to major national and international press outlets. Both Martins and Navarro were advisors to the MST and the Church’s Commissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), prior to their personal fallouts with these organizations in the late 1990s. A closer review of their critique of the MST can be found in Carter (2009d).
3
The views espoused by these intellectuals have gained traction in top echelons of state and media power. A telling manifestation of this took place in December 2007, when the High Council of Prosecutors of Rio Grande do Sul unanimously approved a secret report that called on the judiciary to take unprecedented measures aimed at “outlawing the MST.” The decision was followed by various efforts to criminalize and curtail MST activities in this southern state. These included the indictment of eight landless activists under a National Security Law sanctioned by Brazil’s military regime, along with various court orders barring the movement from carrying out marches and other peaceful demonstrations.4 Press revelations in June 2008 of the secret judicial plans led to a brief scandal; followed by a temporary lull in state hostilities. Yet by early 2009, the state government had renewed efforts to restrict MST activities in Rio Grande do Sul, notably by shutting down all schools set up in its landless camps. The arguments used by the High Council of Prosecutors to justify the MST’s banishment were crafted on the ideas advanced by Zander Navarro and other academic critics.
This article disputes the extreme caricature and unsubstantiated depictions of the MST presented by these intellectuals and much of the Brazilian mainstream press. It challenges their restrictive view of democracy and patronizing representations of this popular movement. The purported conflict between the MST and Brazil’s democratic institutions is far more rhetorical than real. A sober review of the MST’s actual practice shows that it is far from an “anti-state” or “anti-democratic” organization. Quite to the contrary, it demands that the state play an active part in fostering an inclusive model of development; one that seeks
4 An incisive depiction of the state government’s efforts to criminalize the landless movement took place in January 2008, when close to 1,000 police officers, supported by 100 vehicles, helicopters, horses and police dogs surrounded the Annoni settlement where 1,500 MST activists from Rio Grande do Sul were holding their 24th state congress. The ostentatious police apparatus was assembled to carry out a court mandate to investigate whether MST participants were responsible for stealing the equivalent of 120 dollars, a watch and a photo camera from a nearby ranch. After a tense stand-off, the police investigators found none of the allegedly missing goods. For a useful analysis of recent legal efforts to curtail the MST, see Scalabrin (2009); for the High Council of Prosecutors of Rio Grande do Sul report on the MST, see Thums (n/date).
4
to rebalance the nation’s social order and strengthen capabilities among its underprivileged population.
During the last quarter of a century, the MST has undertaken a wide range of public efforts to enhance the quality of democracy in Brazil by: organizing the poor at grassroots level and raising consciousness about their basic rights; supporting election candidates; lobbying and bargaining with state officials; collaborating with public authorities to implement various development projects; and running court cases to defend its members while advocating for progressive legal reforms. The movement’s sharp impetus and occasionally rough demeanor must be appraised in light of Brazil’s striking disparities of wealth and political power; formidable obstacles to land redistribution; widespread rural poverty; and ongoing violations of basic civil rights in the countryside. Given the nature of its struggle, and the options available, the movement’s oppositional politics should be understood as grounded, first and foremost, on practical considerations rather than any dogmatic ideology.
The MST’s contentious edge, it is argued here, has contributed to Brazil’s ongoing democratization process by: (1) highlighting the role of public activism –a form of social conflict grounded on pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities— in building political capabilities among the poor and catalyzing downward redistribution policies; (2) facilitating the extension of basic citizenship rights, broadening the scope of the public agenda, and strengthening civil society through the inclusion of groups representing the most vulnerable strata of the population; and (3) fostering a sense of hope and utopia through the affirmation of ideals imbued in Brazil’s long term, complex and open-ended democratization process.
An amiable and institutionalized MST, as Martins, Navarro, Graziano and Rosenfield seem to prefer, would render the movement innocuous and defeat its raison d’etre. In light of the crude realities of Brazilian rural politics and the enduring powers accrued by its agrarian elite, it would be naïve, at best, to expect the MST’s struggle for social justice to require anything less than a tough touch.
5
Setting the Context
An incisive appraisal of the conditions that have shaped the MST is crucial for understanding its history and activities. Brazil is the world’s ninth largest economy and the globe’s tenth most unequal society in terms of income distribution. The wealthiest 10 percent of the population holds 45 percent of the nation’s income, while the poorest 20 percent holds less than three percent of this income.5 This starkly divided society is the upshot of the country’s historical configuration, notably, its oligarchic politics, weak patrimonial state, slave-based economy, and striking land concentration. During the 20th century Brazil underwent an intense process of capitalist modernization, led by an invigorated state. Yet its secular inequities have remained largely intact, especially in the countryside. After more than two decades of political democracy and ongoing mobilization for agrarian reform, the nation continues to exhibit one of the world’s highest patterns of land concentration. According to Brazil’s land registry, 1.6 percent of the landholders control 47 percent of the nation’s farmland, while a third of the farmers hold 1.6 percent of this area.6
The nation’s stark social disparities are responsible for producing a disjointed, apartheid-like society.6 In rural Brazil, a highly modernized and dynamic agricultural economy coexists with a pauperized society in which more than half of the population lives below the national poverty line. The nation is a leading global producer and exporter of major food commodities--notably sugar, coffee, oranges, soybeans, and beef--yet according to a government survey, more than 25 million Brazilians, 14 percent of the population, have suffered from hunger in recent years.7 Over the last few decades Brazil has become largely
5 UNDP (2007: 282). Brazil’s income inequality ranking is based on data for 139 countries, computed by Carter (2009f). According to a study conducted by Campos, Barbosa, Pochmann, Amorin and Silva (2005: 29), the combined resources of the richest 5,000 Brazilian families –that is, 0.001 percent of the population— amounts to 40 percent of the nation’s GDP.
6 This data is from the government’s 2003 land registry, as published in DATALUTA (2008: 27). For helpful historical reviews of Brazil’s agrarian structure and politics, see José de Souza Martins (1997, 1994); Leonilde Sérvolo de Medeiros (1989); João Pedro Stédile (1994); Guilherme Costa Delgado (2009).
7 World Bank (2005, 275); IPEA (2005, 56).
6
urbanized and currently only one-fifth of its population lives in the countryside and works in agriculture.8 Still, the number of landless people is estimated between 3.3 and 6.1 million families, while Brazil's unproductive farmland comprises more than a quarter of the national territory.9
Brazil’s sharp class asymmetries condition the balance of forces in its society and shape much of its political process. Three sets of obstacles, in particular, have thwarted the implementation of a progressive agrarian reform. These are: the enduring influence of the agrarian elite, an oligarchic system of governance, and an acute concentration of media power.
The continuing strength of the landlord class owes much to the policies, legal framework and inactions of the Brazilian state. Government subsidies and technical support to large commercial farmers, instituted after the mid 1960s, fueled the rise of an intense process of capitalist modernization in agriculture. Rural production increased substantially in the ensuing decades. The 1982 debt crisis compelled the state to augment its agro-exports to repay its foreign and domestic creditors. The agrarian elite’s privileged access to public resources and protection intensified under these economic policies. Throughout this process, the state continued to protect large landholders through assorted measures, such as negligible taxation on rural properties; state acquiescence to the fraudulent appropriation of vast tracks of the nation’s territory (especially in the Amazon); lax enforcement of environmental, labor and agrarian reform laws; judicial favoritism towards the agrarian elite; and highly inflated compensations for most land expropriations. Trade liberalization policies established in the 1990s gave rise to an influential agribusiness sector, operating in close partnership with the world’s leading agrifood conglomerates –notably, Monsanto, Syngenta, Dupont, Bayer, Acher Daniels Midland (ADM), Cargill and Bunge— which control global markets for seeds, chemical inputs and agricultural trading.10 As a result, over the
8 CEPAL (2004). 9 Del Grossi et al. (2001); MDA (2003, 43 and table 5.1.1.1). 10 On the power of global agrifood corporations, see ActionAid International (2006).
7
last two decades Brazil has witnessed the formation of a powerful triple alliance between the national landed elite, the state and global agrifood corporations.
Thus, contrary to the assessments offered by Navarro, Martins and Graziano, Brazil’s agrarian elite has not reached levels of “unprecedented weakness,” become “more receptive to land reform,” or “vanished” as result of their modernization.11 Large landholders in Brazil continue to wield significant economic influence and political clout. Though more modernized and well assimilated into the nation’s competitive electoral process, this sector has generally resisted agrarian reform and the adoption of other pro-poor measures aimed at extending effective citizenship rights in Brazil.
Various facets of Brazilian politics bolstered the nation’s lopsided distributions of political power. A highly fragmented party system, widespread clientelistic practices, including frequent vote buying among the poor; and the “un-rule of law” among marginalized sectors of the Brazilian population; have historically weakened the political capabilities and representation of popular interests. Enduring patrimonial legacies and a disjointed national bureaucracy have facilitated elite capture of state resources.12 Adding to this, the over-representation of conservative rural interests in Congress due to the mal-apportionment of legislative seats, have assured the agrarian elite and close conservative allies control of more than a third of the seats in the lower chamber. This multiparty coalition known as the “bancada ruralista” has been the largest voting bloc in Congress since Brazil’s re-democratization. Their political clout has compelled all
11 Navarro (2002b: 274), Martins (2000: 48) and Graziano (2004: 133). The empirical bases for these assertions are remarkably poor. Navarro, for instance, equates the diminished visibility of a single large landholding association, the Democratic Ruralist Union (União Democrática Ruralista, UDR) to the demise of an entire agrarian class, ignoring the breadth of organizations representing rural elite interests, as well as the many informal ways through which this sector has traditionally exercised its influence and power.
12 On Brazil’s party system and political clientelism see Mainwarring (1999); on the “un-rule of law” see Méndez, O’Donnell and Pinheiro (1999), Pinheiro (1997) and Pereira (2000). On the patrimonial fragmentation of the Brazilian state, see Weyland (1996). On the nation’s enduring traditional politics, see Hagopian (1996).
8
recent civilian presidents to appease the large landowners’ caucus in order to sustain majority coalitions in the legislature.13
These and other features of Brazilian politics have shorn up what Alfred Montero describes as a system of “government by and for the few,” in which minority interests have exhibited a resilient capacity “to block institutional change.”14 Under these oligarchic arrangements, the distribution of public resources has usually favored dominant interests over the needs of the poor. The following findings serve to illustrate the point. Between 1995 and 2005, landless peasants had an average of one federal deputy for every 612,000 families, while the large landlords had one deputy for every 236 families. The political representation of landlords was therefore 2,587 times greater than that of landless peasants. As a result of these disparities, each of Brazil’s largest landlords had access to U.S.$1,587 from public coffers for every dollar made available to a landless family.15 The numbers speak eloquently for themselves.
Another powerful obstacle to agrarian reform in Brazil stems from the nation’s conservative, oligopolistic media structure. Through its influential role in shaping the nation’s public agenda, the mainstream press has done more to buttress the country’s political and social inequities than to challenge these conditions. According to estimates, nine family conglomerates generate 85 percent of the country’s news information. Though staffed with many competent journalists, the striking concentration of media power and its attendant class biases explain much of the one-sided, mostly negative, and often blatantly hostile coverage accorded to popular movements like the MST.16 As Guillermo
13 In the last three legislatures only two percent of federal deputies were linked to popular organizations in the countryside, such as the MST and CONTAG, see Carter (2009b). On the over-representation of conservative rural interests, see Stepan (2001: 343; 2000), and Snyder and Samuels (2004). On the bancada ruralista, see Vigna (2003).
14 Montero (2005: 51). 15 Carter (2009b).
16 Informative accounts of the media’s portrayal of the MST can be found in Lerrer (2005), Comparato (2003) and Berger (1998).
9
O’Donnell explains, in highly unequal societies, “Few issues get onto the public agenda other than those that interest the dominant sectors and classes except concerns for ‘public security,’ which often entail the criminalization of poverty, and, with it, further repressions in the civil rights of the popular.” The “resulting deafness of the agenda” to the need-claims of popular groups, he adds, “is an indication of the low quality of these democracies.”17
Brazilian peasant organizations have sought to overcome such “deafness” through recurrent mobilizations, including 7,078 land occupations between 1987 and 2006.18 Successive governments have responded to such demands by undertaking various land distribution measures. From 1985 to 2006 close to 825,000 families received a parcel of land, in an area amounting to a total of 41.3 million hectares; a territory as large as Sweden. Brazilian government spoke- persons have often touted these land reform initiatives as “the world’s largest.”19 The absolute numbers are certainly impressive. Yet Brazil is the fifth largest nation in the globe in population and territory, hence the need for proportional comparisons. Weighed against 16 other Latin American countries that undertook comparable reforms, Brazil actually ranks last in the percentage of beneficiary families (at five percent of the nation’s agricultural workforce), and twelfth in land allocation (based on the distribution of 11.6 percent of the nation’s farmland).20
These figures are clearly indicative of Brazil’s conservative trend in land tenure policies. Since the return to political democracy, all presidents, from José Sarney to Luis Inácio Lula da Silva, have pursued some variation of what could be broadly described as a “conservative agrarian reform.” Under all these administrations, the impetus for reform has been essentially reactive and restrained. It has strived mainly to appease rural conflicts, rather than promote
17 O’Donnell (2005: 59). 18 Carter and Carvalho (2009). 19 Graziano (2004: 238); Carta Maior (2009).
20 Land reform figures and comparative rankings are from Carter and Carvalho (2009) and Carter (2009b).
10
family farming through proactive measures aimed at transforming the rural structure and its power relations.21 By treating agrarian reform as an isolated problem, of marginal interest to the nation’s development, all governments have engaged in an ad hoc distribution process, offering land in places convenient to the state and landowning elite.22 As a rule, all governments have shied from taking measures that would confront or upset Brazil’s dominant rural forces: its large landholders and agribusiness conglomerates. As a consequence, Brazil’s agrarian reform has had largely negligible effects on the nation’s land tenure pattern.
All these mobilizations for land have taken place amid recurrent human rights violations in the Brazilian countryside, as noted in Table 1, and striking levels of impunity. According to the CPT, between 1985 and 2006, 1,465 land reform activists and peasants, including dozens of children, were killed in different rural conflicts. Only 8% of the cases were ever brought to trial, and barely 20 landlords who hired the gunmen to execute such crimes have been condemned by the courts.23
Table 1
21 A major survey of agrarian reform settlements found that 96 percent of all these communities had originated through some from of land struggle, see Leite et al. (2004: 40-43). On average, peasants have had to mobilize for four years in order to gain access to a farm plot, due to the restrictive legal and bureaucratic process required to create a reform settlement, see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
22 This explains the fact that more than 70 percent of all land distributed between 1985 and 2006 has taken place in the Amazonian agricultural frontier (including the neighbouring states of Mato Grosso and Maranhão), where land values tend to be much lower than in the rest of Brazil.
23 CPT (2007a).
11
Land Distribution & Human Rights Violations in Brazil, 1985 - 2006
President
Period
Beneficiary Families
Area Distributed (in hectares)
Human Rights Violations (a) Yearly Average
Total
Yearly Average
Amazon %
Total
Yearly Average
Amazon %
Sarney Collor & Franco Cardoso 1 Cardoso 2 Lula 1
1985 - 1989 1990 - 1994 1995 - 1998 1999 - 2002 2003- 2006
92.178
57.194 299.863 155.491 220.606
18.436 14.299 74.966 38.873 55.152
44 58 31 28 47
5.091.049
2.895.903 12.222.613 6.768.771 14.356.824
1.018.210 723.976 3.055.653 1.692.193 3.589.206
64 71 41 41 73
312 (b) 315 198 225 376
Total
1985 - 2006
825.332
37.515
38
41.335.160
1.878.871
57
284
Source: DATALUTA and CPT, compiled by Carter and Carvalho (2009).24
(a) The figures for Human Rights Violations are based on yearly averages per government period of the total number of people that have been assassinated, suffered assassination attempts and received death threats over rural conflicts in Brazil.
(b) Human Rights Violations data for the Sarney period covers only two years, 1988 and 1989.
24 These figures draw on data provided by DATALUTA, which is generated by the Núcleo de Estudos da Reforma Agrária (NERA) of the Universidade Estadual de São Paulo (UNESP). Both the Cardoso and Lula governments have published land reform statistics substantially higher than those generated through DATALUTA’s scholarly review of data obtained from the federal land reform agency, INCRA. The figures presented here have not computed the data from 55 extractive reserves created in the Amazonian rainforest (covering an area of 18,339,543 hectares and benefiting 35,957 families); as these huge areas averaging more than 500 hectares per recipient cannot be properly equated to family farmland allocations. For a closer examination of the ongoing debate over Brazil’s land reform statistics, see Carter (2009b), Delgado (2009) and Melo (2006: 220-223).
12
Making History
Brazil’s first stirrings for land reform took place in the mid 1950s, in the country’s Northeast region. These mobilizations gained broader impetus in the early 1960s and prompted President João Goulart to issue the nation’s first agrarian reform law in 1964. Days later, however, a military coup d’etat ended Brazil’s fledgling democratic regime. The military takeover was strongly backed by the influential landlord class. Popular movements in the countryside and their leftist allies suffered extensive repression during the ensuing years. All remaining peasant associations were subject to state controls. Under the military regime, land reform was confined to a colonization program in the Amazon and largely removed from public debate.
The MST was forged in the context of a second wave of peasant mobilizations that surfaced in the early 1980s. Officially created in January 1984, in Cascavel, Paraná, the movement emerged under the aegis of the Pastoral Land Commission (Commissão Pastoral da Terra, CPT), an ecumenical agency linked to the Catholic Church. The CPT nurtured the MST’s formation by building a network of activists engaged in different land struggles across southern Brazil.
The movement’s origin in the South was facilitated by the region’s relatively high levels of rural development, state capacity, education and social capital. The strong family farm legacy, particularly in Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, and Paraná, a consequence of intense European immigration after the mid 1800s, helped foster a historically active and inventive civil society. Previous land mobilizations, notably during the late 1950s in Paraná and early 1960s in Rio Grande do Sul, had established an important precedent in the region. Moreover, despite many restrictions, the creation of state-sponsored rural trade unions in the 1960s and 1970s helped diffuse basic notions of citizenship rights and nurture a sense of class identity among the peasantry.25
The MST’s genesis was shaped, in particular, by the rise of a large contingent of landless farmers in the 1970s. This resulted mostly from population
25 On the history of these rural trade unions, see Maybury-Lewis (1994), Medeiros (1989).
13
growth in the countryside, the capitalist modernization of agriculture and the state-led construction of large hydroelectric dams. The military regime’s gradual abertura in the late 1970s created new political opportunities for popular mobilization. These changes, in turn, enabled progressive religious agents – inspired by innovative Catholic trends, including a theology of liberation— to play a pivotal role in re-igniting Brazil’s struggle for land reform. Indeed, these and other Church initiatives at the grassroots helped foster an array of rural social movements, the MST being its most prominent offspring.26
The landless movement expanded to other regions of Brazil through the support of a progressive network of Church and rural trade union activists. By 1997 it had established a foothold in 23 of the country’s 27 federal units. Nine years later it carried out its first land occupation in the state of Roraima, near the border with Guyana.
After the mid 1990s, the MST became particularly active in the Brazilian Northeast. In 2006, nearly half of its estimated 2,012 agricultural settlements were located in this region. By then, the movement had prodded the Brazilian government to distribute close to 3.7 million hectares or 14,285 square miles; a territory roughly the size of Switzerland or half the state of South Carolina. An estimated 135,000 MST families have benefited from these measures.27
During the last decade, over 90 peasant associations were involved in land struggles across Brazil. The MST and the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (Conferederação dos Trabalhadores Agrícolas, CONTAG) are the largest and most active of these organizations. The MST is predominant in the South, as well as some states in the Southeast and Northeast.28 In the Amazon, the Center-West
26 Key sources on the MST’s history and evolution include Branford and Rocha (2002); Carter (2009a); Fernandes (2000); Ondetti (2008); Stédile and Fernandes (1999); Wright and Wolford (2003); as well as Welch’s (2006) useful review of the literature on this movement. On the Church’s involvement in support of the MST, see Poletto (2009) and Poletto and Canuto (2002).
27 Estimates of MST settlements are from Carter and Carvalho (2009).
28 The federal units where MST settlements comprise more than half of the state’s total settlements are (ranked from the top): Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Sergipe, Espiritu Santo, Paraná, Pernambuco, Ceará and São Paulo.
14
and other Northeastern states, land struggles have been led primarily by CONTAG-affiliated unions and various local movements, including informal groups of squatters. In 2006, over a quarter of Brazil’s agrarian settlements were connected to the MST.29 Yet more than 90 percent of the land distributed since 1984 resulted from mobilizations undertaken by peasants groups that were not linked to the MST.30
The MST gained ample national visibility in the mid 1990s. A surge in land mobilizations after 1995 and ample media coverage of dramatic developments in the countryside, notably two police massacres of landless peasants in the Amazon, contributed much to this newfound impetus. The April 1996 slaughter of 19 MST peasants at Eldorado dos Carajás, Pará, triggered a national scandal, and prompted the federal government to accelerate land distribution throughout Brazil.31
This episode, in particular, along with the benign depiction of the landless struggle in a highly popular television soap opera, O Rei do Gado (The Cattle King), which aired two months after the massacre, helped generate widespread support for land reform. This momentum peaked during the first months of 1997, with the MST’s national march to Brasília. Led by 1,300 people, divided into three columns originating in distant corners of the country, the marchers walked for 64 days, some covering as much as 640 miles, before their triumphant arrival into the nation’s capital. At the final gathering in front of the National Congress close to 100,000 supporters came to rally for agrarian reform. These events allowed the MST to gain wide-spread recognition as Brazil’s principal social movement.
29 Carter and Carvalho (2009).
30 Carter and Carvalho (2009). The disparity between the percentage of MST settlements and area allocated reflects the fact that reform plots in the Amazon are much larger in size than those distributed in regions where the MST is more active.
31 A telling illustration of Brazil’s “un-rule of law” in the countryside can be gleaned from the aftermath of the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre. The first court trial of the 146 police officers charged with killing 19 people, and seriously wounding 70 other peasants, found them all to be innocent. A retrial followed the annulment of the first ruling. Here, only two senior police officers were found guilty; none of which has actually spent time in prison.
15
Opinion polls taken in April 1997 showed that 94 percent of the population felt that the struggle for land reform was just, while 85 percent indicated a support for non-violent land occupations as a way to accelerate government reform efforts.32 Around this time the MST became one of the leading critics of the neoliberal policies pursued by the Cardoso administration and various state governors.
As noted in Table 1, the Cardoso and Lula administrations substantially increased the pace of land distribution in Brazil. Together, both administrations helped settle 82 percent of all reform beneficiaries between 1985 and 2006. Each of these governments, however, exhibited different dispositions towards the MST and varying policy concerns.
The Cardoso administration multiplied the number of reform settlements, especially between 1996 and 1999, when the government’s monetary stabilization program triggered a temporary drop in rural property values. The new agricultural communities instituted during the Cardoso era, however, received meager ancillary support from the government, despite the existence of federal laws mandating the provision of credit, infrastructure and basic services to ensure the development of these reform settlements.33 During Cardoso’s second term a discernable effort was made to restrict MST protest and curb financial support for its activities. Aside from instituting efforts to criminalize landless mobilizations, it instigated a media campaign aimed at discrediting the MST’s public image.34 With the backing of The
32 These figures are from Ibope, one of Brazil’s leading polling firms, and were published by O Estado de São Paulo on April 16, 1997; see Comparato (2003: 190- 191).
33 A 2002 survey of all land reform settlements created between 1995 and 2001 found that nearly half of these communities were in a “precarious state.” Over half of them lacked internal roads or access to public transportation; 55 percent had no electricity; and 77 percent had no access to a secondary school, see Sparovek (2003: 169, 100- 114).
34 On President Cardoso’s agrarian reform policies and relations with the MST, see Branford (2009), Fernandes (2009), Ondetti (2008) and Comparato (2003). The mainstream media’s hostility towards the MST picked up steam under Cardoso’s second term and has remained strong during Lula’s tenure in office, partly as a way of keeping Lula’s left-leaning cabinet members in check. The decade-long media attack explains much of the drop in the MST’s popularity, as revealed in an April 2008 poll take by Ibope, which found that 50 percent of Brazilians held a negative view of the
16
World Bank, the Cardoso government introduced a decentralized, market-based approach to land distribution, which severely undercut the MST’s capacity for collective action.35
The election of President Lula, a longstanding MST friend, was greeted with an enthusiastic sense of relief within the landless movement MST. The Workers Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, PT) administration no longer sought to criminalize the movement’s protests, despite repeated demands for this by right- wing politicians and the conservative media establishment. Notwithstanding a greater capacity for dialogue with popular movements and increased public funding for family agriculture and reform settlements, the Lula government failed to pursue the more audacious agrarian policies he had ardently defended in the past. The annual rate of land reform beneficiaries during Lula’s first term in office was actually lower that that of the Cardoso era. Moreover, 73 percent of Lula’s land distributions took place in the Amazonian frontier, often in remote areas, compared to only 41 percent of the Cardoso land allocations.36
Lula’s conservative agrarian policies were largely the result of the administration’s fear of upsetting agribusiness interests, alienating its conservative congressional allies, and undermining its fiscal austerity policies. Eager to assure a steady flow of hard currency obtained through agro-exports, and increase the production of agro-fuels, the Lula government lent ample support for the expansion of large-scale agribusiness farming. From 2003 to 2007, state support for the rural elite was seven times larger than that offered to the nation’s family farmers, even though the latter represent 87 percent of Brazil’s rural labor force
country’s rural social movements, of which the MST was the most recognizable group, see O Estado de São Paulo (2008).
35 On The World Bank’s land policies in Brazil, see Sauer and Pereira (2006); Pereira (2004); and Dias Martins (2004).
36 Under the two Cardoso administrations, the government settled a yearly average of 56,919 families, 1,768 families more than under Lula’s first term; see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
17
and produce the bulk of the food consumed by its inhabitants.37 All this led to a growing disenchantment with Lula within the ranks of the MST. As one leader put it, “Lula has now become a friend of our enemies.”
The MST has made great strides since its precarious origins in the 1980s. The movement, nevertheless, is not the great powerhouse in the nation’s political scene imagined by a number of its detractors and admirers. Although large and broadly extended throughout Brazil, the MST comprises only five percent of the country’s rural inhabitants.38 As an organization of poor people, operating with scarce resources, the MST exhibits many of the collective action problems – logistical shortcomings, strategic errors and human vices-- that can be found in other popular groups of this kind. Amid its many limitations, the MST has demonstrated unusual longevity and sophistication for a popular movement. As such, it has effectively re-written the history of popular movements in Brazil.
37 Carter and Carvalho (2009). Adding to this, the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget to support agribusiness farming during the 2008/2009 harvest was six times larger than the funds allocated for Lula’s flagship poverty reduction initiative, the Programa Bolsa Família, as can be ascertained by contrasting data published by MAG (2009) and INESC (2009).
38 Carter (2009b)
18
Building Capabilities
The MST’s endurance and growth owes much to its ability to make the best of the opportunities and obstacles on hand. The nation’s political freedoms and competitive elections, for one, have allowed the movement to expand its organizing efforts and petition public authorities. State response to MST demands, however partial and delayed, has enhanced the movement’s attractiveness among its actual and potential participants. Moreover, Brazil’s apartheid society, with vast numbers of people living in abject poverty, has ensured a large contingent of potential recruits for the MST. In turn, the steep obstacles to agrarian reform have prompted the movement to boost its organizational capacities, in order to extract concessions from the state and make up for inadequate government services. All this has led the movement to engage in a continuous process of pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities. As a result, the MST has developed seven major sources of power, namely, its: 1) mobilization capacity, 2) multifaceted yet flexible organization, 3) strategic creativity, 4) quest for financial independence, 5) resourceful allies, 6) investment in popular education, and 7) mystique and discipline.
1. Mobilization Capacity. The movement possesses a large membership and the adroit ability to mobilize masses of people. In 2006, the MST had an estimated membership of 1.1 million people, supported by 20,000 activists engaged in coordinating movement activities on various issues and levels.39 That same year, the MST led 55 percent of all land occupations in Brazil and was active in more than half of all popular demonstrations in the countryside.40 The movement has sponsored some of the largest and most elaborate mass mobilizations in Brazilian history. In May 2005, the MST organized a 125-mile march to Brasília with 12,000 people. The 17-day mobilization was supported by an impressive logistical apparatus: several massive circus tents to lodge all
39 Carter and Carvalho (2009). The number of MST members is precarious, given that the MST has no formal membership roster. Needless to say, levels of commitment among MST members are quite variable.
40 Author’s calculus based on CPT (2007b: 83-89; 176-199).
19
campers, 65 transport vehicles, a roving child care center, 325 health workers, and a cooking staff of 415 people responsible serving three meals a day, prepared with food donations from MST settlements scattered across the country. The event even featured a mobile radio station which broadcast programs to the marchers through 10,000 small radio receivers borrowed from the World Social Forum. Never had the world recorded a long distance march as large and sophisticated as this one.41
2. Multifaceted yet Flexible Organization. The MST is not a stodgy bureaucratic entity. Rather it operates through a complex and scattered network of collective groups. Its multiple instances of coordination –at national, state, regional and local levels— function in a fairly decentralized though cohesive manner. The MST relies fundamentally on volunteers, yet has strengthened its professional support over the last years. The MST’s main national and state offices employ full-time staff organizers and technical advisors, albeit mostly at minimal living stipends. Though consistent and synchronized in many of its tactics, the movement allows for regional variation and experimentation. Between 1988 and 2006 the MST created 13 task teams to deal with various facets of its struggle. These multi-layered collectives cover an assorted range of issues, from education, finance, recruitment and grassroots organizing, to health, communication, culture, gender, youth, human rights, international relations, and production and ecology. These task teams are responsible for managing 161 cooperatives, including four credit unions; 140 agro-industries; scores of training centers, news outlets, and artistic groups; and a variety of national and transnational advocacy networks.42 The MST’s growth and maturation over the last quarter of a century has engendered a highly sophisticated organization that has gradually come to assimilate a more comprehensive, long term and holistic agenda for social change.43
41 Further details on this march can be found in Carter (2009b). 42 Cooperatives and agro-industry figures are from Revista Sem Terra (2009: 16).
43 For a closer review of the MST’s internal organization see Carter and Carvalho (2009), Fernandes (2009) and Branford and Rocha (2002).
20
3. Strategic Creativity. The MST has learned to seek and devise homegrown solutions to a wide range of practical problems. This led the movement to develop an inventive ethos, open to experimentation and renewal. MST ingenuity is sharply exhibited in the way its local activists plan and carry out its massive and peaceful land occupations, a generally risky endeavor conducted with tactical acumen. Throughout its history the MST has shown a discernable capacity for innovation and adaptation. All this owes much to the movement’s practical disposition, its collective decision-making process, and ability to learn from past mistakes.
Examples of MST’s resourcefulness abound. After the mid 1990s, the movement began to reappraise its early attachment to an industrial, chemical- dependent model of agriculture, and began to foster a growing enthusiasm for agro-ecology. The 1997 creation of BioNatur, the movement’s first cooperative for organic seeds, established in Rio Grande do Sul, marked a turning point in this process. A decade later, BioNatur had become the largest producer of organic seeds in Latin America, with 117 crop varieties and annual yield of 20 tons of seeds. In the mid 1990s, the MST sought to overcome a period of relative isolation by investing significantly in the creation of various news outlets, in addition to the monthly newspaper established in 1981. Along with a glossy bi- monthly magazine, web page, 30 community radio stations, and news programs distributed to 1,500 radios, the MST helped establish a publishing house, two news agencies and a weekly newspaper, Brasil de Fato, sold at newsstands across the country.44 In the late 1990s, after extensive lobbying, MST women gained access to child care facilities at every movement gathering; and by 2003 had helped guarantee full gender equality within the organization’s leadership structure.
4. Quest for Financial Independence. As a poor people’s movement, the MST has faced an ongoing challenge in securing the material resources needed to
44 On BioNatur and the MST’s communication outlets, see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
21
sustain its activities. Early concerns about becoming too dependent on a handful of external supporters led the movement to diversify and decentralize much of its fundraising efforts. At the local level, the MST receives regular contributions from its cooperatives and members, and occasional assistance from municipal governments. Aid is also channeled through an assortment of civil society groups, including religious institutions, trade unions, student groups, artists, NGOs and educational institutions. Federal and state governments have funded various educational and agricultural projects, and often provide food rations for the movement’s landless camps. Between 1995 and 2005, three associations linked to the MST received 19.2 million dollars from the federal government.45 International sources of support for the MST have generally come from church organizations, solidarity groups, foundations, NGOs, as well as development agencies run by governments in Europe, Canada, Cuba and Venezuela. In the early 2000s, the European Union contributed 1.3 million dollars to help build the MST’s own university.46 Cuba and Venezuela, in turn, have provided full scholarships for 120 MST medical students.47
5. Resourceful Allies. The movement’s birth and ongoing expansion would not have been possible without the contribution of numerous partners, notably within Brazilian civil and political society. Over time, the movement became adept at capitalizing on sympathetic pockets within the state, including those in the federal land reform agency, INCRA. Its strongest supporters in civil society include liberal sectors of the Catholic and mainline Protestant churches, urban and rural trade unions, as well as progressive NGOs, university professors, students,
45 During the same period, five societies representing elite rural interests received 509.6 million dollars from the federal government; a sum 27 times larger than that made available to support MST projects in education, agriculture and health. Despite these vast disparities, virtually all of the intense congressional and media scrutiny has been on the monies allocated to MST-related associations, and not those that subsidize the associations controlled by wealthy ranchers and planters. The figures used here were computed from data compiled by Melo (2006: 127, 177).
46 Arruda (2005). 47 Revista Sem Terra (2009: 17).
22
musicians and actors. The MST has also played an active role in several Brazilian networks such as the National Forum for Agrarian Reform and Justice in the Countryside, the Consulta Popular, the Coordination of Social Movements and the Church-sponsored Popular Assembly. Within political society, the movement has enjoyed the backing of left-leaning political parties, notably the PT. The MST’s international ties were strengthened considerably during the 1990s. After receiving Sweden’s Alternative Nobel prize in 1991, it established solidarity groups in 14 European and North American countries. In 1994, following several years of active engagement with other popular groups in Latin America, the movement helped create the Latin American Coordination of Peasant Organizations (Coordinadora Latinoamericana de Organizaciones del Campo, CLOC). Two years later it joined and became a leading proponent of La Via Campesina, an international peasant coalition, which by 2008 had expanded to include 168 associations from 69 countries around the globe.
6. Investment in Popular Education. The movement has placed a uniquely strong emphasis on providing an education to its participants and raising popular consciousness. Starting in 1984, the MST set up a network of 1,800 primary and secondary schools, which has served an estimated 250,000 children. The bulk of its 8,000 teachers use pedagogical methods inspired by Paulo Freire and teaching materials developed by the MST’s own educational team.48 Since 1991 the MST has provided adult literacy classes for more than 50,000 people.49 Significant resources have been devoted to the preparation of its cadres. Between 1988 and 2002 over 100,000 activists took part of hundreds of workshops organized on a assorted range of topics.50 In early 2005 the movement inaugurated its first university, the Escola Nacional Florestan Fernandes, named after a renowned Brazilian intellectual, on an attractive campus near the city of São Paulo. Over the last decade, the MST established partnerships with 60 Brazilian universities offering
48 Carter and Carvalho (2009). On the MST’s approach to education see, Kolling, Cerioli, Caldart (2002); Caldart (2000); and Kane (2001: 90-110).
49 Revista Sem Terra (2009: 16). 50 Carter and Carvalho (2009).
23
various degrees and special courses for its members. These programs and workshops complement the intense pedagogical experience that takes place during its collective struggles. These moments, in particular, have helped MST participants overcome previous sentiments of disempowerment and fatalism, and foster a strong sense of agency. In this way, the movement has nurtured feelings of dignity, self-confidence and social responsibility among its members.51
7. Mystique and Discipline. Under the auspices of the Church and liberation theology, the movement learned to cultivate a sense of “mística” among its participants. And has done so by creating a rich symbolic repertoire –its flag, songs, chants, theatre, poetry, and stirring speeches— displayed in ritual gatherings that stimulate feelings of shared sacrifice, camaraderie, and idealism, and offer moments of festive commemoration. All this has helped nourish an intense social energy, forceful convictions and strong sense of identity. Among MST activists one often hears expressions of deep emotional attachment, such as: “I love the MST,” “The movement is my family.”52
Alongside these strong dispositions, the movement normally exhibits a well composed and orderly lifestyle. By disciplining passions and other raw impulses into more methodical forms of behavior, the MST has helped nurture what Norbert Elias describes as a “civilizing process.”53 Feelings of enhanced self- control and greater self-esteem have inclined MST participants to channel their contentious behavior through constructive means. The movement’s sense of mystique and discipline are interwoven in subtle ways. Together, they elicit and channel the emotions that give vitality, courage and perseverance to the MST’s struggles. They are its intangible sources of power.
51 Caldart (2000) and Quirk (2008).
52 Elsewhere, I have characterized these forceful convictions as grounded on Max Weber’s concept of “ideal interest” behaviour, whereby actors are strategically oriented toward the fulfilment of an absolute, non-negotiable goal, see Carter (2008, 2003). On the MST’s symbolic repertoire, see Vieira and McGuirk (2007).
53 Elias (1982).
24
Engaging the Political Process
MST relations with Brazil’s political system are multifarious and dynamic. This owes much to the assorted and decentralized structure of the Brazilian state, and variegated forms of access and influence on its decision making process. Brazil’s democratic freedoms, oligarchic traditions, federalist regime, strong local governments, distinct electoral system, and disjointed bureaucratic apparatus play a key role in shaping the MST’s repertoire for collective action. At any given juncture, the movement’s choice of tactics will be determined largely by the perceived opportunities and challenges at stake. In the MST’s own parlance, its strategic options emerge from its “analysis of the correlation of forces.”
This section examines the predominant forms of MST interaction with Brazil’s governing institutions. Contrary to established views in Brazil, it argues that none of these patterns of engagement are essentially “anti-democratic.” If anything, such actions display the kinds of contentious practices employed by popular groups engaged in democratizing struggles throughout the modern world.54
The MST’s prevailing mode of action is grounded on a distinct form of social conflict described here as public activism. This approach to social struggle is substantially different from that of an armed insurgency, a scattered riot or what James Scott defines as “everyday forms of resistance,” to describe informal, discreet and disguised forms of popular aggression.55 Unlike these other patterns of social confrontation, the MST’s public activism involves an organized, politicized, visible, autonomous, periodic and non-violent form of social conflict.
Actions carried out through public activism are geared towards drawing public attention; influencing state policies, through pressure politics, lobbying and negotiations; and shaping societal ideas, values, and actions. Typically,
54 On the democratizing role of popular sector groups, see Collier (1999), and Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens (1992).
55 According to Scott, everyday forms of resistance include actions such as poaching, foot-dragging, evasion, discrete forms of land squatting, anonymous threats, sabotage and arson (1990, 1985). This discussion of “public activism:” builds on Carter (2009c).
25
mobilizations of this kind employ an array of modern repertoires of contention, such as demonstrations, marches, petitions, group meetings, hunger strikes, protest camps, election campaigns, and acts of civil disobedience such as sit-ins, road blockades, building takeovers, and organized land occupations.56	Unlike other approaches to social conflict, public activism’s non-violent thrust makes it essentially compatible with civil society and provides a legitimate democratic vehicle for propelling social change.
Public activism requires certain facilitating conditions, notably, enhanced political opportunities for collective action and substantial access to mobilizing resources. Together, these opportunities and resources structure a set of incentives that persuade contentious groups to make demands on the state and bargain with its authorities. Moreover, they encourage the development of partnerships with civil and political society groups in order to strengthen these demands and improve prospects for a successful negotiation. These conditions help channel social conflict into non-violent forms of interaction with the state and other societal forces. The MST’s disposition towards public activism is manifested through various patterns of engagement, as detailed below.
Pressure Politics and Civil Disobedience. The MST’s contentious politics often involve disruptive mobilizations. Some of these entail lawful protest activities; others involve acts of civil disobedience. The MST’s penchant towards pressure politics is conveyed through an array of authorized demonstrations, ranging from long distance marches, hunger strikes to the organization of landless camps. These protest encampments, with their makeshift plastic tents, well-organized life-style, and red-MST flags flying overhead, are perhaps the most visible, well-known and ingenious repertoire for MST contention. The camps not only make the demand for land reform perceptible. They also facilitate MST consciousness-raising activities among the landless, enable the preparation of other protest mobilizations, and help the movement recruit and train its new cadre.
The most controversial tactics employed by the MST entail acts of passive resistance to civil laws. Principally among these forms of pressure politics are: land
56 On this theme, see Sidney Tarrow (1998) and Charles Tilly (1979).
26
occupations of private or public landholdings, sit-ins at government buildings, and highway blockades. These forms of MST engagement are essentially mass-based, strong-arm actions carried out in a non-violent fashion. They generally infringe conventional laws, notably those protecting property rights. State tolerance or repression of these forms of protest depends principally on the political persuasion of state governors, given their control over police enforcement. In the state of Paraná, for example, the MST experienced greater police hostility under the rightist Governor Jaime Lerner than under his left-leaning successor, Governor Roberto Requião, who on several occasions refused to dispatch public forces to evict MST land occupations. Forceful police removal of land and building occupations are not uncommon. Yet most acts of civil disobedience end peacefully, generally the result of lengthy negotiations with police, judicial and political officials. MST protest mobilizations are invariably geared toward dramatizing a public demand and bringing state authorities to the bargaining table.
Lobbying and Bargaining. MST pressure tactics do not emerge in a vacuum. These are usually preceded by a string of failed petitions and frustrated negotiations with public officials. These activities can take place at various levels of government. The MST’s most frequent interlocutors are the staff of the Ministry of Agrarian Development and, especially, its land reform agency, INCRA, given the federal government’s privy over agrarian reform laws. If the issue, however, is getting public monies disbursed on time, the target for MST insistence and bargaining could be the Bank of Brazil or the Ministry of Finance. Since 1993, the MST has held fairly regular meetings with all of Brazil’s presidents.
Associated Networks with the State. Yet another mode of interaction with the Brazilian political system could be treated as a loosely organized, non-hierarchal pattern of interest representation, offering various types of partnerships with the state.57 These associated networks have facilitated different points of access to public resources and participation in selective policy-making bodies. Over the
57 The term “associated networks” draws on Chalmers, Martin and Piester (1997). It also shares elements of the state-societal arrangements that Schmitter (1974) described as “societal corporatism.”
27
years, the MST has signed a number of agreements with federal, state and local governments, to carry out a variety of development projects, notably in agriculture, education and public health. In recent years the MST has collaborated with the Ministry of Health on programs to prevent the spread of HIV/Aids and promote the cultivation of herbal medicines. In 2004, Petrobras, Brazil’s state oil company, financed the construction of the movement’s first natural medicine plant, located in the state of Ceará. In addition, MST representatives have served on various government commissions, local administrations, and even helped run some state agencies. After the 1998 election of Governor Olivio Dutra in Rio Grande do Sul, the MST was invited by the PT administration to direct the state’s land reform bureau. Overall, though, partnerships between the Brazilian state and popular organizations have been far more precarious, politicized and intermittent than those established by social democratic states in Western Europe, where labor unions, in particular, have become an integral part of the policy-making framework.
Electoral Participation. MST members have actively engaged in election campaigns and party politics since the mid 1980s. For over two decades the movement held close ties to the PT. In Rio Grande do Sul, for example, the MST elected a five-term PT federal deputy and a string of PT representatives to the state assembly. While both associations shared many members, they have historically run their organizations in an autonomous way. This independence owed much to the fact the MST was founded separately from the PT. It was further reinforced by the PT’s early decision to eschew tenets from the traditional left that would have sought to subordinate the movement to the party. Ties between the PT and MST were solidified in the mid 1980s with the formation of the party’s National Agrarian Secretary and the Agrarian Nuclei of the Chamber of Deputies. Both party venues offered a space for dialogue and policy formulation that brought together PT officials, MST representatives, rural trade union leaders, and spokespersons from other progressive civil society organizations. In times of need, PT officials have customarily provided support for MST activists.
28
The ties between the PT and MST were stronger when both party and movement were in opposition to governing authorities and neoliberal policies. The PT’s victory in the presidential election of 2002 and decision to uphold many of Cardoso’s economic and rural policies led the MST to waver on its alliance with the PT. The movement’s disappointment with Lula’s policies were initially tempered by the MST’s pragmatic decision to side with the PT’s left and attack the government’s neoliberal economic policies, while sparing President Lula himself. In 2006, the movement campaigned for Lula’s re-election in an effort to defeat his more conservative opponent. Despite a growing sense of disenchantment with the PT among MST cadres, the movement has continued to support progressive candidates, linked mostly to the PT.58
Manifold Relations with the Rule of Law. The MST’s relationship with the legal system is an issue of enduring controversy. Prevailing orthodoxy in Brazil assumes that MST’s land and building occupations are in conflict with the rule of law, and a sign of the movement’s disdain for the state. This view, however, oversimplifies what is an altogether complex relationship. It ignores the fact that Brazil’s justice system is cripplingly bureaucratic, saturated with class bias and traditionally pliant towards landlord interests; hence much of the MST’s difficulties in dealing with the legal system.59 The idea of a fundamental opposition between the MST and the law omits the fact that social movements around the world have also served as architects of an alternative legal order.
The MST has taken an active part in the nation’s debates over the interpretation of existing laws. The 1988 Constitution, for instance, upholds agrarian reform and qualifies property rights by their social function. Despite these provisions, most judges insist on applying the Civil Code’s absolutist approach to property rights and thus criminalize land reform activists. In a major
On the historic relations between the PT and MST, see Branford (2009) and
58 Pereira (2009).
59 The MST’s mistrust of the Brazilian judiciary is broadly shared in this country, where according to the Corporación Latinobarómetro (2007: 101), only 10 percent of the population believes it would be treated equally in a court of law. For a thoughtful analysis of this problem, see Vieira (2007).
29
victory for MST lawyers, a 1996 decision by Brazil’s highest court ruled that land occupations designed to hasten reform were “substantially distinct” from criminal acts against property. Far from simply disdaining legality, the MST has actively contributed to shaping the debate on the nature and function of law. Through a dedicated and expanding network of close to 500 lawyers, the movement and its allies are frequently involved in running legal cases and lobbying higher echelons of the judiciary. In fact, MST land occupations are often planned with legal issues in mind, by targeting, for example, estates of dubious or illicit proprietorship.60
All of these considerations –the MST’s disposition towards pressure politics and civil disobedience tactics, negotiations and lobbying with public authorities, associated networks with the state, electoral participation, and manifold relations with the rule of law-- highlight the complex nature of the MST’s interaction with Brazil’s political institutions. Ostensibly, they demonstrate that for all its harsh rhetoric, the MST is not an “anti-state” or “anti-democratic” movement as some analysts would have us believe. Quite to the contrary, the MST and its allies actively underscore the state’s central role in defending human rights and rebalancing the nation’s social order through downward redistribution policies. This explains the MST’s determined opposition to the neoliberal project of public retrenchment, and the resulting concentration of wealth in the hands of powerful economic forces. Democracy, in the MST’s view, cannot be limited to a system of elite competition for public office. Rather, it should encompass a range of efforts geared towards developing greater state accountability and responsiveness to popular sector needs. In this way, democracy would help foster a more inclusive and egalitarian society, offering better conditions for the meaningful exercise of citizen participation.
60 My observations on the MST’s relation to the rule of law are greatly indebted to Meszaros (2009; 2000a; 200b).
30
Contributing to Democracy
The prevailing critique of the MST, articulated by Martins, Navarro, Graziano and Rosenfield, presents the landless movement as a “threat to democracy.” In their assault on its reform efforts, these authors display what Albert O. Hirschman described as the “rhetoric of reaction,” notably by advancing the argument that the MST jeopardizes a “previous, precious accomplishment.”61 The sentiments and ideas espoused by these Brazilian scholars are quite revealing in their assumptions and omissions. Three of these include: a restrictive view of democracy, tacit aversion to class conflict, and a-historical understandings of democratization.
Restrictive views of democracy have long intellectual history. Their proponents have traditionally shared a low esteem for the demos and disdain for the excessive participation and mobilization of popular masses. Their tendency to overlook the impact of large social asymmetries on the distribution of political power and state benefits is matched, as David Held observes, by their skepticism towards about the “possibility of a radical re-organization of society.” “Excessive” criticisms of the government on all too many issues, they fear, could harm democracy by infringing “on the smooth functioning of ‘public’ decision- making.”62 These sentiments have an affinity with complacent arguments that treat Brazil as a “consolidated democracy,” and thus downplay prospects for qualitative improvement.
Among MST critics, irritation towards its contentious demeanor is often fueled by discrete cultural norms embedded in mainstream Brazilian politics. One of these conventions is grounded on a strong distaste for explicit manifestations of class conflict. As Bolívar Lamounier explains, this aversion stems from the nation’s oligarchic tradition and the ethos of conciliation and political flexibility it fostered among the ruling elite. This disposition bred a “cultural construction (that) vigorously asserted that zero-sum conflict” was inimical to Brazilian society.
61 Hirschman (1991: 7). 62 Held (1987: 160, 176, 184).
31
Fueled by patrimonial customs and a lack of experience with “principled politics,” the legacies of this conservative, patriarchal view of politics can be found in depictions of popular class struggles as instances of “childish behavior.”63 Many of the terms used to portray the MST suggest a close affinity with this patronizing ethos: “The MST is the perfect incarnation of the political childishness of sectors of our society;” engaged in a “frivolous resistance” and “comedy of errors;” inspired by the “vulgar Marxist” ideas of its leaders; that merely seek to “indoctrinate” and “manipulate” its “little foot-soldiers;” in what only amounts to a “pre-political” movement or a “pseudo-revolutionary” group.64
Analyses that represent the MST as a “threat to democracy” are also short- sighted in their historical understanding of democracy and Brazilian society. They discount the fact that throughout world history the main social force against democratization has been the landlord class, not the peasantry.65 The Brazilian case certainly fits the mold. A-historical views of contemporary affairs undermine efforts to examine Brazil’s authoritarian legacies and allow people to assume that large agribusiness farmers are nothing like the traditional landed elite. Since the return to civilian rule, however, politicians and associations representing large landholding interests have consistently opposed different initiatives to strengthen citizenship rights among the poor and thus enhance the quality of democracy in Brazil.
Restrictive and a-historical views of democracy have built-in blinders that hamper an appreciation of the many democratic contributions made by popular movements like the MST. In particular, they disregard the fact that social movements can contribute to democratization both as “explicit programs or as by-products of their action.”66 The following comments offer a broad assessment
63 Lamounier (1989: 123-124).
64 Navarro interview in Arruda (2003); Navarro (2007); Navarro (2002b: 279); Martins (2000: 114); Navarro (2009); Martins (2000: 18); Graziano (2004: 278).
65 On the negative democratic impact of landlords, see Moore (1966), Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens (1992), and Huber and Safford (1995).
66 Tilly (2004: 142-143).
32
of the boisterous conduct, civic impact and normative drive that have shaped the MST’s contribution to democracy in Brazil.
(1) Public Activism, Political Capabilities and Pro-Poor Policies. Grassroots organizing, pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities have been at the heart of the MST’s way of engaging with Brazil’s democratic institutions. Electoral participation, though never irrelevant to the movement, has normally taken a back seat to other more assertive and direct tactics. In doing so, the MST has sought mainly to exercise a form of “societal accountability,” by shaping the public agenda and influencing state policy, rather seeking to exert control over the state apparatus itself.67
Public activism has become ingrained in the movement’s ethos and self- image. The movement, after all, was born and raised amid social conflict. In everyday MST speech, all of its conquistas (conquests) are the result of their ability to organize at grassroots and engage in sustained struggle. Its penchant towards pressure politics, however, is not the result of mere ideological assumptions, as critics like Navarro insist. Navarro maintains that the MST has “canonized” collective action as a result of its “fundamentalist” view of politics.68 Given its options, however, the MST’s preference for pressure politics is actually the most rational strategy available for maximizing its efficacy.
Considering the alternative means for accomplishing its objectives – electoral contestation, legislative representation, media influence, lobbying, or armed insurgency— pressure politics is clearly the most cost effective option. Fielding national election candidates or acquiring a major media outlet is clearly beyond the MST's financial means. Legislative representation offers few tactical advantages given the prerogatives accorded to the executive branch for carrying out land reform and the traditional overrepresentation of conservative rural interests in Congress. The MST is also fully aware that lobbying without pressure politics is usually a toothless instrument. Despite a fondness for Che Guevara and
67 The idea of “societal accountability” draws on Smulovitz and Peruzzotti (2000). 68 Navarro (2002b: 261 and 267).
33
other world revolutionaries, the movement clearly understands that a guerrilla alternative would be a suicidal gamble.
Public activism and its disruptive tactics, then, are the only reasonable course of action available to Brazil's landless peasants. This mode of collective action is first and foremost a practical response, a collective problem-solving measure— not the machination of an ideological agenda. Public activism enables the MST to stir public opinion and gain direct access to policymakers in a way that most institutional mechanisms would render ineffectual or innocuous at best.
Pressure politics, however, is more than just an instrument for exacting government concessions. Collective acts of struggle also strengthen the movement internally. By energizing its participants, they help galvanize the passions, convictions and sense of mystique that gives the MST its resilient character. They also foster feelings of pride and ownership over the results achieved. MST mobilizations, furthermore, sharpen class consciousness, raise awareness of basic rights, build social networks of trust, nurture organizing skills and cultivate new popular leaders. As such, the movement’s public activism has played a central role in the long-term development of political capabilities among Brazil’s rural poor.69
Over the years, the MST has inspired and helped nurture an array of Brazilian popular movements representing peasant women, populations displaced by hydroelectric dams, small farmers, homeless people, and other landless groups, principally those linked to CONTAG’s rural trade unions.70 In this way, the MST has helped catalyze an unprecedented distribution of state resources among the rural poor, through land purchases, farming and housing credits, infrastructural development, technical assistance, educational programs, and the creation of scores of rural cooperatives and food-processing plants.
All this suggests that public activism should be treated as a crucial instrument for inequality reduction in societies as starkly disparate as Brazil. Such environments, after all, tend to produce daunting obstacles to change. Their
69 On the development of “political capabilities over the long run,” see Whitehead and Molina’s (2003).
70 Rosa (2009).
34
removal requires that they be tackled with concerted, forceful, and disruptive pressure from below. If coupled with a bargaining process at the top, this societal drive can foster an auspicious momentum for progressive reforms. In apartheid- like environments, amiable, top-down attempts to carry-out substantive downward-redistribution measures are likely to produce empty government promises, or meagre reforms, at best.
Far from being a sign of “incongruence” and affront to democracy, as Navarro and other critics suggest,71 MST pressure politics should be appreciated as a mark of democratic vitality and engagement. Indeed, compared to other manifestations of social tension and conflict –including street gangs, riots, crime and guerrilla warfare— public activism offers a constructive, democratic venue for channeling popular demands and instigating pro-poor development policies.
(2) Citizenship Rights, the Public Agenda and Civil Society Inclusion. The MST has contributed to the development of citizenship rights in Brazil, and done so in all three basic dimensions of this idea: civil, political and social rights.72 Since its origins the MST has fought for the right to protest and mobilize freely, and thus exercise its democratic right to influence decisions made by public authorities, independent of the electoral process. Through legal measures and publicity efforts, it has defended the basic civil rights of hundreds of peasants who have been imprisoned, abused and assassinated for their land reform activism.
MST achievements in the creation of land reform settlements, cooperatives, agro-industries, education and consciousness-raising have improved the material conditions, cultural resources and political capabilities of its members. As such, the movement has fortified the social foundations for democracy in Brazil. When basic needs are met and awareness of rights enhanced, people are unlikely to sell their votes on Election Day. The sense of character and dignity forged through long years of MST struggle has helped nurture more conscientious citizens and foster greater public participation in local and national affairs. By
71 Navarro (2002a: 219). 72 As outlined originally by T.H. Marshall (1992).
35
enabling people to use their political rights, the MST has facilitated the integration of hundreds of thousands of poor and historically marginalized Brazilians into the democratic process. In doing so, the MST has abetted their “transition from clientelism to citizenship.”73
MST demands to implement national agrarian reform laws are illustrative of the movement’s efforts to bridge a striking gap in Brazilian society –the abyss between the Constitution’s social rights and their weak enforcement. The effort to diminish the historic chasm between the pays légal and the pays réel –between the country’s formal edifice –made, as the popular saying in Brazil goes, “para o inglês ver” (for the English to see)— and its everyday reality, amounts to a concerted struggle aimed at overcoming Brazil’s “low-intensity citizenship.”74 The process of surmounting such democratic deficits is an eminently political and contentious one. As Charles Tilly highlights, throughout world history, citizenship rights were never created through gentle concessions from the ruling elite or the gradual enlightenment of society as a whole. Rather, these rights are the historical result of years of resistance, struggle and bargaining with national authorities.75
The quality of democracy is enhanced through the “complementary and mutually reinforcing tasks” of “strengthening citizen participation and expanding the agenda for public discussion.”76 Through its protests and public advocacy, the MST has enriched Brazil’s public debate in many ways. Over the years the movement has incorporated several new themes to its traditional class-based analysis of Brazilian reality, from gender equality to agro-ecology, food sovereignty, youth empowerment and human rights. All these themes have become an integrate part of the movement’s critique of Brazil’s exclusionary and predatory model of development. MST detractors dismiss this line of reasoning as
73 Fox (1994).
74 O’Donnell (1994: 166); also see Carvalho (2006: 199-217).
75 Tilly (2002); also see Foweraker and Landman (1997).
76 Iazetta (2005: 6). On the quality of democracy, see O’Donnell, Cullell and Iazzetta (2004), and Diamond and Morlino (2005).
36
a sign of the movement’s “undue politicization” and “deviation” from a more “wholesome past,” in which its main preoccupation was to gain access to land.77 The landless movement’s quest for “revolutionary change” in Brazil, the critics assert, is “backward-looking,” “anti-modern” and “dangerous.”
Other audiences, however, are likely to interpret MST proposals differently. For instance, the movement’s sharp critique of the agribusiness model of rural development, with its large-scale industrial farms, intense use of pesticides, reliance on genetically-modified seeds and close affinity to the “fast- food lifestyle,” would elicit sympathy from European and North American consumers and activists engaged in the budding counter-culture movement in support of an organic food production system, anchored on local family farms.78 Similarly, citizens in most advanced democracies would readily agree with the MST’s support for strict gun controls. Leading international human rights organizations have endorsed MST petitions to Congress urging that it federalize human rights crimes in the countryside and ratify a constitutional amendment to expropriate ranches that use slave labor. Efforts to democratize Brazil’s media structure, in turn, have put the MST in close collaboration with alternative media networks in various parts of the globe. In light of the world’s 2008-2009 financial debacle, it would appear to many that the MST’s longstanding disagreement with neoliberal policies of financial deregulation and fiscal austerity were not as “regressive” as portrayed by its adversaries. Indeed, its ongoing support for a grassroots campaign to re-nationalize Brazil’s giant mining conglomerate formerly
77 For relevant comments of this sort, see Graziano (2004: 73, 103, 278), Martins (2000: 17-39, 112-115; 2007); Navarro (2002a: 201-212; 2007; 2009) and in Scolese (2003); Rosenfield 227, 239, 252-253, 267). Fernando Henrique Cardoso (2006: 70, 79, 541) offers a similar appraisal. He describes the MST as belonging “to a niche of resistance to modernity that is a conveyer of a regressive utopia;” a movement that looks at the world “through the rearview mirror;” and committed the grave mistake of seeking to “politicize” the agrarian question in Brazil.
78 MST advocacy for alternative forms of rural development shares core principles and ideas espoused by Michael Pollan (2006, 2008) and other critics of the industrial model of food production and consumption.
37
known as the Companhía do Vale do Rio Doce, privatized at fire-sale prices in 1997, might still prove to be a prescient move.
Recurrent efforts to de-legitimize the MST and dismiss any discussion over the issues raised by the movement counter classic liberal arguments in favor of free speech. As John Stuart Mills long noted, “fear of heresy” and the tendency towards “intellectual pacification” thwart prospects for “social progress.” Such dispositions stifle intellectual creativity and restrict the open discussion and consideration of alternative viewpoints needed to find new elements of truth. They also hamper the development of the mental and moral character forged through vigorous deliberation.79 Though constricted in many ways, MST efforts to keep a substantial, rather than a minor, spectrum of dissent alive, have enhanced the quality of public debate in Brazilian democracy.
All together, the struggle to enhance political capabilities among the poor, extend basic citizenship rights, and broaden the nation’s public agenda, has strengthened Brazilian civil society. The organization and incorporation of marginalized sectors of the population into this arena through autonomous popular movements is a relatively novel phenomenon in Brazilian history. Traditionally, civil societal associations and media outlets represented mostly the interests of the upper and middle classes. These interests, no doubt, are still predominant. Yet the inclusion of subaltern actors such as the MST has contributed much to the democratization of this societal space. The long term trend suggests a potential for many innovative developments, provided the conditions for this be secured through the preservation and expansion of Brazil’s political freedoms.
(3) Hope, Utopia and Democratizing Ideals. Contemporary democratic institutions, practices and ideas are the result of a longstanding development fueled by powerful normative aspirations. As Giovanni Sartori put it, “what democracy is cannot be separated from what democracy should be. A democracy exists only insofar as its ideals and values bring it into being.”80 The creative
79 Mill (1956: 40-41, 64). 80 Sartori (1987: 7).
38
tension between democracy’s real and ideal dimensions has been at the heart of its historical evolution.
MST demands for greater social justice in a nation afflicted by remarkable inequities represent a vital democratizing force for Brazil. From its early days, the movement has helped inspire new horizons and heartened visions of a more just society. In recent years, the belief that “another world is possible,” has found a congenial setting at the assemblies of the World Social Forum. This global gathering of progressive and alternative forces emerged as a counterpoint to the World Economic Forums established in Davos, Switzerland, a meeting place for leading financiers, corporate managers and heads of state. The MST has been very much involved with the World Social Forum since its first encounter in 2001. Indeed, four of the first five gatherings have taken place in Porto Alegre, Brazil, not far from where the movement was actually born.
By cultivating a resilient sense of hope and quest for “another world,” the MST has bolstered the dreams and ideals of equality, liberty and participation that have invigorated movements for democratization throughout world history.81 Democratization, as Laurence Whitehead underscores, is a “complex, long term, dynamic and open-ended process,” that cannot be frozen in time and place.82 Democracy, in other words, is a perpetually unfinished product, open to improvement through contestation, deliberation and bouts of creative inspiration.
A sense of utopia can be crucial for all this. As Max Weber perceptively wrote, humans “would not have attained the possible if time and again (they) had not reached out for the impossible.” A “steadfastness of the heart ... can brave even the crumbling of all hopes. This is necessary right now, or else (people) will not be able to attain even that which is possible today.”83
81 On the historical importance of social movements for democracy, see Markoff (1996).
82 Whitehead (2002: 6-34). 83 The quote is from Weber’s essay, “Politics as a Vocation” (1958: 128).
39
Conclusion
To confine the MST’s place in Brazilian society as one merely engaged in the struggle for agrarian reform is to miss out on the larger picture at stake. The MST is not just a rural phenomenon. Lurking behind the movement’s orderly marches and bright red flags is a specter that haunts Brazil’s secular inequities. Though often exaggerated, the fears of change it elicits are not groundless. The MST rattles common-held perceptions, norms and customs. It upsets “the natural order of things.” It exposes, gives voice and channels tensions that underlie Brazilian society. Some see its agitation as a national anathema. Others sympathize with its disruptive thrust. Among the latter, many consider the movement a powerful Brazilian symbol and inspiration in the struggle to achieve the full promise of equal citizenship rights.
The way the MST has pursued such promise has not always squared neatly with conventional forms of liberal democratic politics. Brazil’s starkly unequal society and great obstacles to the political representation of popular sector interests are crucial to understanding the MST’s alternative approach to democratization. For lack of a comprehensive pro-poor reform policy in the countryside, peasant groups have been left with few alternatives to strong-arm, pressure tactics. The MST’s radicalism, therefore, should be understood principally as a reaction to the adverse conditions that have hampered land redistribution and the adoption of other progressive economic and social policies in Brazil.
According to the Latinobarómetro poll, between 1996 and 2006, an average of only 24 percent of Brazilians claimed they were satisfied with their democracy.84 It should come as no surprise, therefore, to find harsh words of contempt within the MST towards the nation’s governing institutions and ruling political class. Unlike the majority of Brazilians, who vent their frustrations in more private ways, MST members are inclined to channel their indignation through public activism. Indeed, for all their malaise and disappointment with the
84 Corporación Latinobarómetro (2007: 72-74).
40
political system, within the landless movement one can find some of the most relentless, no-nonsense practitioners of grassroots democracy in Brazil.
This point can be illustrated with a brief follow up to the 1985 Annoni land occupation in Rio Grande do Sul, described at the beginning of this article. By the early 1990s, 354 families had been settled in the Annoni estate. The influx of people into the area led to the creation of a new municipal district named Pontão, which celebrated its second elections for local government in 1996. In Brazil, municipal elections tend to mobilize politicians and voters in intense contests given the substantial powers conferred to local governments.
The Annoni community was one of the largest in this overwhelmingly rural district. Hence, MST settlers were able to put forth a PT candidate and win a three-way election with almost 39% of the valid votes. This represented another milestone victory for the MST as it was the first time one of its members was elected mayor of its municipality. The 2000 vote for local government, however, involved a tight re-election contest, as the opposition formed a broad coalition against the left. The PT, nonetheless, won again with 56% of the valid votes, thanks to the MST’s efforts among the Annoni settlers.85 At a simple glance one would presume that such outcomes were the result of conventional campaign tactics found in mainstream democracies. The truth, though, is that the decisive election move was not as ginger as this.
Political clientelism and vote-buying are a longstanding practice in Brazil that affects the country’s poorest social strata, in particular. The national laws established to punish such behavior are strong, yet the mechanisms to enforce them are actually weak. In the months preceding the 2000 vote, anti-PT campaigners in Pontão got organized to purchase the support needed to win the election. Days before the election, they went out through the back country roads to offer car tires, money and groceries in exchange for votes. But the PT activists struck back with a string of all-night, gun-in-hand roadblocks to prevent their rivals from buying out their more feeble supporters. One night, the roadblock
85 Election data is from the Núcleo de Pesquisa e Documentação da Política Rio- Grandense (NUPERGS), of the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.
41
crew fired warning shots towards an approaching vehicle. On another day, the PT militants had the police ground a truck full of spare tires. And in between, they held back a second truck loaded with groceries. Thus, they were able to secure a tense election victory in Pontão.86
The lessons from all this should be clear by now. Given the crude realities of Brazilian politics and harsh conditions under which agrarian reform must be implemented, one cannot expect the MST’s contribution to democracy in Brazil to be anything less than muscle-bound, forceful and rough. By virtue of birth and necessity, the MST’s distinct mark has been that of the tough touch.
86 This account was gathered during a field visit to Pontão and neighboring municipalities shortly after the 2000 municipal elections. Problems with vote-buying or attempts to do so were reported in all neighboring districts. As in Pontão, progressive candidates had to resort to similar strong-arm tactics to thwart their adversaries’ vote-buying efforts.
42
Bibliography
ActionAid International. Power Hungry: Six Reasons to Regulate Global Food Corporations. Johannesburg: ActionAid International, 2006.
Arruda, Roldão. “’Não existiria nenhum abril vermelho sem recursos públicos.’” O Estado de São Paulo, (April 29, 2007).
Arruda, Roldão. “MST inaugural escola de US$1,3 mi,” O Estado de São Paulo, (January 16, 2005).
Arruda, Roldão. “'Ofensiva do MST será estorvo político para Lula': Para o sóciologo Zander Navarro, movimento pode atrapalhar programa de reforma agrária,” O Estado de São Paulo (May 5, 2003).
Berger, Christa. Campos em Confronto: A Terra e o Texto. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade/UFRGS, 1998.
Branford, Sue. “Lidando com Governos: O MST e as Administrações de Cardoso e Lula,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Branford, Sue and Rocha, Jan. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau, 2002.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. Pedagogía do Movimento Sem Terra: Escola É Mais do que Escola, 2nd edition (Petrópolis: Vozes, 2000).
Source:
h t t p : / / w w w . c a r t a m a i o r . c o m . b r / t e m p l a t e s / m a t e r i a M o s t r a r . c fm ? m a t e r i a _ i d = 1 5 5 5 3
Access: April 9, 2009 Carter, Miguel, editor. Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária
no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009a.
Carter, Miguel. “Desigualdade Social, Reforma Agrária e Democracia no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009b.
Carter, Miguel. “Origem e Consolidação do MST no Rio Grande do Sul,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009c.
Carta Maior. “Lula divulga balanço de 6 anos e defende Reforma Agrária.” Carta
Maior (January 30, 2009).
43
Carter, Miguel. “Desafiando a Desigualdade: Contestação, Contexto e Conseqüências,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009d.
Carter, Miguel. “The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) and the Struggle for Social Justice in Brazil,” Alternative Visions of Development: The Rural Social Movements in Latin America, edited by Carmen Diana Deere and Fred Royce. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2009e.
Carter, Miguel. Stroessner Vive: Legados Autoritarios y Democracia en el Paraguay. Asunción: ServiLibro / CIPAE, 2009f.
Carter, Miguel. For Land, Love, and Justice: The Origins of Brazil’s Landless Workers Movement. Unpublished Manuscript, 2008.
Carter, Miguel. “Land Mobilizations in Rio Grande do Sul, 1978-2006.” Unpublished Database, American University, 2007.
Carter, Miguel. “The Origins of Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST): The Natalino Episode in Rio Grande do Sul (1981-84). A Case of Ideal Interest Mobilization.” Working Paper Number CBS-43-03, Centre for Brazilian Studies, University of Oxford, 2003.
Carter, Miguel and Horacio Martins Carvalho. “A Luta na Terra: Fonte de Inovação, Fortalecimento e Desafio Constante ao MST,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Chalmers, Douglas A., Scott B. Martin and Karieanne Piester. “Associative Networks: New Structures of Representation for Popular Sectors?” The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and Representation, edited by Douglas A. Chalmers, Carlos M. Vilas, Katherine Hite, Scott B. Martin, Keriane Piester, and Monique Segarra. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Collier, Ruth Berins. Paths Toward Democracy: The Working Class and Elites in Western Europe and South America. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
CEPAL (Comisión Económica Para América Latina). Anuario Estadístico de America Latina y el Caribe, 2004. Source: http://www.eclac.cl/, accessed May 19, 2006.
Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT). “Assassinatos e Julgamentos 1985-2003.” Setor de Documentação. Unpublished Report, 2007a.
Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT). Conflitos no Campo Brasil 2006. Goiânia: CPT, 2007b.
44
Comparato, Bruno Konder. A Ação Polítiça do MST. São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2003.
Corporación Latinobarómetro. Latinobarómetro Report 2007. Santiago de Chile, 2007. Source: www.latinobarometro.org.
DATALUTA (2008). Banco de Dados da Luta pela Terra, Relatório 2007. Presidente Prudente: NERA – FCT/UNESP.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo, José Garcia Gasques, José Graziano da Sila, and Júnia Cristina P. R. da Conceição. 2001. “Estimativas das famílias potenciais beneficiárias de programas de assentamentos rurais no Brasil.” Transformações da agricultura e políticas públicas, edited by José Garcia Gasques and Júnia Cristina P. R. da Conceição. (Brasília: IPEA, 2001).
Delgado, Guilherme Costa. “Questão Agrária e o Agronegócio no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Diamond, Larry and Leonardo Morlino, editors. Assessing the Quality of Democracy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. “Formação e Territorialização do MST no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. A Formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes, 2000.
Foweraker, Joe and Todd Landman. Citizenship Rights and Social Movements: A Comparative and Statistical Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Fox, Jonathan. “The Difficult Transition from Clientelism to Citizenship: Lessons from Mexico.” World Politics 46: 2 (January, 1994), pp. 151-184.
Graziano, Xico. “Terrorismo Agrário.” Estado de São Paulo, May 23. Graziano, Xico. O Carma da Terra. São Paulo: A Girafa, 2004.
Hagopian, Frances. Traditional Politics and Regime Change in Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Held, David. Models of Democracy. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.
Huber, Evelyne and Frank Safford, editors. Agrarian Political Structure & Political Power: Landlord and Peasant in the Making of Latin America. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1995.
45
Iazzetta, Osvaldo M. “Introduction.” The Quality of Democracy: Theory and Applications, edited by Guillermo O’Donnell, Jorge Vargas Cullell and Osvaldo M. Iazzetta. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, 2004.
Instituto de Estudos Socioeconómicos, INESC. “Orçamento Público, Direitos e Desigualdades: Um olhar sobre a proposta orçamentaria para 2009.” Source: www.inesc.org (Access: April 9, 2009)
Kane, Liam. Popular Education and Social Change in Latin America. London: Latin America Bureau, 2001.
Kolling, Edgar Jorge, Paulo Ricardo Cerioli, and Roseli Salete Caldart, editors. Educação do Campo: Identidade e Polítiças Públicas: Por uma Educação do Campo. Coleção Por Uma Educação do Campo No. 4. Brasilia: Articulação Nacional Por Uma Educação do Campo, 2002.
Lamounier, Bolívar. “Brazil: Inequality Against Democracy.” Democracy in Developing Countries: Latin America, edited by Larry Diamond, Juan J. Linz, and Seymour Martin Lipset. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publisher, 1989.
Leite, Sergio, et al., editors. Impactos dos Assentamentos: Um Estudo sobre o Meio Rural Brasileiro. Brasília: Núcleo de Estudos Agrários e Desenvolvimento Rural (NEAD), 2004.
Lerrer, Débora Franco. De como a mídia fabrica e impõe uma imagem: A degola do PM pelos sem-terra em Porto Alegre. (Rio de Janeiro: Editora Revan, 2005).
Mainwaring, Scott P. Rethinking Party Systems in the Third Wave of Democratization: The Case of Brazil. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999.
Markoff, John. Waves of Democracy: Social Movements and Political Change. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press, 1996.
Marshall, T. H. “Citizenship and Social Class.” Citizenship and Social Class, edited by Tom Bottomore. London: Pluto Press, 1992.
Martins, José de Souza. “O MST e seus moinhos de vento.” O Estado de São Paulo (April 22, 2007).
Martins, José de Souza. O Sujeito Oculto: Ordem e Transgressão na Reforma Agrária. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade/UFRGS, 2003.
Martins, José de Souza. Reforma Agrária: O Impossível Diálogo. São Paulo: Editora da Universidad de São Paulo, 2000.
46
Martins, José de Souza. “A Questão Agrária Brasileira e o Papel do MST,” A Reforma Agraria e a Luta do MST, edited by João Pedro Stédile. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1997.
Martins, José de Souza. O Poder do Atraso: Ensaios de Sociología da História Lenta. São Paulo: Editora HUCITEC, 1994.
Martins, Mônica Dias, editor. O Banco Mundial e a Terra: Ofensiva e Resistência na América Latina, Ásia e África. São Paulo: Biotempo, 2004.
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers' Trade Union Movement, 1964-1985. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1994).
Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de. História dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE, 1989.
Méndez, Juan E. Guillermo O’Donnell, and Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, editors. The (Un)Rule of Law and the Underprivileged in Latin America. Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 1999.
Meszaros, George. “O MST e o Estado de Direito no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Meszaros, George. “No Ordinary Revolution: Brazil’s Landless Workers’ Movement.” Race & Class. 42:2 (2000a), pp.1-18.
Meszaros, George. “Taking the Land into their Hands: The Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian State.” Journal of Law and Society. 27:4 (December 2000b), pp.517-41.
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty, edited by Currin V. Shields. Indianapolis: Bobbs- Merrill Educational Publishing, 1956.
Ministério de Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento, MAG (2009). “Estatísticas: Crédito Rural no Brasil.” Source: http://www.agricultura.gov.br/ (Access: April 9, 2009)
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA); Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária (INCRA); Superintendência Nacional de Desenvolviment Agrário (SND). “Projetos de Reforma Ágrária Conforme Fases de Implementação: Período da Criação do Projeto - 01/01/1900 Até 24/07/2003.” Unpublished Document, July 2003.
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA), Equipe Técnica. “Proposta de plano de reforma agrária.” Unpublished manuscript. Brasília: MDA (October 2003).
47
Moore, Barrington. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Landlord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Navarro, Zander. “MST tenta se manter vivo no sistema politico.” Gazeta Mercantil (February 12, 2009).
Navarro, Zander. “Comédia agrária.” Folha de São Paulo (April 22, 2007).
Navarro, Zander. “Mobilização sem Emancipação – As Lutas Sociais dos Sem Terra no Brasil.” Produzir para Viver: Os Caminhos da Produção Não Capitalista, edited by Boaventura de Sousa Santos. São Paulo: Civilização Brasileira, 2002a.
Navarro, Zander. “O MST e a Canonização da Ação Coletiva (Reposta a Horacio Martins Carvalho).” Produzir para Viver: Os Caminhos da Produção Não Capitalista, edited by Boaventura de Sousa Santos. São Paulo: Civilização Brasileira, 2002b.
O Estado de São Paulo. “Editorial: O perfil dos movimentos sociais.” O Estado de São Paulo (June 17, 2008).
O’Donnell, Guillermo. “Human Development, Human Rights and Democracy.” The Quality of Democracy: Theory and Applications, edited by Guillermo O’Donnell, Jorge Vargas Cullell and Osvaldo M. Iazzetta. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, 2004.
O’Donnell, Guillermo. “The State, Democratization and Some Conceptual Problems (A Latin American View with Glances at Some Post-Communist Countries).” Latin American Political Economy in the Age of Neoliberal Reform, edited by William C. Smith, Carlos H. Acuña and Eduardo A. Gamarra. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1994.
Ondetti, Gabriel. Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2008.
Pereira, Anthony W. “An Ugly Democracy? State Violence and the Rule of Law in Postauthoritarian Brasil.” Democratic Brazil: Actors, Institutions and Processes, edited by Peter R. Kingston and Timothy J. Power. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2000.
Pereira, Hamilton. “Somos a Perigosa Memória das Lutas,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Pereira, João Marcio Mendes. “O Modelo de Reforma Agrária de Mercado do Banco Mundial em Questão: O Debate Internacional e o Caso Brasileiro. Teoria, Luta Política e Balanço de Resultados.” Masters Thesis, CPDA, Universidade Federal Rural de Rio de Janeiro, 2004.
48
Pinheiro, Paulo Sergio. “Popular Responses to State-Sponsored Violence in Brazil.” The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and Representation, edited by Douglas A. Chalmers et al. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Poletto, Ivo. “A Igreja, a Comissão Pastoral da Terra e a Mobilização pela Reforma Agrária,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Poletto, Ivo and Antônio Canuto, editors. Nas Pegadas do Povo da Terra: 25 Anos da Comissão Pastoral da Terra. Sao Paulo: Edições Loyola, 2002.
Pollan, Michael. In Defense of Food: An Eaters Manifesto. New York: Penguin Group, 2008.
Pollan, Michael. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals. New York: Penguin Group, 2006.
Rosa, Marcelo. “Além do MST: O Impacto nos Movimentos Sociais Brasileiros,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Revista Sem Terra, 11: 48 (January/February 2009). Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyne Huber Stephens and John D. Stephens. Capitalist
Development and Democracy. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1992. Quirk, Patrick W. Emotions and the Struggle ofBrazil's Landless Social Movement (MST).
(Saarbrucken, Germany: VDM Publishing, 2008).
Sauer, Sérgio and João Marcio Mendes Pereira, editors. Capturando a Terra: Banco Mundial, políticas fundiárias neoliberais e reforma agrária de mercado. São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2006.
Sartori, Giovanni. The Theory of Democracy Revisited. Chatham: Chatham House Publishers, 1987.
Scalabrin, Leandro Gaspar. “’Estado de Exeção’ no Rio Grande do Sul e a criminalização do MST.” Unpublished manuscript, 2009.
Scolese, Eduardo. “Revogar MP é "tiro no pé", diz especialista,” Agência Folha (March 23, 2003).
Schmitter, Philippe C. “Still the Century of Corporatism?” Review of Politics, 36 (January 1974), pp. 86-131.
49
Scott, James C. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985.
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.
Smulovitz, Catalina and Enrique Peruzzotti. “Societal Accountability in Latin America.” Journal of Democracy, 11:4 (October 2000), pp. 147-158.
Snyder, Richard and David J. Samuels, “Legislative Malapportionment in Latin America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives,” Federalism and Democracy in Latin America, edited by Edward L. Gibson. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004, pp. 131-172.
Sparovek, Gerd. A Qualidade dos Assentamentos da Reforma Agrária Brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas & Letras Editora e Gráfica, 2003.
Stédile, João Pedro, editor. A Questão Agrária no Brasil. 7th edition. São Paulo: Editora Atual, 1999.
Stédile, João Pedro and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora da Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1999.
Stédile, João Pedro and Frei Sergio Görgen. A Luta Pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Página Aberta, 1993.
Stepan, Alfred. Arguing Comparative Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. Stepan, Alfred. “Brazil’s Decentralized Federalism: Bringing Government Closer
to the Citizens?” Daedalus, 129:2 (Spring 2000).
Thums, Gilberto. “Investigando: MST – Levantamento de dados sobre suas atividades no Rio Grande do Sul.” Conselho Superior do Ministério Público. Procedimento Administrativo No 16315-0900/07-9, n/date.
Tilly, Charles. Social Movements, 1768-2004. Boulder and London: Paradigm Publishers, 2004.
Tilly, Charles. Stories, Identities, Political Change. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002.
Tilly, Charles. “Repertoires of Contention in America and Britain,” The Dynamics of Social Movements, edited by Mayer N. Zald and John D. McCarthy. Cambridge, Mass.: Winthrop, 1979.
50
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Human Development Report 2007/2008. Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World. New York: UNDP, 2007.
Vieira, Else R.P. and Bernard McGuirk, editors. Landless Voices in Song and Poetry: The Movimento dos Sem Terra of Brazil. Nottingham: Critical, Culture and Communications Press, 2007.
Vieira, Oscar Vilhena. “Inequality and Subversion of the Rule of Law in Brazil.” Working Paper Number CBS-60-05, Centre for Brazilian Studies, University of Oxford, 2007.
Vigna, Edélcio. “Mediação de Sementes.” Reforma Agrária: Os Caminhos do Impasse, interview by Débora Lerrer. São Paulo: Editora Garçoni, 2003.
Weber, Max. Economy and Society, edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. Berkeley: University of California, 1978.
Welch, Clff. “Movement Histories: A Preliminary Historiography of Brazil’s Landless Laborers’ Movement (MST).” Latin American Research Review, 41: 1 (2006).
Weyland, Kurt. Democracy Without Equity: Failures of Reform in Brazil. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996.
Whitehead, Laurence. Democratization: Theory and Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002
Whitehead, Laurence and George Gray-Molina. “Political Capabilities over the Long Run.” Changing Paths: International Development and the New Politics of Inclusion, edited by Peter P. Houtzager and Mick Moore. Ann Harbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland: Food First Books, 2003.
51

2007
Ethnomusicology
Latin American Music Review
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil
Moehn, Frederick

Latin American Music Review, Volume 28, Number 2, Fall/Winter 2007, pp. 181-219 (Article)
Published by University of Texas Press
DOI: 10.1353/lat.2007.0032
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/lat/summary/v028/28.2moehn01.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/15/11 11:32PM GMT
Frederick Moehn	Music, Citizenship, and Violence in
Postdictatorship Brazil
ABSTRACT: This essay shows how individuals approaching debates over citizenship, development, civil society, and prob- lems of violence in Brazil evoke music as a kind of audiotopia (from Josh Kun, 2005)—or a sonic space of an imagined country where inequalities are leveled out. It explores these themes in a variety of contexts, such as a con- cert in Carnegie Hall; the work of Nega Gizza (of the urban hip-hop organi- zation CUFA); music recordings associated with the Rural Landless Workers Movement (MST); a televised MPB song festival; and the cultural policies of the Lula administration. The essay traces a web of horizontal and vertical linkages between radically different sectors of Brazilian society and between
cultural practices, social structures, and the state.
RESUMEN: Este artículo demuestra cómo es que los individuos implicados en éstos debates sobre ciudadanía, desarrollo, so- ciedad civil y problemas de violencia en Brasil evocan la música como si fuera un tipo de audiotopía (de Josh Kun, 2005)— o espacio sónico de un país imag- inario en donde las desigualdades son equilibradas de cierta forma. Algunos de los contextos aquí explorados son: un concierto en Carnegie Hall, el tra- bajo musical de Nega Gizza (de una organización de origen hip-hop urbano, CUFA); grabaciones de canciones asociadas con el Movimiento de los Sin Tierra (MST); un festival televisado de la canción MPB; y las políticas cul- turales de la gestión presidencial de Lula. El artículo traza una red de eslabones horizontales y verticales entre sectores radicalemente diferentes, y entre cos-
tumbres culturales, estructuras sociales y el estado.
With how many Brazils do you make a Brazil?
–Lenine/Lula Queiroga1
We need to know what message Brazil wants to send the world—as an example of opposites living side-by-side and of tolerance of differences, at a time when fierce discourses and banners of war are being raised across the globe.
–Gilberto Gil (2003a, 43)
Latin American Music Review, Volume 28, Number 2, December 2007 © 2007 by the University of Texas Press, P.O. Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819
182 : Frederick Moehn
A 2004 concert review in the New York Times by Larry Rohter bore the headline “The Two Brazils Combine for a Night at Carnegie Hall.” It de- scribed how classical pianist Marcelo Bratke, from a prominent family in São Paulo, and young musicians from the percussion ensemble Charanga came together to perform pieces by the composers Darius Milhaud, Heitor Villa-Lobos, and Ernesto Nazareth. Professional musician Marcelo Alves formed Charanga with five youths he met at the Despertar Com- munity Center in Jardim Vilas Boas of São Paulo city, which Rohter iden- tifies as “one of the toughest sections of this metropolis of 20 million people.” In a society as stratified as Brazil, he writes, “there is no reason for people from such markedly different backgrounds ever to meet, much less perform together.” They did, however, meet to make musical sound, in Carnegie Hall no less. This essay explores how discourses about music as well as musical practices themselves narrate the figurative space be- tween the proverbial two Brazils (the term space here should be under- stood as a conceptualized location, while I use the term place to refer to specific physical and cultural geographies). Shared and sometimes con- tested beliefs about music, national identity, the historical trajectory of development in Brazil, and the country’s role on the global stage are powerfully intertwined, with the result that music plays a prominent role in current re-imaginings of Brazilian citizenship.
My analysis here is based in part on my reading of a variety of sources that might be described as texts (documents, recordings, Weblogs, etc.); it is intended to offer a broadly comparative perspective on specific dis- courses about music and society in Brazil. This perspective is also, how- ever, informed by my experiences visiting and conducting fieldwork in Brazil beginning in the 1990s, when I was able to observe and interview pop musicians such as singer-songwriter Lenine and producer Dudu Marote; or in 2004 at the Hutúz Rap Festival at the Bank of Brazil Cul- tural Center in Rio de Janeiro, where I met hip-hop activist Nega Gizza; and finally at the Caiubí Composers Club song festival in São Paulo in 2006, where I encountered singer-songwriter Max Gonzaga, all of whom I discuss below. The essay also grows out of a seminar I taught on social movements in Brazil at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs, where I was able to meet visiting members of the Rural Landless Worker’s Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais sem Terra, or MST) in 2004, and to participate in a meeting with Brazil’s Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil pertaining to his Culture Points project in 2005. I thus seek here to draw together a variety of my personal points of engagement with topics Brazilian, as they reflect on key issues of citi- zenship, class, race, and expressive culture.
The idea of “two Brazils” has been a refrain in interpretations of Brazilian society since Euclides da Cunha proposed a distinction between
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 183
the modern and urbanized coastal regions and the archaic but authen- tic interior in his classic book Rebellion in the Backlands (Os Sertões, 1944 [1902]). Today the expression is used to refer more generally to the different national spaces inhabited by the privileged few and the disad- vantaged many. Sometimes people speak of “many Brazils” when urban- rural or other regional distinctions are being highlighted.2 Because music is so closely associated with national identity in Brazil, it enjoys special currency as a mediator between different social classes and spaces on the one hand, and between the state and civil society on the other. It is also the most effective expressive medium for evoking that imagined com- munity of Brazil which privileges mixture and the juxtaposition of con- trasts. The above-mentioned Marcelo Bratke explained his use of a street percussion group for the performance of art music pieces in Carnegie Hall thus: “The hallmark of Brazilian culture is its miscegenation, its mal- leability, its ability to blend seemingly antagonistic elements” (Rohter 2004). Culture, and music in particular, is in this conception a reagent for mixture with the capacity to sound a national space unmarred by so- cial division.
I see discourses about music, and practices associated with making, consuming, and even legislating music, as framing a “third Brazil” be- tween the two Brazils. This space in between bears comparison with what Josh Kun calls audiotopias, or the “spaces that music helps us to imagine” and in which one can take “refuge” (2005, 14).3 Psychologist Maria Rita Kehl, for example, writes of having “dual citizenship”—one in the Brazil “of widespread injustices and futile struggles,” the other in the country of popular song, “where all Brazilians have the right to exile when real life becomes too insipid” (2002, 60). Arthur Nestrovski, similarly, main- tains that Brazilians “live daily in two countries: a few minutes with inten- sity, imagination, and carelessness in Brazilian popular music; the rest of the time, in the other one” (2002, 12). Kehl and Nestrovski are ambiva- lent about their national political citizenship, but popular music consti- tutes an alternative “country” to which one has the “right” to exile for a few transcendent minutes. The choice of words here is significant, for not too long ago exile from the “real-life” Brazil of injustices was an in- voluntary violation of one’s rights as a citizen, not an exercise of those rights. We might recall, for example, that two of Brazil’s musical super- stars, Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil, endured political exile for two years (1969–71) early in their musical careers, while celebrated song- writer Chico Buarque, an adept critic of the military regime in his music, voluntarily chose exile in Italy in the late 1960s for about a year.
For Kun, audiotopias are “sonic spaces of effective utopian longings where several sites normally deemed incompatible are brought to- gether” (23). They are “identificatory ‘contact zones,’ in that they are both
184 : Frederick Moehn
sonic and social spaces where disparate identity-formations, cultures, and geographies historically kept and mapped separately are allowed to interact with each other” (23). Kun’s desire to engage problems of na- tion, identity, and citizenship in the United States through audiotopic spaces, in which difference is not erased but is instead listened to, res- onates with my analysis here. I appreciate also his interest in the emotive sounds of the spaces of citizenship. I tried to evoke this sonic space my- self when reading this at a colloquium by first performing on guitar and singing a couple songs that I knew would generate sentiments of national belonging among Brazilians or Brazilophiles present in a way that read- ing a paper or even playing a recording cannot (e.g., the famous 1939 samba “Aquarela do Brasil,” by Ary Barroso).
Kun is concerned with the way music is intertwined with problems of race and identity in an America that has often struggled with its own multiculturalism, where musical homes of “dual belonging, dual culture, dual identity” coexist in audiotopic tierras that supposedly destabilize dominant discourses of assimilation (2005, 221). In Brazil, by contrast, the prevailing narratives of nationhood have tended to emphasize hetero- geneity and the juxtaposition of contrasts, the capacity to choose not to choose between oppositions but rather to combine them (the “virtue” of the middle ground, in Roberto DaMatta’s phrase, 1995 [1978]). It is a discourse not of assimilation into a supposedly already existing “Ameri- can” identity, but of continual (racial) mixture and transculturation into ever new formulations.
Yet discourses of mixture and heterogeneity may obfuscate certain persistent structures of inequality and opposition in Brazil, enabling a sense of dual belonging, comparable to what Kun describes for the United States, as suggested by Nestrovski’s “we live daily in two countries” and the metaphor of the two Brazils in general. Recently enacted poli- cies for affirmative action in government hiring and university admissions in Brazil—made possible in part by a clause in the 1988 constitution allowing for what is known as positive discrimination—reflect new levels of awareness of the fissures in received narratives of relatively harmonious race relations, such as that suggested in Barroso’s “Aquarela do Brasil,” with its apparent nostalgia for a bygone plantation setting. Notwithstand- ing, some policy makers have interpreted affirmative action policies as a U.S. import that is out of place in the Brazilian context. In appreciation of such heterogeneous views, I am interested in emphasizing the insta- bility of audiotopias and the competing interests in and different uses of them by individuals and groups variously situated in the fabric of civil so- ciety. Whereas Kun harnesses popular music to remap existing dynamics of difference and national identity in the U.S. context into “effectively enacted” heterotopias (from Foucault) that help us cope with this world
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 185
(Kun 2005, 23), my elaboration here reveals a parallel but differently inflected musical space traversed by distinct dynamics of race, class, vio- lence, nation, and state. Some may seek refuge in this space in order to cope; others may mobilize it for more radical change in a society of ex- treme social stratification.
I highlight postdictatorship Brazil (1985 onward, but especially since the mid-1990s) as a time frame marking several developments—both positive and negative—that bear upon questions of citizenship and cul- tural expression. These include democratization and political stabiliza- tion (with a new constitution in 1988); currency reform and the taming of hyperinflation; market-oriented economic policies (generally referred to as neoliberalism) with limited economic growth and modest progress in reducing inequality; the increased importance of social movements and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs); a sharp rise in violence as- sociated in part with escalating drug trafficking, and seen by many as a threat to the full realization of modern citizenship; and various develop- ments associated with globalization such as the increasingly complex in- ternational dynamics of finance, communications, the media, and social activism and policy. The election to the presidency of long-time labor leader and Workers Party (PT) founding member Luís Inácio da Silva— or Lula—in 2002, and his reelection in 2006, signaled that social issues were central to politics in Brazil at the beginning of this millennium, and this is reflected in Minister Gil’s policies. Yet the Lula administra- tion was crippled by scandal in its first term, and thus far has not been able significantly to alter the durable social stratifications that continue to make the metaphor of two Brazils meaningful.
Among the questions that motivate me here are the following: Why and how does musical sound evoke an alternative Brazil? What role do different kinds of musical sound play in this Brazil in between the two (or many) Brazils? Precisely how do aesthetic and performative practices work to rethink and even reconfigure citizenship? What kinds of rela- tionships exist between the individual, the group, and the state in these scenarios? Or between live performance, recorded sound, and the pub- lic sphere? How do Brazilian audiotopias speak to regional concerns, or to global dynamics of difference and inequality? In my aim to visit these questions in a variety of settings, I sacrifice detailed analysis of the spe- cific music cultures involved, but I hope to provoke further thinking about these issues. I consider musical examples of a variety of genres, in- cluding what is known as MPB (música popular brasileira), a broad category of music encompassing various styles and often (although not exclu- sively) associated with a middle-class public; Brazilian rap and hip-hop; and certain rural traditions in connection with the Landless Movement (MST).
186 : Frederick Moehn
Citizenship, Social Class, and Audiotopic Rhythms
Most writing on citizenship begins with the typology famously outlined by Thomas H. Marshall in his essay “Citizenship and Social Class,” originally presented as a lecture in 1949. Focusing on the English case, Marshall argued that there are three components to citizenship: the civil, the po- litical, and the social, which historically emerged roughly in that order. A citizen possesses a set of rights and duties associated with each of these components as defined, protected, and enforced by the legal-political ap- paratus of the nation-state. The civil component pertains to legal inclu- sion into the definition of citizenship. The political part of citizenship, in this definition, refers primarily to participation in democracy through voting; while the social is generally understood as pertaining to those rights and duties associated with the modern welfare state.
In Marshall’s analysis, there is a progressive historical expansion of these components to citizenship. Increasing levels of democratic repre- sentation would seem to go hand-in-hand with the extension of citizen- ship rights and duties to greater portions of the population. However, as Teresa Caldeira and James Holston have argued, in Brazil there is a dis- junction between the expansion of democratic representation since the end of the military dictatorship in 1985 (the political component of citi- zenship), and the extension of civil and social components—in particu- lar, egalitarian legal protection of citizens and the right to decent living conditions, which have actually become even less accessible for many citizens (1999). José Murilo de Carvalho argues that Marshall’s typology is in fact inverted in Brazil, as many civil rights—which formed the foun- dation of Marshall’s sequence—remain inaccessible to the majority of the population (2001, 219–20).4
In the present analysis I find it worthwhile to retain Marshall’s empha- sis on social class in relation to citizenship, for what most obviously sepa- rates the two Brazils is a highly polarized class structure. The average income in Brazil is about $374 per month, and about 20 percent of the population lives below the poverty line. In the United States the median income is about 90 percent of the average income, while in Brazil it is only about 30 percent of the average, which is to say that the average is skewed upward by excessive wealth at the top, and about half the population earn considerably less than that (Rothkopf 2005). A standard index of income inequality used by economists for the purposes of comparatively gauging development is the gini coefficient. At .57 in 2005 (estimated), Brazil’s gini coefficient is among the worst in the world, although it is slightly better than it was in 2000 (Germany and Swizerland, by contrast, have coefficients of .25, while the United States has a strikingly poor .47, having worsened dramatically in the past ten years). The lowest 20 per- cent of income earners account for just over 2 percent of total income in
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 187
Brazil, while the highest 20 percent earn 64 percent of the total income in the country (and the top 10 percent of earners account for 45 percent of income).5
Class should be understood in relation to various other determinants such as race, with the poorest Brazilians tending to be phenotypically darker; or to violence, which disproportionally affects poorer, darker- complexioned (and also younger) Brazilians. Class status, of course, also bears directly on level of education (including access to formal musical training and instruments, and musical tastes), and consequently on the kinds of work available to different sectors. It indexes access to the media and political leadership, and the degree of integration into consumer and information society. Finally, class is also intertwined with place. Hip- hop in Brazil, for example, emerged in the favelas (shantytowns) in and around major cities (particularly São Paulo), and it has been incorpo- rated into a number of urban NGOs in recent years. The MST (Rural Landless Worker’s Movement), on the other hand, is a social movement oriented precisely around the problems of place and class as these per- tain to ownership of cultivable land.
To refer again to the Carnegie Hall concert, it is the relatively privi- leged, white, educated, and well-traveled Marcelo Bratke who is the “award-winning pianist” appearing at Carnegie Hall, while the (mixed- race) percussionists of Charanga have little formal musical training and were awed at the opportunity to see New York. They conceded that they hadn’t heard of Milhaud, Villa-Lobos, or Nazareth, so “it was hard at first to understand what was going on in this music.” (Ernesto Nazareth com- posed numerous now classic choros, waltzes, polkas, schottisches, and other “salon” genres popular in Old Republic Rio de Janeiro; Darius Milhaud, the French composer, traveled to Brazil in 1917 and was influ- enced by the music of Nazareth and his contemporaries; Villa-Lobos was Brazil’s preeminent modernist-nationalist composer.)6 Bratke explained that what the compositions from Milhaud, Villa-Lobos, and Nazareth have in common is that they draw on the rhythms of Brazilian popular music in their blending of the erudite and popular (what is referred to as “art music” in English is música erudita in Portuguese). The political economy of music making in this particular audiotopia has the poorer black youths—who would have had little opportunity to play piano— provide the rhythmic swing for the music of relatively privileged mod- ernist composers: Bratke told the members of Charanga that even though they would be playing for a select audience, “the music should always swing.” Percussionist Santos observed, “That, fortunately, is something we don’t lack.”
The two sonic Brazils that combined at the Carnegie Hall concert, then, can be described roughly as erudite, cosmopolitan, musically liter- ate, harmonically complex, and featuring orchestral instruments and
188 : Frederick Moehn
arrangements on the one hand; and musically “non-literate,” compara- tively local, subaltern, “authentic,” rhythmically swinging, and featuring percussion instruments on the other. While these are oversimplified dis- tinctions, they do have interpretive meaning for participants who view music making as a symbolic and aesthetic practice in which radically dif- ferent classes of citizens can participate jointly in the production of na- tional culture. It is an idea formulated in the period of Brazilian modernism in the 1920s and 30s. The influential intellectual and musi- cologist Mário de Andrade, for example, envisioned an aesthetic nation- alism that navigated the received contradictions between popular and erudite, local and cosmopolitan culture. Importantly, as Mariza Veloso and Angélica Madeira observe, Andrade conceptualized Brazilian culture as a “synthesis that was not a mere sum of the parts, but a process of so- cial relations in transformation” (2000, 127).
This emphasis on the process of constructing Brazilian national cul- ture, on the aesthetic and symbolic negotiation of social, structural, and cultural differences, and this confidence that art can do the identity work of nation- and citizen-building are also present in the cases I explore below. Andrade granted rhythm the ability to do much of this identity work (a term I borrow from Isin and Wood 1999). In his Essay on Brazilian Music (1928), for example, Andrade wrote: “We are in a stage of rhyth- mic predominance,” and he suggested that “in accommodating and adapting foreign elements to his own tendencies the Brazilian acquired an imaginative way of ‘rhythmicking’ [jeito de ritmar]” (1962 [1928], 21). The connection between syncopated (and racialized) rhythms and na- tional identity would help propel urban samba to the status of Brazil’s national music in the 1930s and 40s. Even today Brazilian music in gen- eral tends to be regarded internationally as rich in rhythms, as Afro- diasporic sounds continue to have a privileged place in world music markets (Brazilian music that is not particularly “rhythmic” seems to enjoy little exposure outside of Brazil).
Rhythm and drumming also participate on some level in what might be termed the symbolic economies of NGOs (nongovernmental organ- izations) and citizens’ action groups, some of which enjoy funding from international sources, such as the AfroReggae Cultural Group in Rio de Janeiro, which has received Ford Foundation support. AfroReggae even terms its identity work batidania, combining batida (beat) with cidadania (citizenship). The group, based in the Vigário Geral favela of Rio de Janeiro, initiated a rather remarkable series of residencies in 2005 that joined the military police in the city of Belo Horizonte with favela residents. Said Lt. Col. Josué Soares of the 34th Battalion: “Not long ago, a lot of officers believed we had to use force to stop criminality. Our men- tality has changed in the way we approach favelados [favela residents]” (Reardon 2005). Journalist Christopher Reardon reports, “The 23-year
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 189
police veteran figured he’d mastered the tools of his trade: a two-way radio, handcuffs and a 9-millimeter service pistol. He never imagined that one day he would add a bass drum or a can of spray paint [for graffiti]” (2005). The sound of drumming here replaces the sound of guns—at least on a small scale—literally taking over both the space and the place dividing the police and the favela residents, and having a real effect on civil society.
In the northeastern state of Bahia, which has the highest concentra- tion of African Brazilians in the country, the Olodum cultural group has centered its community activities and commercial enterprise around drumming since the late 1970s, taking an active role in redefining the civic landscape of Salvador, the capital of that state. Also focused on Bahia is the “Rhythmic Uprising” project coordinated by a team of Brazilian and U.S. media professionals who aim to “tell the world the in- spiring tale of how a powerful grassroots movement based in the arts is overcoming social and economic depression.” Another organization with international ties and working in Bahia is called “Rhythm of Hope,” an “informal network association” that aims to “strengthen social programs in the Bahia community, to better the quality of life of its marginalized populations, and to foster awareness, tolerance, and understanding on the part of non-Brazilians.”7
In the song “Under the Same Sky” (“Sob o mesmo Céu,” 2005), MPB singer, songwriter, and guitarist Lenine (Osvaldo Lenine Macedo Pimentel), along with his songwriting partner Lula Queiroga, describe rhythm as mediating between—and bringing together—the various Brazils. Following are excerpts from the lyrics:
With how many Brazils does one make a country called Brazil? Under the same sky every city is a village, a person, a dream, a nation. ... My heart has no frontiers nor clock, nor flag, just the rhythm of a greater song We come from the drum of the Indian We come from Portugal; from the black drumming... We come from samba, from forró We came from the future to learn about our past We come from rap and from the favela...from the center and from the periphery...We bring a desire for happiness and peace
These lyrics illustrate some of the conceptual architecture of this musical space in between. The question of how many Brazils it takes to make one unified country serves primarily as a device for introducing a subsequent list of differences (of which I have only excerpted a few); it is a way of songfully celebrating the juxtapositioning of contrasts in a complex national whole.8 There is also the suggestion in these lyrics of an embod- ied national geography, at the center of which is a “heart” beating with- out frontiers to the free rhythm of a “greater song.” The “country of the
190 : Frederick Moehn
future,” as Brazil is often called, is preoccupied with its past. Taken to- gether, these lyrics describe a temporally ambiguous space emanating from a simultaneously individual and national body whose heart beats out a rhythm that transcends difference, and whose mind dreams up a Brazil that in its inclusive diversity is also universal. The metaphor of the national “body” is pervasive in Brazilian cultural discourse. Minister Gil, for example, speaks of approaching the country as “a living, pulsating organism that is enveloped in contradictions and in constant need of being energized and balanced” (Turino 2003, 16).
A performance of this song can be seen on Youtube.com, with Lenine joined on stage by a small band of electric bass and guitar, drum kit, pan- deiro (a tambourine used in a wide range of Brazilian popular musics), and several female Brazilian singers from various parts of the country (and also racially diverse): Fafá de Belém; Margareth Menezes; Elba Ramalho; Sandy; Ana Carolina; Fernanda Abreu. Like Ary Barroso’s “Aquarela do Brasil” from the late modernist period, the tone in this song is nationalistic and celebratory, although the musical sound is less characteristically “Brazilian” than a traditional samba (the most obviously Brazilian aspect, aside from the language, is the pandeiro). It comes across as something like a pop anthem of the “country” of popular song to which Maria Rita Kehl says Brazilians have the right to exile. In fact, the song was composed for a French celebration of Brazilian culture cospon- sored by the Brazilian Ministry of Culture. The Ministry identifies it as the Anthem of the Year of Brazil in France, 2005. If Ary Barroso’s na- tionalistic sambas (sambas-de-exaltação) ended up fitting comfortably with Getúlio Vargas’s populist agenda in the 1930s and 40s, “Under the Same Sky” speaks to the aims of the culture ministry under one of Brazil’s greatest MPB stars, Gilberto Gil—clearly a radically different, albeit curi- ously analogous context.9 Notwithstanding, the opening question in these lyrics hints that work remains to be done before a single country called Brazil realizes its “audiotopic potential” as a fully inclusive space. In many ways, the modernist musical vision of the Brazilian nation is evident in this song (as in the Carnegie Hall concert), but in postdictatorship Brazil other musical spheres may interpret this space and its symbols differently, as the examples of Nega Gizza of CUFA and the recordings associated with the MST will show.
The United Favela Federation (CUFA) and Nega Gizza
According to the 2004 UNESCO Brazil report, Map of Violence: The Youths of Brazil, 92 percent of homicide victims are males between 18 and 24 years old, and of these 74 percent are black. Furthermore, between 1993 and 2002, there was an increase of 88.6 percent of homicides among the total
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 191
population aged 15 to 24 (Waiselfisz et al. 2004). For Júlio Tavares of the Fluminense Federal University in Niteroi, Rio de Janeiro, this violence amounts to a genocide of black and predominantly male bodies. Tavares sees hip-hop as a corporeal and narrative response to this genocide, col- laborating “in the construction of a new social landscape for Brazil,” and accelerating the “fight for civil rights and citizen-consciousness” (Tavares n.d.). Hip-hop, he argues, is a “third way,” negotiating between institutionalized, formal capitalism and the informal parallel economy of the drug trade, both of which he views as complicit in this genocide.
In Rio de Janeiro the United Favela Federation or CUFA (Central Única das Favelas), describes itself as an organization that unites residents of over 100 favelas as well as artists, producers, and people connected to residents associations.10 CUFA’s mission statement describes the Federa- tion as “a national organization that emerged in meetings of youths— generally black — from various favelas in Rio de Janeiro who were looking for a space in the city to express their attitudes, problems, or just their desire to live.” Most of these youths participated in or were oriented by the hip-hop movement, and they organized around the ideal of trans- forming “the favelas, their talents, and their potentials in the face of a society in which prejudice based on color, class, and origin had not yet been transcended.” Rap music can be useful in this effort, the mission statement argues, because it helps raise the consciousness of those who are on the periphery of their citizenship, and because it is gaining recog- nition in the media. There is, the statement adds, an affinity between the militancy of hip-hop and the work of CUFA: they both seek “to stim- ulate the residents of favela communities to take action; to promote a popular revolution in Brazilian culture.”11
In June 2004 I attended some events organized by CUFA and its partner group Hutúz at the Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in the mid- dle of the city. These featured hip-hop bands from various countries of Latin America and took place in a theater during the middle of the day, rather than at night in areas of the so-called periphery. Such linkages between potentially transformative movements and financial or corporate institutions are part of what George Yúdice has called the “privatization of culture” in neoliberal Latin America, a trend that risks the adoption of “expedient” culture-based programs at the expense of real changes to the structural causes of inequality (Yúdice 1999, 2003). Despite such risks, these music-based movements can potentially draw increased atten- tion to the problem of the two Brazils among the general population, and they provide a grassroots community-centered space of solidarity for favela residents to debate problems of citizenship and representation, and to organize actions that seek to remedy such problems. For exam- ple, in 2005 CUFA received $60,000 in Ford Foundation funds to sup- port a series of workshops on race, gender, human rights, and film with
192 : Frederick Moehn
youths from the hip-hop movement in Rio as part of the organization’s Citizenship and Audiovisual Project.
One of the founding members and current treasurer of CUFA is rap artist Nega Gizza (Gisele Gomes de Souza). She was born in the favela of the Hope Park (Parque Esperança) in Rio de Janeiro. Her brother is the rapper MV Bill (Alex Pereira Barbosa). She and MV Bill contributed to the soundtrack for the film City of God (Cidade de Deus, 2002), based on Paulo Lins’s 1997 novel by the same name, which portrayed the lives of two youths growing up amidst brutal violence in that neighborhood. Also in 2002, Nega Gizza released her album In Humility (Na humildade), which presents a black female favela resident’s perspective on rap, race, class, and Brazilian citizenship (Fig. 1). It is a subject position she regards as alienated by the discourse of miscegenation, and deprived of the full complement of rights associated with modern citizenship in the West. The album begins with “Horror Film” (“Filme de Terror”), a sparse, sim- ple, minor key ostinato, a beat that stutters before settling into a groove, and periodic chordal interjections on violins that evoke the suspense- inducing music of a horror film soundtrack—for from Nega Gizza’s perspective, that is precisely what Brazil looks like. I excerpt from the lengthy lyrics:
Country of racial democracy, of the mulata for export, of natural beauty Brazil! Happy nation, a tropical country... Brazil, who condemns us to live like irrational animals Let’s pretend that it will pass, that it is natural!
The time of conformism is over. I don’t want war, I only want love! ... Change this horror film... We are born to die of hunger. We are born without being proud of our own name How can Sarney’s family try to convince me
Figure 1. Front and back covers of Nega Gizza’s 2002 CD Na humildade.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 193
How can ACM’s family think I can believe That I would find all this lovely and natural?12... They concentrate wealth, and they don’t think it’s obscene Oh Maranhão, land of blacks transformed into doormats Oh Salvador, land of blacks already subdued by the ropes of the hangman Uncross your Arms, follow in my footsteps The sound is rap, this is the beat... We are part of a people without future, of folks without culture, without pride The whites on the seaside, the blacks on the hillside The Indians suffocated against the wall. Police persecution is not normal... A horror film is what I see...Lock the gates of the castles... Treat us like diseased ones, just because we don’t have teeth I won’t die for Brazil.
The general framework in these lyrics remains that of two Brazils— the elite and the poor, or alternatively, the whites and the blacks. Race mixture is mentioned but with deep irony (the racial democracy, the mulata), although it is noteworthy that there is brief mention of Brazil’s “Indians,” consistent with the “three-race” mixture in the foundational myth of the Brazilian people. The temporal dimension is racialized: poor black Brazilians are people without a future, and this is due, Nega Gizza argues, to the normalization of social and racial stratification and violence within a conformist social order. “Let’s pretend that it will pass, that it is natural!” The poor live like starving, diseased animals (not citizens) whose teeth are falling out, hunted by the police. They lack “culture” anyway, so it is natural to view them as animals. In this view the problem that Brazilian identity has with both the future and the past is race. More specifically, it is the naturalized correlation between race and class in Brazil that impairs the teleology of modernization and development. Rather than coming from the future to learn about the past, as in the Lenine/Queiroga song, the present reality makes the future almost be- side the point for many. There is also a geographical dimension, pertain- ing especially to Rio de Janeiro, where the wealthy live near the prized beaches and the poor build their shacks on the steep slopes, which lack roads and services (the contrast between the asphalt and the hillside slums that Zuenir Ventura analyzed, 1994). As in the Lenine/Queiroga song, the body enters into the picture, but it is black, hungry, perse- cuted, and relegated to the favela.
Yet Nega Gizza’s “Horror Film” and Lenine’s and Queiroga’s “Under the Same Sky” do have something in common: a different Brazil is evoked through the musical rhythm (the “rhythm of a greater song” in the Lenine/Queiroga piece). “Uncross your arms, follow in my foot- steps,” Nega Gizza sings. “The sound is rap, this is the beat.” Lenine, however, uses the first person plural: “We come from the center and the
194 : Frederick Moehn
periphery; we come from rap and from the favela.” Lenine speaks for the national “we.” Nega Gizza, by contrast, speaks for the black and eco- nomically marginalized “we,” while her musical beat has little direct con- nection to grooves traditionally associated with poor blacks and mulatos in Brazil, such as samba. Rather, the musical connection is more Black Atlantic; it is transnational and diasporic. Her track “Release the Ani- mal” (“Larga o bicho”) further elaborates on her subject position qua citizen: “Black woman with the warring spirit/.../I’m not a mulata, I’m not a drug mule [mula], I’m a cannon/... /African descendent preserving my faith/. . . /My dialect is rap, a tough bone to chew.” Her co-rapper on the song, Yeda Hills (alternatively written as Ieda), adds, “I’m black in skin and mind, this makes me courageous, because I know that I’m a descendent of the fighting Zumbi13/.../I go on living one day after an- other, in accordance with my rhythmology [ritimologia]/.../My micro- phone is my weapon.” The track ends with the following: “It’s the sound of black my brother [som de preto meu nego], the sound of black.”
In sum, the perspective offered by Nega Gizza here is indeed “periph- eral” to the dominant national narratives of miscegenation and the cele- bration of contrast, mixture, and the coexistence of differences. Instead of celebrating difference Nega Gizza wishes to mobilize it in order even- tually to negate it — not through mixture, but through the leveling out of social inequalities. The hip-hop “sound of black” provides a more “mili- tant” and politicized rhythm for conjuring this audiotopic space than would, for example, traditional samba (although Brazilian hip-hop does sometimes mix in samba rhythms). Rap production in Brazil is highly varied and Nega Gizza cannot be taken as representative of the full breadth of this output. Certain São Paulo hip-hop artists, for example, de-emphasize race and blackness while highlighting violence and mar- ginality (see Pardue 2004). Yet as already demonstrated, violence and marginality correlate strongly with race in Brazil, and most rap artists tend not to celebrate miscegenation and the harmonious juxtaposition- ing of differences, as MPB artists like Lenine often do. My choice of Nega Gizza as a case study is motivated by her association with the United Favela Federation (or CUFA) as a kind of social movement or cit- izens’ action network that emphasizes a black subjectivity and ostensibly black beats. I would like now to contrast this eminently urban perspec- tive with the rural activism of the MST.
Music and the Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST)
The MST was conceived in 1984, the last year of military dictatorship in Brazil. It was in large part an outgrowth of the Pastoral Land Commis- sion (CPT), an organization founded by progressive Catholic Bishops in
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 195
1975. According to the MST Web site, less than 3 percent of the popula- tion owns two-thirds of Brazil’s arable land.14 The principal work of the MST is oriented around land redistribution, specifically peasant occupa- tions of underutilized but privately owned land, and activism aimed at the subsequent legalization of community ownership and agricultural production on such land. Legalization is sometimes made possible by petitioning the state to redistribute land in accordance with Article 184 of the 1988 constitution, which states that land not “carrying out its so- cial function” can be appropriated by the federal government.15 Accord- ing to the MST’s own statistics, more than 350,000 families have won land titles to over 20 million acres after MST land takeovers, while more than 160,000 families are in encampments throughout Brazil awaiting government recognition.16 It is the largest social movement in Latin America, and one of the most successful grassroots organizations in the world. Once a given territory is occupied, the MST establishes food and agricultural cooperatives, as well as literacy and other educational pro- grams. Not surprisingly, such conquests have often come at the cost of lives. The members of the MST have often been in violent conflict with both the landowners (or their private security forces) and the police. Be- tween 1984 and 2004, more than 1,000 people were killed as a result of land conflicts in Brazil, one of the most notorious being the Eldorado de Carajás massacre of 1997, in which nineteen unarmed peasants were killed by the military.
An important part of the movement’s activities is the mística, a utopian and millenary vision of the world, and also a ritual celebration held at the start of MST events. The mística ceremonies with which all MST events begin feature various art forms, including theater, dance, and, most importantly, music and poetry. The music is typically drawn from rural styles such as cantoria—a sort of ballad singing—but sympathetic MPB and hip-hop artists have also contributed to the musical activities of the movement. Interestingly, at these events both the red MST flag— which features an outline of the Brazilian nation as a reminder that land reform is a national problem—and the Brazilian flag are present, again suggesting an ambivalent and dual sense of citizenship. I want to high- light how the movement reaches out to and collaborates with varied sectors of the population in audiotopic musical recordings, addressing in particular the issues of poverty, land redistribution, and violence. Malcom McNee, for example, analyzed an MST project proposal enti- tled “Musical Formation and Training in the Camps and Settlements.” The proposal calls music “an important and efficient channel of pene- tration into the social sphere” (cited in McNee 2003, 99). It argues that “contagious melodies and rhythms take control of groups and reaffirm on a daily basis their message and their behavior, divulging their ideas and reaffirming their positions” (McNee 2003, 99).17
196 : Frederick Moehn
The MST released five CDs between 1997 and 2002 featuring mostly songs written by people associated with or supporters of the movement, and sometimes performed by pop musicians not necessarily directly in- volved with it. The cover art for the first CD, Art in Movement (Arte em movi- mento), features a dramatic photo by Sebastião Salgado of peasants at an encampment on the lands of the Cuiabá plantation as they celebrate— hoes raised, with one of the peasants playing a flute—the latifundio ex- propriation decree adopted on May 6, 1996, that allowed them to form the community of 2,800 families (Fig. 2). Pop musicians not directly associated with the MST performed several of the tracks on the CD. Samba/MPB star Beth Carvalho, for example, sings “Order and Progress” instead of Zé Pinto, the song’s MST composer. Rather than prioritizing acoustic instruments and limited electronic manipulation in the studio, as one might expect of a recording associated with rural, agricultural peasant life, this first MST release has a rather “commercial” sound, owing pri- marily to the use of synthesizer and electric bass. Commenting about this disc music professor and MST supporter Graciano Lorenzi wrote that the recorded releases of MST music “should not be aggressive” but should “conquer the sympathy and the support of the people that listen to it” (cited in McNee 2003, 100). That is to say, the recording was intended to reach a broad public beyond local MST settlements, consistent with the movement’s adept usage of the media and its extensive networking with other spheres of civil society—in this instance the world of MPB, a sphere of pop music with considerable national visibility, market share,
Figure 2. Front cover of MST 1997 CD Arte em movimento with peasants at Cuiabá plantation.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 197
and status. Chico Buarque, another major MPB artist who has supported the landless movement, released a four-song CD called Terra (Earth) in association with Sebastião Salgado’s book of photographs of Brazilian landless workers. Although ultimately the MST CDs did not see wide cir- culation, in the case of these recordings music was viewed as a “channel of communication with society and as a space to be occupied by the MST” (Lorenzi cited in McNee 2003, 100).
This view of music’s communicative potential and the suggestion that music itself is a space that can be occupied is precisely what is proposed by CUFA, by AfroReggae, and by Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil. It recalls Artur Nestrovski’s “we live daily in two countries”—where one of those countries is the “space” of music itself—but for middle-class professionals like Nestrovski, the idea remains largely metaphorical. For landless peasants, by contrast, the metaphor of the space of music is ur- gently connected to the struggle to occupy places, in this case land for agri- culture, and also fully to occupy the space of citizenship to the extent that legal protection from violence and social welfare protection from starvation and lack of income, education, or medicine, etc., is wanting. The recorded CD, in this context, takes on a performative role parallel to the use of music at live mística events. In entering into market and media circuits and establishing links with popular music artists and other sympathetic publics, the CD Art in Movement seeks to “conquer”— to use Lorenzi’s word—the national (and even international) public sphere in which citizenship is debated.
The “Anthem of the Landless Movement” (“Hino do Movimento Sem Terra”) from this same recording is a remarkable track, for although the lyrics to the anthem are by MST poet Ademar Bogo, the music is written by Marxist avant-garde art music composer Willy Corrêa de Oliveira, a participant in the Música Nova movement that included Rogério Duprat (equally known for his participation in that movement as he is in the Tropicália movement as arranger and producer) and others. The song, a march with trumpet, flute, and snare drum arrangement, features the choir of the University of São Paulo singing an angular minor key melody constructed around a forceful descending fifth. It ends with a resound- ing choral modulation to the parallel major key. The piece sounds more Kurt Weil and Bertold Brecht than rustic camp song. Here the musical space in between joins a simple anthem for agrarian reform with an urban musical vanguard: “With arms raised, let’s tell our story/Smothering our oppressors with strength/Let’s raise the colored [MST] flag/Let’s awaken this sleeping fatherland/Tomorrow belongs to the workers!” MPB musi- cian Chico César—whose pop music draws heavily on traditional styles from the Nordeste (the Northeast), an area rich in folklore and very much associated with both agriculture and inequality in the national imagi- nary, sings the track “Flowering” (“Floriô”) featuring the characteristically
198 : Frederick Moehn
Northeastern xote rhythm and lyrics by Zé Pinto: “The rice is in sheaves and the beans have blossomed/The corn is on the husk, and the heart is full of love./. . . /Raising our voices shouting for agrarian reform/For the struggle does not end with taking over the land/[It continues with] mak- ing schools, bringing comrades together/Creating cooperatives to in- crease [agricultural] production.”
The second MST CD, Songs That Embrace Dreams (Canções que abraçam sonhos, 2002) features songs from the First National Agrarian Reform Festival, which took place in Rio Grande do Sul in 1999. It has a much more acoustic production sound than the first recording. The beautiful “Migrants Procession” by Martin César Ramires Gonçalves and Pedro Munhóz, for example, is sung in the cantoria ballad style, with the tradi- tional steel-stringed double-course viola guitar used in this “country music”: “Brazil-land, Continent, Motherland of my people/Today I want to ask—/If your arms are so great/Why deny a space/To those who want to have a home/I cannot understand/How in this immense land/ It is still kill or die/For a piece of earth.”
The CD A Song for Peace from 2001 features a mixture of traditionally rural and more popular sounds, evidencing various sympathies and al- liances across genre, nation, region, and class. The track “Latin prayer” (“Oração latina”), for example, sounds similar to the nueva canción group Inti Illimani from Chile, with the use of the Andean cuatro (a small, four- stringed, double course, ukulele-like instrument) and an open-throated vocal style.18 The song “The stones will scream” (“As pedras gritarão”), by contrast, is a jazz-rock fusion. To give one final example, the track “Eldorado dos Carajás” is performed by a hip-hop group based in a favela in Belém, capital of the northern state of Pará, near where the Amazon River meets the Atlantic Ocean. The group, MBGC (for Manos da Baixada de Grosso Calibre, or Brothers of Large Caliber Way), tells the story of the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre on April 17, 1996, when about 1,200 landless workers blocked a road in protest of delays of a rel- atively small land redistribution that had been promised by the National Institute of Colonization and Land Reform (INCRA).19 Powerful local landowners, fearing further MST invasions, pressured the state to remove the protesters forcefully. Colonel Fábio Lopes, commander-in-chief of the military police in Pará, sent two heavily armed squadrons. Evidence sug- gests that the military police intended to use violence “to teach the MST a lesson they would never forget,” as one journalist at the scene reported (Branford and Rocha 2002, 139). This musical track recounts the event in detail at a lugubrious tempo and in a solemn voice: “Fourteen minutes of dense shooting. Thick lead...and bone/Amidst that tumult one heard crying and shouting from those attempting to flee./.../Desperate peo- ple begged for help/All victims of a brutal, violent, and bloody police
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 199
action/With summary executions, a tragedy comparable with those of Carandiru, Candelária, Vigário Geral, Corumbiara.”20
The last line of the song connects the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre to other notorious police killings that received national and interna- tional attention. On October 2, 1992, over 100 prisoners were killed by the police at the Carandiru prison in São Paulo after a riot broke out at the facility.21 On July 23, 1993, eight street children were murdered by policeman in front of the Candelária Church, in the center of Rio de Janeiro. Vigário Geral refers to the 1993 massacre in the Rio favela by the same name (the AfroReggae Cultural Group formed in response to this tragedy). At Santa Elina Ranch, in the Corumbiara municipality in the interior of Rondônia state, a violent confrontation between police and landless squatters resulted in the deaths of nine peasants and two policemen. Again, evidence suggested that the peasants were shot at close range in the back or in the head.22 This musical example from a favela- based hip-hop group sympathetic to but not directly associated with the MST shows music as a key horizontal link between widely different ac- tivist groups—one urban, emphasizing race and racism, privileging the rhythms and styles of hip-hop culture and combating the drug trade; the other rural, Marxist-oriented, and millenary, shunning any formal al- liances with the state, political parties, or international foundations, and tending to favor the sounds of caipira country music for its live mística events. Both, however, see music as an important force in reimagining Brazilian citizenship in response to institutionalized violence, as well as to the “violence of everyday life” (Scheper-Hughes 1992).
“The New Music of Brazil”? An MPB festival, the middle classes, and a cyberdebate
If the musical output of Nega Gizza in association with CUFA, and of musicians connected in some way to the MST, interrogates problems of citizenship and class as they pertain to social welfare, violence, and civil rights, what of those social sectors that enjoy relatively higher economic security, specifically populations considered middle class? The middle class in Brazil is typically described as persons earning more than about US $450 per month per family, and the sector tends to be further sub- divided into lower middle class ($450–$1,200); “middle middle class” ($1,200–$2,300); and upper middle class (above $2,300). It is a demo- graphic group that, “although with relatively little property, is character- ized by high and intermediary positions both in the social-occupational structure and in the distribution of income and wealth” (Pochmann et al. 2005, 16). As such, the middle class is understood as “possessing
200 : Frederick Moehn
recognized social status and authority and a superior level of consump- tion” (ibid.). Middle-class intellectuals, creative artists, and professionals represent an important national public for a CD like the MST’s Art in Movement; they constitute that sector the sympathy and support of which Professor Lorenzi said the recording should “conquer.” Although the deeply Marxist MST speaks and sings of radical social revolution and an imagined utopian future, in the audiotopic present the organization has carefully established significant links with sympathetic members of the middle classes, as have CUFA and AfroReggae.
Middle-class music makers often serve a mediating role, such as, for example, the professional musician Marcelo Alves who put together the Charanga percussion ensemble; or Dudu Marote, one of the producers of Nega Gizza’s recording Na humildade.23 Such mediations can have im- portant aesthetic consequences. One reviewer of Nega Gizza’s album wrote that her sound has a greater musical richness than her brother MV Bill, “not exactly for her style of rapping...but for knowing how to put herself in the hands of the right producers. Zégonz, Ganja Man, and Dudu Marote provide a deep musical foundation for Gizza to rap over. They managed to create a rarity: a disc of Brazilian hip-hop that balances the strength of the verses with the musical part; electronic interventions in the perfectly exact measure mixed with acoustic instruments, scratches, and changes in the musical ambience on each track” (Barbosa n.d.). “The right producers,” in this case, are taste brokers who make sure the CD meets certain aesthetic standards of balance and proportion— much in the same way, I imagine, Marcelo Bratke negotiated the rhyth- mic foundation to the Carnegie Hall concert discussed above.
The role of mediator may include using publicity clout to support causes agitating for social reform, such as when Chico Buarque releases tracks for the Terra project, or when Caetano Veloso offers his support to the AfroReggae cultural group, or when pop musician Fernanda Abreu crosses from the so-called South Zone of Rio (where many of the city’s middle- and upper-class residents live) to the North Zone (where Rio’s favela-based hip-hop communities are typically located) to appear at events with artists like Nega Gizza, AfroReggae, and MV Bill, as she often does. There exists also a network of intellectuals, professionals, and government officials who may act in a mediating role between the haves and have-nots or between the state and civil society, such as jour- nalist and author Zuenir Ventura, who wrote about the Vigário Geral favela (1994) and who appears in the movie Favela Rising, or certain NGO staff, or Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil.
Yet there is also a heightened sense of ambivalence amongst the mid- dle classes, as suggested by the statements from Maria Rita Kehl and Artur Nestrovski about “dual citizenship” cited above. Economist Waldir José de Quadros at the University of Campinas (Unicamp) fears that
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 201
the Brazilian middle class is angry. “It just hasn’t exploded yet,” he says, “because it is also confused. The forces that succeed in channeling this anger will find a great ally for its interests. The problem is that we see disillusionment with the Lula government, creating conditions for the right to strengthen its position” (Sugimoto 2004, 8). According to Quadros, the middle class accounted for 42.5 percent of the country’s total population in 1981. By 2003, that figure had dropped to 33.2 per- cent, and those who left the middle class moved down, of course, rather than up. Another study showed small increases in the income of the poorest sectors in recent years, but a tightening of the labor market for the middle class.24 Economist Márcio Pochmann found that the median income of middle-class workers fell 19.4 percent in the past ten years, while in the same period taxes increased 20 percent.25 Carlos Antonio Ribeiro Costa, a specialist on social mobility at the State University of Rio de Janeiro, says “the fight to stay in the middle class is tougher. In the 1970s middle-class children had 2000 times better chances to get a good job than a farmer’s child. Today the difference is one fourth that.”26
Singer-songwriter Max Gonzaga, from São Paulo, captured the anxi- eties of this social sector in his song “Middle Class” (“Classe Média”), which he presented in a televised song festival in 2005, and which I was able to see him perform at a smaller song festival in November 2006 in São Paulo (Fig. 3). The Festival Cultura—the New Music of Brazil (Festi- val Cultura—A Nova Música do Brasil) took place in the SESC Pinheiros theater in São Paulo city from August 31 to September 14, 2005. The event was a song contest recorded in front of a live audience in the tradition of the legendary festivals of the 1960s that launched the ca- reers of Chico Buarque, Caetano Veloso, and Gilberto Gil, among many other household names of MPB, and that also became the main forum for protest song (canção engagada) that paralleled the new song move- ment (nueva canción) in the rest of Latin America. The event, broadcast on the public television station TV Cultura, commemorated forty years since the first such festival. The project was to be “open to all the musi- cal tendencies and rhythms of the country,” and it sought to “present, without restrictions, the best of what exists of a Brazil of living and vi- brant colors and rhythms.”27
“Middle Class” made it to the semifinals and seemed to strike a chord among many viewers, listeners, and bloggers in Brazil, despite the fact that it was eliminated in that round. Musically, the song is firmly in the MPB mold: Gonzaga’s smooth and practiced low tenor voice, and the rangy, well-constructed, pop melody “conquer” the listener; the altered chords he finger-picks on his nylon-stringed classical guitar evoke jazzy bossa nova harmonies with tempered syncopations, as does the discrete accom- paniment played on synthesizer. An “MTV Acoustic” sound predominates, with bongos and other light percussion completing a sophisticated pop
202 : Frederick Moehn
Figure 3. Max Gonzaga performing at the November 2006 Caiubí Composer’s Festival in São Paulo.
texture, and judicious amounts of reverberation added to the PA mix. One of the organizers of the event, Solano Ribeiro, said of the stage sound, “We have opted for subtlety, to show acoustic music, music that is a little more elaborated in terms of instrumentation [as in the original song festivals].”28 “Subtlety,” “acoustic,” “elaborated instrumentation”— these terms describe a fairly restrained and nostalgic aesthetic that re- calls the original song festivals of the 1960s, where electric guitars, for example, were at first notoriously rejected by the public. Notwithstand- ing, the lyrics to Max Gonzaga’s “Middle Class” (“classe Média”) frankly captured the interrelationships between consumption, violence, and the media from a perspective that Gonzaga suggests is shared by a significant portion of the Brazilian middle classes today:
I’m middle class, a parrot of every news program I believe in the impartiality of the weekly magazine I’m middle class, I buy clothes and gas with a credit card I can’t stand buses, I travel in my car that I bought with a loan
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 203
All I do is pay taxes, I’m always at the limit of my check overdraft... But I’m not concerned if the drug trafficker is the one who controls the favela Nor am I if there’s a flood or people are dying in Itaquera [a low income neighborhood in the East Zone of São Paulo city] I wish the entire periphery would explode But I am indignant with the state when I am inconvenienced By the starving beggar extending his hand, the windshield washer soaping my window... And if the assault is in Moema [an upper-middle-class neighborhood of São Paulo city] Or the assassination is in Jardins, and the executive’s daughter is raped to death Then the media show up. You begin to think about the death penalty again Or about reducing the age of majority And I who am well-informed agree and join a demonstration While the readership of the newspaper increases... Disasters only interest me when they knock at my door Because it’s easier to condemn someone already condemned to death
The contrast between the “smooth jazz” acoustic sound of this song and its primarily middle-class live performance setting on the one hand, and the biting irony of its lyrics on the other, disrupt the space in between that Marcelo Bratke described as a celebratory mixture of high and low in Carnegie Hall, or that Maria Rita Kehl describes as an “other” Brazil to which everyone has the right to exile. This Brazil in the middle is troubled by the two Brazils on either side of it: it is the coexistence of the grossly overprivileged and the embarrassingly impoverished that inhibit the full realization of a modern middle-class cosmo-consumer conscious- ness and way of life. “Middle Class” also subtly interrogates the premises of the festival itself: while the latter celebrated the great MPB artists of the 1960s—whom the military dictatorship censored or even forced into exile—Gonzaga sang about joining a demonstration in favor of the death penalty. The singer applied an extra-syrupy sincerity to his vocal timbre on this line, making it sound especially ironic. The clever usage of the first person singular—making it seem as if the singer himself has expe- rienced the emotions he cynically narrates—heightens the sense of a conflicted and ambivalent self-consciousness about being stuck between violence and consumption, between backwardness and development.
An MPEG video recording of Gonzaga’s performance of the song circulated through cyberspace and generated mixed reactions (it is now on Youtube.com). Several bloggers felt that Gonzaga captured an un- comfortable truth: “This song really says it all—Applause!” commented one; “A really good song,” wrote another, “the lyrics speak for them- selves.”29 Another well-educated blogger (he presented his commentary
204 : Frederick Moehn
as a quasi-Socratic discussion in which he cited Aristotle) observed that “the average middle-class type...can be summarized with the phrase ‘for the masses, charity or the police.’”30 On the other hand, one reporter wrote that this kind of pop music and criticism was simply out of step with the sound of today, which is better represented by rap music: “The sound [of rap] is electronic, accelerated, and “rhythmed” [ritmado] to the tempo of the big city, and the same for the lyrics, the concrete poetry of a reality marked by inequality. ...Rap and the whole hip-hop movement are not represented at the Festival Cultura.”31
Yet another blogger appreciated Gonzaga’s talent but was incensed by the lyrics and provided an important counterperspective on the Brazil- ian middle class, meriting a lengthy quotation:
The guy has creativity, but...the middle class in this country is being squeezed year after year and its ability to generate income and consump- tion has been reduced to an extent never before seen here. Taxes, interest rates, impunity in the government, the lack of an efficient health-care sys- tem, excessive embezzlements, the manipulations of the media, the absurd protectionism of the worker’s statutes [leis trabalhistas], and so forth, only managed to destroy the vitality of those who still held out any hope for this country (namely, the middle class). How else can the middle class... mobilize if not through public demonstrations and constant appeals for justice? ...Please, Mr. Gonzaga, be more attentive to the possibility that you might offend one who gives his blood for this land, ...who works, sometimes 12 to 14 hrs a day to pay for decent schooling for his children (as if he had not already paid for this in taxes), to stay employed despite being over 40, etc. Have more respect for those who have lost someone (middle class or not) to the violence so in vogue these days (what hap- pened to the security that we pay for with our taxes?). I myself had the sad luck to have to bury the daughter of a friend of mine who was a victim of rape and assassination.32
Clearly this blogger was unable to distance himself enough from the topic to appreciate Gonzaga’s irony and hence understandably seems to have missed the point of the song. His are important concerns that give a broader picture of the contexts of inequality into which music, vio- lence, social movements, and public policy are thrust in Brazil. I heard similar concerns during a visit to Mosh recording studios in São Paulo in 2006. The composer/arranger/producer Marco Pontes Caixote, for example, complained to me of rising taxes on the middle class, while he has to turn to private schooling to assure a good education for his chil- dren, and to private health care, while protection against violence re- mains a persistent concern.
Max Gonzaga’s song “Middle Class” is significant, therefore, not be- cause it is harnessed to a social movement seeking greater equality and basic citizens’ rights, but because it speaks to a fundamental problem
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 205
blocking the transformation of civil society in Brazil: on the one hand, many in the middle classes see themselves as living in a different coun- try from the rural farmworker or from “the periphery”—which some hope would just “explode”; on the other, social programs seeking to ele- vate the poor into the middle sectors are not supported by a sufficient amount of economic growth, and high taxation threatens the middle- class consumer-citizen lifestyle. This musical example is also significant for the aesthetic and media context in which it was presented. Not pe- ripheral, or marginal, MPB and the Festival Cultura are mainstream, and the sound of Gonzaga’s song is the kind of smooth pop that perhaps Pro- fessor Lorenzi sought for the first MST album in order to conquer the middle-class public. Yet contemporary singer-songwriters like Gonzaga (or Lenine and Lula Queiroga), who have been influenced by the great festival musicians of the 1960s and 70s (Chico Buarque, Gal Costa, Gilberto Gil, Caetano Veloso, Tom Zé, Os Mutantes, among others), no longer have a dictatorship to criticize, or a countercultural leftist student audience. Instead, they are stuck between violence and the rising cost of a secure, stable middle-class lifestyle, and between consumption and tax- ation. Chico Buarque himself ruffled a few feathers in a recent interview for the newspaper Folha de São Paulo when he made the following obser- vations: “The fear of violence in the middle class turns into a rejection not only of the so-called marginal individual, but of the poor in general, of the guy who has an old car, of the mulato, the one who is poorly dressed. To be reactionary became the popular tone to take” (quoted in Silva 2006). Max Gonzaga’s “Middle Class” is unusual in its destabilizing of the audiotopic “refuge” of MPB, described by Maria Rita Kehl as a coun- try to which one has the right to exile and given sonic form in Lenine’s and Queiroga’s “Under the Same Sky.” It reveals that audiotopia to be fragile, threatened especially by rising violence and persistent social in- equality. In the following section I briefly explore how the state has en- gaged the problems of citizenship, violence, social class, and the nation.
MinC: The State massaging the national cultural body
“Either Brazil does away with violence, or violence will do away with Brazil,” declared Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil at his inaugural ad- dress in Brasília on January 2, 2003. “We must complete the construc- tion of this nation, include the excluded groups, reduce the inequalities that torment us.” He continued:
Otherwise we will not be able to keep sending a message to the world of a nation which set the highest ideal that a collectivity can possibly set: the ideal of living side by side in tolerance, an ideal in which a wide array of beings and languages coexist amid differences and even contradictions.
206 : Frederick Moehn
The role of culture in this process...is not merely tactical or strategic—it is central: to objectively contribute to overcoming social inequalities, all the while focusing on the full realization of human potentials. (Gil 2003a, 42)
As might be expected of the state, questions of violence, inequality, differ- ence, and cultural expression are of critical importance in the manage- ment of national identity, development, and Brazil’s image in the global community. The Ministry of Culture (MinC) states that its activities are based on three interwoven dimensions: “culture as a symbol factory, cul- ture as a right and as citizenship, and culture as part of the economy” (Gil 2003b, 8). It is noteworthy that Gil speaks of completing the construction of the nation, consistent both with development-speak and with mod- ernist Brazilian identity discourse wherein, as mentioned above, the process of cultural mixture is understood as central and also incomplete.
Gilberto Gil’s remarkable career took off with his participation in the Tropicália movement of the late 1960s. When Lula appointed Gil minis- ter of culture late in 2002 the international press was abuzz. A world music star once imprisoned and exiled by the military and now directing the cultural policy of the first socialist government in this “developing” country thought to be the world’s eighth largest economy is newsworthy. In his role as minister Gil has traveled widely to publicize his “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizenship” program. This so- phisticated and ambitious cultural policy seeks as its partners “cultural agents, artists, teachers, and social activists who not only see culture as artistic languages [sic], but [who] also realize that it shapes rights, behav- iors, and economics” (Ferreira 2003, 11). It emphasizes working with al- ready existing social actors, organizations, and mechanisms, and it cites critical geographer Milton Santos, who has argued that utopia should be founded on “what already exists as an embryo, which thus holds the po- tential of being realized” (as paraphrased in Ferreira 2003, 11), recalling Josh Kun’s use of the concept of heterotopia. The program is consistent with an administration that has a social agenda but that is also respon- sive to the market and to the global economic and political landscape. In the words of the MinC’s executive secretary Juca Ferreira, it is intended to encourage and enable “a large scale convergence of low-income groups with that other portion of society that has kept its distance due to a lack of security...and that today enjoys greater access to the uni- versity, services, and cultural goods” (Ferreira 2003, 11). The minister seeks to plan a Brazil, he says, that will be integrated by the circulation of merchandise and values, by symbolic production, by the transit of popular culture through mass markets, and by stimulating a creative di- alogue between local and foreign cultures. Through spurring “real and human exchanges between Brazilian people,” the program will pave the way, Secretary Ferreira says, “to drawing together the various Brazils” (Ferreira 2003, 11).
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 207
Here I will only make brief mention of the Culture Points part of this program. These are spaces that should stimulate dialogue between civil society and the state following, in part, Jürgen Habermas’s conception of the public sphere (1989 [1962]), and “bring together key players to link up and drive community-based actions” (Gil 2003a, 42). Gil de- scribes the culture points as “anthropological do-ins” that massage “vital points that have been momentarily left aside or dormant in the coun- try’s cultural body” (2003a, 42). Financial support, computer and other digital equipment, free open-source software to aid in producing music, video, etc., are among the items provided through the program to help develop existing grassroots and other cultural agents and organizations. The culture points should also be connected with each other, especially via the Internet, suggesting an incorporation of the latest technologies of communication into a long-standing modernist (and perhaps origi- nally positivist) corporeal trope of the nation—that is, the country’s “cultural body.” Thus far, the monitoring of the initiative is incipient; the MinC’s own Web site, moreover, provides little information about spe- cific culture points.
One already existing community-based and music-centered organiza- tion that is participating in the program is the Organized Brazilian Hip Hop Movement (MHHOB) which, according to Lamartine Silva, one of the movement’s coordinators, has a presence in sixteen different states. Silva reports that the public programs of digital inclusion, part of the Ministry’s plan, “give peripheral youths access to other technologies be- sides weapons” (quoted in Pimentel 2005a). Silva is responsible for a cul- ture point in São Luís do Maranhão in the Northeast. He describes what he sees as a new kind of politics that echo the emerging participatory publics already pioneered by Worker’s Party municipal governments (see, e.g., Avritzer 2002): “Until today, in order to do anything at all with the federal government in the sphere of culture, you had to pass through the state government. These days, I was surprised to find a former sec- retary of culture from Maranhão state seeking me out to borrow my Cul- ture Point proposal. ...Previously the guy wouldn’t even talk to me” (Pimentel 2005a).
The Piaui Hip Hop Association (Associação Piauiense de Hip Hop), also part of the MHHOB, is another example of a culture point estab- lished where a grassroots organization had already shown initiative. The center began to take shape in an old building belonging to the Secretary of Education of the state government but abandoned for ten years. Youths from the hip-hop movement occupied the building until they could get official permission to stay there. Rap and other music groups use the re- hearsal space and recording studio at the center. The Bank of Brazil promised forty recycled computers. The Ministry of Education intends to provide satellite Internet connection. Also supporting the site are the
208 : Frederick Moehn
U.S.-based Kellogg Foundation, the NGO FASE (Federation of Social and Educational Assistance Organizations, which is itself supported by the Rio de Janeiro–based activist musical group O Rappa), and the students of a local school who are associated with the international group SIFE (Students in Free Enterprise). The Ministry of Labor, which is working jointly with the MinC on the culture points project, has reportedly pro- vided eighty-five work stipends for youths that the organization helps. The French NGO Acajuyê also provides materials and has sponsored exchange programs, bringing Brazilian youths to France (Pimentel 2005b).
This list of positive dialogues traversing various sectors of civil society is, I would note, reported on the Ministry of Culture’s own Web site. Thus far little public critique has emerged of the culture points program (the comments I have heard in casual conversations with Brazilian musicians are skeptical). One complaint I found pertains to delays of several months in the transfer of the promised stipends to certain MHHOB culture points. According to Secretary Célio Turino of the MinC, it is a bureau- cratic delay stemming from the fact that the stipends actually come from the Ministry of Labor, and the two ministries are working toward sort- ing it out.33 A blogger on the official Culture Points Weblog, “Conversê,” also noted that someone from the Pensarte cultural think tank in São Paulo described the culture points as “weak, without content, organized by people of low cultural level” (a derisive way of referring to Brazilians who have little formal education), and “just for show” (pra inglês ver).”34 The jury is still out, then, on how well the culture points massage the public sphere, and what kind of effect the program will have on citizen- ship in Brazil, especially now that Lula has won reelection.
Conclusions: The identity work of cosmopolitical citizenship
I have sought to present a set of examples from different perspectives in which discourses about music as well as musical practices are understood as traversing a “space” in between radically different Brazils, one that is characterized in part by a disjuncture between postdictatorship democ- ratization processes and the unequal realization of the civil and social components of citizenship in the face of durable forces of inequality and rising violence. I have tried also to explore on a limited scale how spe- cific sounds are taken to represent different Brazils, and how “rhythm” and drumming have a privileged place in certain re-imaginings of citi- zenship. Detailed ethnographic research and musical analysis can illu- minate more fully the relationships between discourses and musical practices in a given setting, but my aim here has been to highlight, on the one hand, how central music is to discussions of themes and problems
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 209
that bear on citizenship and social class in a sort of audiotopic space, and, on the other, to emphasize how ambiguous and unstable this space is.
Some of the recent literature on so-called cultural citizenship under- stands rights associated with cultural practices and identity as an impor- tant fourth component not envisioned by Thomas H. Marshall. This literature tends to focus on the recognition of alternative or oppressed social identities within a polity, and in many ways it parallels the rise of theories of multiculturalism.35 It emerged in a context in which scholars were arguing that the complexity of postindustrial society rendered class divisions less important than identity politics. The new social movements that organized around issues like the environment, gay rights, or democ- ratization were also interpreted as displacing class-based mobilization. In the cases explored here, however, questions of collective identity and cultural expression are very much about “citizenship and social class,” to evoke Marshall. The examples of CUFA and the MST suggest that it is not so much a question of whether class or identity (as we explored it through music) is more important in new social movements; rather, we see new ways in which class is tied to other aspects of the group experi- ence of citizenship, such as race, place, gender, violence, aesthetic pref- erences, and development. Max Gonzaga’s song “Middle Class” shows an alternative class perspective on some of the same problems that preoc- cupy Nega Gizza of CUFA, or Zé Pinto of the MST. However, that per- spective does not represent a social movement identity—at least not yet. It has the potential, perhaps, to become a “post-citizenship movement” in which participants who already enjoy most or all of the normal rights of citizens have established channels for mobilizing and putting pressure on political decision makers (Jasper 1997). Some, like economist Waldir Quadros, fear that extreme conservative forces could exploit such poten- tial. It seems vitally important, therefore, to play close attention to how relationships between culture, identity, and citizenship change inflections across class lines, rather than seeing these as distinct realms of experi- ence and practice. Moreover, as an analytical category “class” seems most often to be evoked in the Latin American context in association with the labor or subaltern sectors. Relatively few studies take the cultural expres- sions and preoccupations of the Latin American middle class—that “rather gelatinous and opaque sector,” as Altamiro Borges refers to it (2006)—as their object.
The MinC’s Culture Points initiative demonstrates, on the other hand, that state policies may traffic in some of the same discursive currency permeating the identity politics of social movements, pop music, or even of a disillusioned middle class. Francesca Polletta and James M. Jasper observe that new social movement scholars have inadvertently turned collective identity into “a kind of residual category” that describes what happens “outside structures, outside the state, outside rational action”
210 : Frederick Moehn
(2001, 285). Research on identity and social movements, they argue, should allow “for a number of different relationships between cultural and discursive practices on the one hand, and legal, political, economic, and social structures on the other” (285). The collection of examples I briefly explored here support Polletta and Jasper’s argument that the analytical challenge is to “identify the circumstances in which different relations between interest and identity, strategy and identity, and politics and identity operate, circumstances that include cultural processes as well as structural ones” (285).
Engin Isin and Patricia Wood offer a useful framework for theorizing the role that culture and identity play in contemporary conceptualiza- tions of citizenship by viewing the latter as both a bundle of rights and duties (civil, political, and social), as well as a set of practices (cultural, symbolic, and economic) that define an individual’s membership in a polity (1999, 4). Citizenship is thus not simply a legal or entirely a soci- ological concept, but a relationship between the two, a relationship be- tween status and practice (4). Music, in the cases described above, can be seen as a set of cultural, symbolic, and economic practices that engage, negotiate, and interrogate this relationship and the attendant questions of status. Viewed thus, the notion of cultural citizenship becomes more than simply about rights to produce and consume symbolic goods and services; it refers to the identity work required of “active producers of meaning and representation and knowledgeable consumers under ad- vanced capitalism” (Isin and Wood 1999, 152).
I began this essay with the two Brazils in Carnegie Hall, New York, and throughout I have employed Josh Kun’s concept of audiotopias, a neologism he coined in reference to music and the politics of difference in the United States. To close I want to bring my native country back into the discussion as a nation where social stratification is on the rise, and which has its own dynamics of violence. Economist Paul Krugman, for example, reports that the gap between the rich and the middle class in the United States is “as wide now as it was in the 1920s, when the po- litical coalition that would eventually become the New Deal was taking shape” (2007). In his January 2003 inaugural address Minister Gil asked what message Brazil can send to the world in a time when “fierce dis- courses and banners of war are being raised across the globe” (2003a, 43). This was eight months before the Brazilian diplomat Sergio Vieira de Mello, the UN Special Representative in Iraq, was killed in the Canal Hotel bombing in Baghdad on August 19, 2003.
Four years later, my government is preparing for a surge in troops in Baghdad, where today, January 16, seventy people were killed outside a university in so-called sectarian violence. In Los Angeles, on the same day, members of a Latino gang were, police alleged, “looking for a black
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 211
person, any black person, to shoot”; they found 14-year-old Cheryl Green chatting with friends and shot her dead (Archibold 2006). Can Brazil, a country also struggling with problems of violence and inequal- ity, set a global example of “opposites living side by side,” in Gil’s words, of the tolerance of differences? That is obviously not a question I can answer, but posing it is important to the urgent task of bringing this dis- cussion into a larger frame of reference where musical audiotopias in- tersect with global dynamics of difference, identity, class, violence, and civil society.
Acknowledgments
I presented earlier versions of the essay at the 2004 Society for Ethnomu- sicology annual conference; at Stony Brook Manhattan’s 2005 Inequali- ties Workshop; and at Princeton University’s Program in Latin American Studies in 2005. I thank my interlocutors on these occasions as well as the anonymous reviewers of the essay for their feedback. Thanks are also due to Cláudio Gonçalves Couto, Albert Fishlow, Charles Kirschbaum, Eric Herschberg, Jason Stanyek, and David Treece for their readings. I am also grateful to Nino Chapa Preta and Nega Gizza of CUFA, Max Gonzaga, and Lenine, among others in Brazil, for their help in this re- search. Any shortcomings herein are entirely my own responsibility.
Notes
1. From Lenine’s and Lula Queiroga’s song “Sob o mesmo céu,” dis- cussed below.
2. One corporate foundation called BRASIS (the Portuguese plural for Brazil), for example, states as its aim “to insert the greatest number of Brazilians into the map of citizenship, reducing the distances be- tween the different social realities which continue to constitute many Brazils within our country.” “Novos Brasis,” Insituto Telemar (http:// www.institutotelemar.org.br/novosbrasisresultado.asp), accessed Oc- tober 4, 2004.
3. The idea of the “space in between” is originally Silviano Santiago’s (2001 [1973]), although his meaning is somewhat different as it fo- cuses on the postcolonial problem of imitation versus originality and related dynamics as they play out in Latin American literature and culture. Both Santiago’s usage, however, and the space in between the two Brazils I am describing here are intertwined with modernist ideologies of the nation and development.
212 : Frederick Moehn
4.	Although	the	Old	Republic	(1889 – 1930)	granted	citizenship	only	to the very elite, under populist dictator Getúlio Vargas (1930–1945) the social component of citizenship was greatly expanded. Yet this was done in a highly controlled, statist, and corporatist top-down manner, and precisely during a period when political and civil rights were reduced. Political rights were expanded after 1945 and voting rights in fact saw their greatest expansion under the military dicta- torships of the 60s and 70s, when civil rights were heavily curtailed and elections and political parties highly controlled. Finally, today, with democracy seemingly firmly in place, many civil rights—which formed the foundation of Marshall’s sequence—remain inaccessi- ble to the majority of the population (Carvalho 2001, 219–20).
5. Sources:InstitutodePesquisaEconômicaAplicada(IPEA);Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE); World Bank; and U.S. Census Bureau (2005 gini for the United States is estimated). Class in Brazil is typically categorized in five gradients (sometimes labeled A through E). Economist Waldir Quadros, for example, delineates the following income levels: upper middle class (family income above R$ 5,000 [~US$2,300]), “middle middle class” (R$2,500 to R$5,000 [~$1,200–$2,300]) and lower middle class (R$1,000 to R$2,500 [~$450–$1,200]). Below these are the working class (family income from R$500 to R$1,000 [~$230–$450]), “the poor” (less than R$500 [~$230]) and “the indigent” (Sugimoto 2004).
6. See Lago 2002 in this journal for a detailed analysis of the Brazilian pieces that Milhaud draws upon in his Le Boeuf sur le Toit, composed in 1919.
7. TheRhythmicUprisingdocumentaryprojectiscoordinatedbyAmer- ican Benjamin Watkins. It highlights four performing arts groups, of which one is a female drum troupe, one is a capoeira group, another is a children’s circus, and the last is a youth theater group. The project Web site is http://www.rhythmicuprising.org. Rhythm of Hope was founded by American Phillip Wagner, a former IT pro- fessional who is also associated with Benjamin Watkins’ Rhythmic Uprising project. http://www.rhythmofhope.org.
8. The “listing” of seemingly incongruous aspects of national life is a fairly common practice in MPB (música popular brasileira) song lyrics. A classic example from the Tropicália era would be “Geleia Geral” (“General Jelly,” 1968) by Gilberto Gil.
9. By no means do I mean to draw a political parallel between the Vargas era and the Lula administration, or even between Barroso and Lenine/Quiroga. Lenine’s music, for example, is not particu- larly nationalist (although it does often celebrate mixture, miscegena- tion, and cultural heterogeneity).
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 213
10. Central Única das Favelas could also be translated as “United Favela Center.” I have chosen “Federation” because it more closely matches the nature of the organization, whose name was perhaps inspired by the United Labor Federation (Central Única dos Trabalhadores, or CUT).
11. CentralÚnicadasFavelas(CUFA)homepage(http://www.cufa.com .br/oquee.asp#), accessed October 15, 2005.
12. José Sarney from the state of Maranhão, was the first vice president of Brazil after redemocratization in 1985, immediately assuming the position of president when Tancredo Neves died before taking office. Sarney, who had been associated with the military-controlled political party ARENA, attempted but ultimately failed to control inflation with his Cruzado Plan. More recently he has been a senator. Antônio Carlos Magalhães, known as ACM, was also associated with the mili- tary dictatorship and was behind the 1964 coup d’état. He was a three- term governor of the state of Bahia, and a two-term federal senator; a very powerful politician widely considered to be entrenched in cli- entilist circles of money and power, but who also enjoyed popularity in his home state as a charismatic leader. Thousands attended ACM’s funeral in Bahia in July 2007.
13. Zumbi was an African-Brazilian born on the runaway slave colony (quilombo) Palmares in the middle of the seventeenth century and who led the colony in battle against the colonial forces. It took years for the Brazilian army to destroy Palmares in 1694. Zumbi was be- headed in 1695 and is today a national icon of the struggle of blacks in Brazil.
14. MST English Web site, main page (http://www.mstbrazil.org/index .html), accessed October 28, 2004.
15. In practice, the ambiguity of this constitutional article has often al- lowed landowners to interpret it to their own benefit (see Branford and Rocha 2002, 59).
16. “1984–2004: MST 20 Anos de Lutas, Conquistas e Dignidade!” MST Web Site, June 24, 2004 (http://www.mst.org.br/historico/historia .htm), accessed October 20, 2004.
17. Professor Else Vieira’s Landless Voices Web-based archive focused on the MST is a truly impressive research project and resource (http:// www.landless-voices.org). I am grateful to her and Malcolm McNee for sharing their work with me.
18. This sonic reference to the nueva canción genre may also evidence a renewed burgeoning of pan-Latin American social awareness spurred in part by post-neoliberal governments in the region such as that of Hugo Chavez in Venezuela. Chavez supported the Rio de Janeiro samba school Vila Isabel in 2006 with their theme, “Soy loco por ti
214 : Frederick Moehn
América,” which ended up taking the winning prize in Carnival, al- though not without controversy. (Thanks to Jason Stanyek for point- ing this out to me.)
19. A baixada is a lowland, hollow, or slope, but I translated it here as “way” to communicate the sense of a dangerous neighborhood, or passage.
20. Although 127 military police and nineteen higher-ranking officers went on trial in June 2002, none of the police involved in the mas- sacre has been imprisoned. (see Amnesty International Press Release: “Brazil: The Eldorado dos Carajás massacre 10 years on,” April 18, 2006).
21. Dr. Drauzio Varella’s book Estação Carandiru (1999) described his experience as a physician who made regular visits to the prison. The 2004 film Carandiru was a vivid dramatization of this book and the massacre.
22. See “Brazil: Corumbiara and Eldorado de Carajás: Rural violence, police brutality and impunity,” January 1, 1998, http://web.amnesty .org/library/index/ENGAMR190011998, accessed June 13, 2006.
23. Marote, from São Paulo, was also one of the producers of the first Brazilian hip-hop album, Hip Hop Cultura de Rua, (Hip Hop Street Culture, 1988).
24. From the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). 25. “Classe média no sufoco” (Revista Época–Edição 395–14/12/2005). 26. Ibid.Notethattheauthorscitedhereusethesingular“middleclass,”
while I have been using the plural “middle classes” in most instances. For a discussion of the two options as they pertain to analysis see O’Dougherty 2002, 9.
27. Festival announcement, “A Nova Música do Brasil–TV Cultura,” at http://www.brasilcultura.com.br/conteudo.php?menu=85&id=42 &sub=458, accessed June 16, 2006.
28. Revista e no. 101, “Música,” http://www.sescsp.org.br/sesc/revistas/ revistas_link.cfm?Edicao_Id=227&Artigo_ID=3540&IDCategoria =3864&reftype=2, accessed June 17, 2006.
29. Bloggers “StRaNgE,” Nov. 14, 2005, and “alltrillian,” Nov. 17, 2005, respectively, on http://www.radarpop.com.br.
30. Ricardo Antônio Lucas Camargo, January 16, 2006, on http:// tuliovianna.org.
31. Ludmila Ribeiro, “Nem verso, nem prosa: Críticas rasas e pouca poesia na 3a eliminatória do Festival Cultura,” http://www.jornalismo cultural.com.br/musica/cultura3.htm. As this reporter went on to note, rap was, in fact, represented at the festival, but only with the special guest Thaíde who stood out as representatitve of hip-hop “and a whole generation of young musicians also absent from the festival. ...He reinforced the nostalgia that hovers over this festival
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 215
of 2005, really searching for a bygone era that will never return, rap- ping the classic protest songs of the [19]60s and 70s, ‘Roda Viva’ and ‘Caminhando,’ [but] with the liberty for much more up-to-date extemporizing.”
32. Blogger “Abrão,” January 18, 2006, on http://www.radarpop.com.br. 33. “A cultura vive do que tece.” Revista A Rede, May 15, 2006. 34. Blogger ricardo.ruiz, “Esses pontos de cultura são fracos,” referring
to an interview with Maria Stella Leite of the Pensarte Institute that he read in the Viração Magazine. Blog posted on http://converse.org .br/, June 26, 2006.
35. In the cultural citizenship literature it remains unclear what duties would correspond to identity rights. (see, e.g., Miller 2001; Ong 1996; Pakulski 1997; Rosaldo 1999; Stevenson 2003; and Turner 2001) Theoretical efforts to work around this issue have been awkward because there is a fundamental tension between communalist and universalist conceptions of citizenship on the one hand, and the particularist nature of identity rights on the other.
Bibliographic References
Andrade, Mário de 1962 [1928]	Ensaio sobre a música brasileira. São Paulo: Martins
Editora. Archibold, Randal C.
2007	“Racial Hate Feeds a Gang War’s Senseless Killing.” New York Times, January 17.
Avritzer, Leonardo 2002	Democracy and the Public Space in Latin America. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. Barbosa, Marco Antônio
n.d.	Review of Nega Gizza’s CD Na humildade. Clique music Web site: http://cliquemusic.uol.com.br/artistas/artistas .asp?Status=DISCO&Nu_Disco=10414
Borges, Altamiro 2006	“As oscilações da classe média.” Adital: Notícias da América
Latina e Caribe, May 29. http://www.adital.com.br/site/
noticia.asp?lang=PT&cod=22744, accessed June 23, 2006. Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha
2002	Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Caldeira, Teresa P. R., and James Holston 1999	“Democracy and Violence in Brazil.” Comparative Study of
Society and History 41 (4): 691–729.
216 : Frederick Moehn
Carvalho, José Murilo de 2001	Cidadania no Brasil: O longo caminho. Río de Janeiro: Civi-
lizaão Brasileira. “Classe média no sufoco” Revista Época Edição 395, Decem- ber 14, 2005.
Cunha, Euclides da 1944 [1902]	Rebellion in The Backlands. Translated and with an
Introduction by Samuel Putnam. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. DaMatta, Roberto A.
1995 [1978]	For an Anthropology of the Brazilian Tradition; or “A Virtude está no Meio.” In The Brazilian Puzzle: Culture on the Borderlands of the Western World, edited by D. J. Hess and R. A. DaMatta, 270–91. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ferreira, Juca 2003	Opportunities to Voice, to Communicate, and to Live. In
“Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizen- ship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural policy press release, pp. 10–11.
Gil, Gilberto 2003a	Experimentation,	Memor y,	and	Invention	(Inaugural	Ad-
dress delivered by Minister Gilberto Gil, January 2, 2003). In “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citi- zenship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural policy press release, pp. 40–43.
2003b What Happens When You Set a Bird Free? In “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizenship Pro- gram,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employ- ment cultural policy press release, pp. 8–9.
Habermas, Jürgen 1989 [1962]	The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An
Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society. Boston: MIT Press. Isin, Engin and Patricia Wood
1999	Citizenship and Identity. Thousand Oaks: Sage. Jasper, James M.
1997	The Art of Moral Protest: Culture, Biography, and Creativity in Social Movements. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
Kehl, Maria Rita 2002	Chico Buarque. In Música Popular Brasileira Hoje, edited by
Artur Nestrovski, 60–62. São Paulo: Publifolha.
Kun, Josh 2005	Audiotopia: Music, Race, and America. Los Angeles: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 217
Krugman, Paul 2007	“Distract and Disenfranchise.” New York Times, April 2.
Lago, Manoel Aranha Correa do 2002	“Brazilian Sources in Milhaud’s Le Boeuf sur le Toit: A Dis-
cussion and a Musical Analysis.” Latin American Music Re-
view 23 (1): 1–59. Marshall, Thomas H.
“Citizenship and Social Class.” In Class, Citizenship, and So- cial Development. By T. H. Marshall, with an Introduction by S. M. Lipset, 65–122. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
McNee, Malcolm 2003	The Arts in Movement: Cultural Politics and Production
in Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST). Ph.D. diss., University of Minnesota.
Miller, Toby 2001	“Introducing. . .Cultural Citizenship.” Social Text 19 (4): 1– 5.
Nestrovski, Artur, ed. 2002	Música Popular Brasileira Hoje. São Paulo: Publifolha.
O’Dougherty, Maureen 2002	Consumption Intensified: The Politics of Middle-Class Daily Life
in Brazil. Durham: Duke University Press.
Ong, Aihwa 1996	“Cultural Citizenship as Subject-Making: Immigrants Ne-
gotiate Racial and Cultural Boundaries and United States.” Current Anthropology 37 (5): 737–62.
Pakulski, Jan 1997	“Cultural Citizenship.” Citizenship Studies 1 (1): 73–86.
Pardue, Derek 2004	“Putting Mano to Music: The Mediation of Race in Brazil-
ian Rap.” Ethnomusicology Forum 13 (2): 253–86. Pimentel, Spensy
2005	“Cultura digital é aliada no combate à violência, avaliam jovens do Hip Hop.” Enviado especial da Radiobrás, July 28, 2005. “Associação Piauiense de Hip Hop é um dos mais de 200 Pontos de Cultura.” Agência Brasil, enviado especial, July 28, 2005.
Pochmann, Márcio, et al 2005	Classe media: Desenvolvimento e crise. São Paulo: Cortez.
Polletta, Francesca, and James M. Jasper 2001	“Collective Identity and Social Movements.” Annual Review
of Sociology 27: 283–305.
218 : Frederick Moehn
Reardon, Christopher 2005	“The New Favela Beat.” Ford Foundation Report Spring–
Summer 2005. Ribeiro, Ludmila
2005	“Nem verso, nem prosa: Críticas rasas e pouca poesia na 3a eliminatória do Festival Cultura.” Jornalismo Cultural, Aug. 17, http://www.jornalismocultural.com.br/
Rohter, Larry 2004	“The Two Brazils Combine for a Night at Carnegie Hall.”
New York Times, September 25. Rosaldo, Renato
1999	“Cultural Citizenship, Inequality, and Multiculturalism.” In Race, Identity, and Citizenship, edited by R. D. Torres et al., 253–61. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Santiago, Silviano 2001 [1973]	“Latin American Discourse: the Space In-Between.”
In The Space In-Between: Essays on Latin American Culture, by S. Santiago, edited by A. L. Gazzola, 25–38. Durham: Duke University Press.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy 1992	Death without Weeping: the Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil.
Los Angeles: University Of California Press. Silva, Fernando de Barros e.
2006	“Chico diz que vota em Lula de novo.” Folha Online, May 6. Stevenson, Nick
2003	Cultural Citizenship, Cosmopolitan Questions. Maidenhead, Berkshire: Open University Press.
Sugimoto, Luiz 2004	“A classe média está com raiva.” Jornal da Unicamp 251,
May 10–16. Tavares, Júlio César
n.d.	“Uma Proposta para os candidatos à prefeitura da cidade do Rio de Janeiro.” CUFA.com.br (website for the Cen- tral Única das Favelas), (http://www.cufa.com.br/colunas/ juliocesarprop.asp) (accessed October 28, 2004).
Turino, Célio 2003	Unearthing a Deep Brazil. In “Living Culture: National
Culture, Education and Citizenship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural pol- icy press release, pp. 14–18.
Turner, Bryan S. 2001	“Outline of the General Theory of Cultural Citizenship.”
In, Culture and Citizenship, edited by Nick Stevenson, 11–32. London: Sage.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 219
Veloso, Mariza, and Angélica Madeira 2000	Leituras Brasileiras: Itinerários no pensamento social e na liter-
atura. São Paulo: Paz e Terra. Ventura, Zuenir
1994	Cidade Partida. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras. Vieira, Else R. P.
Forthcoming	“About the Poetry and Music of the Sem-Terra,” in
The MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra do Brasil): Introductory Essays, edited by Else R. P. Vieira. Lon- don: Zoilus Press.
Waiselfisz, Júlio Jácobo et al. 2004	Mapa da violência IV: Os jovens do Brasil. UNESCO, Instituto
Ayrton Senna, Ministério da Justica/SEDH. Yúdice, George
1999	“The	Privatization	of	Culture.”	Social	Text	17	(2):	17 – 34. 2003	Parlaying Culture into Social Justice. In The Expediency of Culture, by G. Yúdice, 133–59. Durham: Duke University
Press.

2003
Sociology
Journal of Agrarian Change
Producing Community: The MST and Land Reform Settlements in Brazil
WENDY WOLFORD

This paper analyses the attempt to create an ‘imagined community’ among members of the MST (Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, Movement of Rural Landless Workers) as a way of maintaining high levels of participation. As one of the most active rural movements in Brazilian history, MST owes much of its success to high levels of involvement among members who have already achieved their initial goal of access to land. Move- ment leaders and activists encourage participation by creating a community through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. The lived experiences of community differ from the imaginings, however, and in this paper I show how MST members negotiate the movement’s expression of community in ways that reflect historical experiences of economy and society. Ultimately, MST’s imagined community is effective because the movement has established itself as a successful mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
Keywords: land occupations, land reform, social movements, Brazil INTRODUCTION
Established in 1984, the MST is now ‘the most active organization in the Brazilian countryside’ (Navarro 2000: 37). At the movement’s first National Congress in 1985, members decided on two main goals. MST would fight for an agrarian reform that distributed land to those who would work it, and for the develop- ment of a just, fraternal society (Rocha and Branford 2002; Fernandes 1999). In the years since then, the movement has organized over 230,000 land occupations and overseen the creation of approximately 1200 agrarian reform settlements.1 Movement efforts have been critical in pushing through legislation geared towards land redistribution and the promotion of small family farming. Partly as a result
Wendy Wolford, Department of Geography, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 203 Saunders Hall, Campus Box 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu The research for this paper was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. The author would like to thank
Henry Bernstein for his helpful comments and advice. 1	For updated numbers and information about MST’s activities, see the movement’s own web page at: www.mst.org.br. Also see a web site on MST maintained in the United States by a group called Friends of MST at: www.mstbrazil.org/index.html.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Henry Bernstein and Terence J. Byres 2003.
of these successes, MST’s membership has increased from several hundred in 1984 to over one million today.
The vast majority of these members are not, in fact, ‘sem terra’ (landless) any more – they are people who have won access to land through the movement and now could be more accurately described as ‘com terra’ (landed). These com terra are very important to the maintenance of movement activities because they typic- ally have better access to resources than sem terra and can support ongoing land occupations and political battles. Maintaining a high level of participation and commitment among members who have already won access to land is therefore crucial to MST’s continued growth and impact. But most social movements find it difficult to generate such ongoing momentum. They often become victims of their own success, particularly when they are invested in the acquisition of an easily identifiable, tangible good such as land (cf. Zamosc 1986). MST members who have satisfied their initial demand for land need to be convinced of a reason to remain active in the movement, or many will cease to participate.
Many of MST’s accomplishments over the past seventeen years can be attrib- uted to its success in convincing members that there is a reason to stay in the movement after they win land. MST leaders and activists have worked hard to create, in Benedict Anderson’s (1983) words, an ‘imagined community’, consti- tuted through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. Embedded in this sense of community are ideological guidelines for interpreting different experiences, events and relationships. In this paper, I describe MST’s efforts to create an ‘imagined community’ of settlers conceived as a class for itself in a system dominated by landed elites. I then briefly examine the experiences of community on two MST settlements, one in southern Brazil and one in northeastern Brazil. These two settlements provide an interesting comparison because of the different occupational histories shared by a majority of MST members in the two places. The settlers in southern Brazil were primarily small family farmers before joining the movement, while the settlers in northeastern Brazil were primarily salaried rural workers. The settlers in both places struggle over their understanding of what community means to them – they struggle inwardly and they struggle with each other. Sometimes the everyday experience of ‘community’ is not very communal at all. Ultimately, I argue that while many elements of MST’s framing are successful, people participate in the movement for reasons that have less to do with the appeal to community and more to do with the movement’s effective positioning as mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND THE RISE OF MST
MST’s call for agrarian reform is not a new idea in Brazil. Land distribution has been both inequitable and contested since the Portuguese began to settle the new colony in the early 1500s. Because the Portuguese crown was unwilling and unable to colonize Brazil directly, the area’s known territory was divided into 15 captaincies in 1534, and considerable rights over these areas were bequeathed to
Producing Community	501
502	Wendy Wolford
hereditary captains ( Johnson 1987). The captains oversaw land distribution within their territories, and colonists who had connections to the captains were able to obtain large plots of land. Smaller plots of land were also set aside for poor settlers who were convinced to emigrate to Brazil, but the successful captaincies relied on wealthy men who produced export crops on large rural properties. Access to land could also be obtained through the act of squatting (posseiro), which was practised by wealthy and poor colonists alike. In general, however, these two mechanisms of land distribution (patronage and squatting) favoured the wealthy, and this bias is reflected in Brazilian land tenure patterns today (Stein 1985).
Until the 1930s, Brazil’s economy was dependent on the production of a few primary commodities. In the early colonial years, sugarcane dominated, but by the 1670s when competition from Dutch producers in the Antilles lowered demand for Brazilian sugar (Schwartz 1985), new commodities such as gold, rubber, cocoa, dairy and coffee became increasingly important. Sugarcane and coffee were the principal crops in the densely settled areas of the country, the Northeast and the South/Southeast. Produced for export, both crops were grown on large- scale plantations owned by wealthy elites and worked by slaves until the mid- 1800s (Dean 1976; Eisenberg 1974).2 The plantations, which were often richer than the towns, were set up as individual communities, with the owner – the senhor do engenho – at their head, followed by a group of skilled or semi-skilled employees, and surrounded by a mass of unskilled workers. The hierarchical paternalism of sugar and coffee plantations shaped social and economic develop- ment in Brazil and similar communities are still evident in its rural areas today.
In spite of the restrictive conditions keeping indigenous and African slaves at work in the sugar mills, a surprising number of runaway slave communities, called quilombos, were set up in remote areas as refuge communities. The most famous quilombo, called Palmares, was actually a network of settlements that ran throughout 200 square kilometres in the Northeast, an area now known as the State of Alagoas. Palmares existed for almost 100 years until the Brazilian gov- ernment succeeded in destroying the quilombo in 1695, decapitating its leader Zumbi and imprisoning the women and children who were not killed during the military operations (Schwartz 1992). The existence of Palmares, a community based on very different rules than Brazilian society, threatened the colonial rulers and provoked a violent reaction.
When Brazil was granted independence from Portugal in 1822, members of the newly established government debated the issue of land distribution (Viotti da Costa 2000). Access to land was an important subject because Brazil still had considerable territory open for settlement, and distributing property was seen as a way of encouraging immigration. Immigration was increasingly viewed as necessary to supplement the domestic labour force in the event that slavery was
2	Between 1500 and 1850, when the slave trade was finally abolished, over 3.65 million slaves were shipped into Brazil, more than to any other region in the Americas (Skidmore 1999: 17). Historians’ estimates of numbers vary, as it is difficult to produce reliable figures after 1830 when the slave trade (though not slavery) was abolished and Africans were smuggled into the country illegally.
abolished or became prohibitively expensive (Dean 1976). The two most popular proposals for regulating land distribution were market-based (making land avail- able for sale) and government-based (making land available for public distribu- tion) (Viotti da Costa 2000). In 1850, the land issue was resolved with a new land law that theoretically moved land onto the market, although in practice wealthy elites were able to continue the practice of claiming land through possession (Wright 2001). The government and plantation owners agreed to promote immigration by making frontier areas available for colonization, particularly in the southern end of the country.
In 1886, planters from the State of São Paulo organized the Sociedade Pro- motora de Imigração (Society for Promoting Immigration) and the number of immigrants to Brazil increased from 33,000 in 1886 to 132,000 in 1888 (Skidmore 1999: 72–3). Migrants received some private and public subsidization of travel costs, but the conditions they found in Brazil were far from the paradise they were promised. The planters found it difficult to reconceptualize their relation- ship with labour as a voluntary wage contract (Stein 1985; Viotti da Costa 2000), and they worked to frustrate settlers’ desire for land because the plantations were only viable with a steady source of labour. If immigrants were free to settle elsewhere, it was unlikely they would choose to stay on the plantations, and so planters restricted their mobility through debt peonage and intimidation (Dean 1976; Stolcke 1988). In 1902, the Italian government officially prohibited its citizens from accepting subsidies for travel to Brazil, and the Swiss Consul in Brazil was actively investigating several accounts of persecution (Lesser 1999). Descendants of these immigrants, some of whom found their own land, would be among the first members of MST.
By the early 1900s, Brazil’s economy was beginning to diversify as the profits of coffee production were invested in industrialization, particularly in the south- eastern State of São Paulo (Dean 1969). As industrialization increased, govern- ment officials discussed the ‘agrarian problem’. The large-scale properties and plantations in rural Brazil were seen as traditional and backward (Stein 1985), and it was doubted that they could satisfy the growing demand for cheap food from urban workers and employers. The large estates were seen as a barrier to the modernization of both the rural and urban areas. By the 1950s, the call for land redistribution was growing stronger, although the method was debated. Two classic opinions were presented by Ignácio Rangel (1956) and Caio Prado Júnior (1945, 1966). Rangel believed that industrialization would naturally lead to land tenure change and agricultural modernization, while Prado Júnior believed that a State-led socialist reform was necessary for boosting both agricultural production and development. During the 1950s and early 1960s, grassroots organizers with the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), rural trade unions and the Catholic Church, increased their presence in the rural areas and advocated a distributive agrarian reform (Medeiros 1989). In 1954, the PCB included agrarian reform as part of its strategy for carrying out a democratic-bourgeois revolution, and in 1957 formed a national union of peasants and rural workers in São Paulo (the Union of Farmers and Agricultural Workers of Brazil, ULTAB). Throughout
Producing Community	503
504	Wendy Wolford
the 1950s and 1960s, the Communist Party organized rural trade associations in several States, particularly Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Bahia (Maybury-Lewis 1994).3
In 1955, rural sugarcane workers in the northeastern State of Pernambuco founded a society that came to be known as the Peasant Leagues (Ligas Cam- ponesas). The rural workers, led by a plantation-born lawyer, formed their society in protest over their plantation owner’s decision to violate traditional practice and withhold money for a coffin intended for the burial of a worker (Pereira 1997). The Peasant Leagues grew rapidly and their development, combined with the activities of the Communist Party, stirred suspicions that a left-wing revolu- tion was imminent.4 The fear over revolution in the countryside was heightened by then President Goulart’s decision to announce a radical agrarian reform, expro- priating rural properties over 600 hectares without compensation.
In March 1964, the armed forces of Brazil seized power, forcing Goulart into exile and establishing military rule. Once in power, the military adopted an approach to the rural areas that would solve the agrarian problem by redistri- buting land through colonization and modernizing agricultural production. The military believed that it could satisfy the demand for land that was generating unrest in the Northeast and South of the country by moving ‘men without land’ to a ‘land without men’. The plan involved settling 200,000 families in the sparsely populated savannahs of the Centre-West and the Amazon Basin. In this way, the military could also secure the Northwest border of the country through effective possession.5
As the second part of its agrarian reform project, the military government targeted large-scale producers for subsidized modernization.6 The government poured millions of dollars of subsidized credit into the hands of private pro- ducers (Delgado 1985). Rural credit increased five times in real terms between 1968 and 1978 (Goodman et al. 1984: 198). During years of high inflation, such credit carried a negative rate of interest and financed the soybean and wheat boom in the southern and central-west States. Agricultural technology moved
3	When the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG) was formed in 1964, replacing ULTAB as an umbrella movement representing rural workers, the Brazilian Communist Party provided some of its most active leaders. Although the military government banned the Communist Party later that year, CONTAG continued to organize rural workers, focusing prim- arily on securing workers’ rights.
4	See Forman (1975) who has an interesting discussion of the Peasant Leagues. 5	The planned colonization projects were largely failures because they did not provide the necessary infrastructure, and basic services such as health and sanitation were never offered. The military managed to create only 43 settlements for 8000 of the 100,000 people expected. The military’s experiment with colonization brought international condemnation because of the difficult conditions experienced by the settlers and because of the environmental damage caused to the Amazon region (Schmink and Wood 1984). 6	According to José de Souza Martins, ‘five months after the coup and some time before the Land Statute was sent to Congress, the North American representative for the Alliance for Progress, Walt Rostow, was in São Paulo speaking animatedly with industrialists about the issue of the internal market. [He emphasized] that the industrialists should take an interest in transforming and modernizing their agriculture’ (Martins 1981: 94).
increasingly towards mechanized planting and threshing and chemical inputs. The use of irrigation equipment, pesticides and fertilizers all expanded produc- tion at an unprecedented rate.
The modernization of agriculture restructured land and labour relationships. Mechanized production reduced the need for workers and, without the money to pay for land of their own, millions of rural workers left for the urban areas (Graziano da Silva 1982). Large farmers out-competed small, traditional ones, making it more difficult for the latter to make a living. Land ownership became more concentrated, with the GINI index of land distribution increasing from 0.731 in 1960 to 0.867 in 1985 (Cardoso 1997). Through selective modernization and the urban migration of rural workers, the military government effectively ‘solved’ the agrarian problem. Agricultural production increased rapidly and Brazilian producers became internationally competitive in several lucrative com- modities, including soy, wheat, orange juice, poultry and cattle/beef (Müller 1989).
During military rule (1964–82), the Catholic Church grew into a force for radical organization and change in the Brazilian countryside. In 1961, the Roman Catholic Church officially decided to focus on land tenure issues in Latin America, publishing a series of educational documents to inform rural workers in Brazil of the biblical statement that ‘the land is a gift of God’. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, the Brazilian episcopate was one of the most progressive religious clergies in the world (Mainwaring 1986). In 1963, the first Ecclesiastical Base Communities (Comunidades Eclesiais de Base – CEBs) were created as a means of enabling communities to hold Sunday service without a priest, and in 1972 the Church formed the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra – CPT) to protect landless workers in the Amazon. By 1975, the CPT had extended its activities to peasants all over Brazil. By 1985, it was estimated that there were over 100,000 CEBs in local communities. Because of their integration into local communities and connection with a wider network of reform-minded activists, the CEBs were an ideal channel for grassroots organization (Houtzager 1997).
In 1982, the military formally withdrew from government. They had stepped into office ‘temporarily’ in 1964 to restore order to the country and had ended up ruling for eighteen years. The gradual end of authoritarian rule was characterized by economic crisis. The Brazilian State was deeply in debt and hyper-inflation threatened even as society clamoured noisily for a piece of the country’s eco- nomic wealth. When José Sarney was inaugurated as president in 1985, he remarked, ‘I have inherited the greatest political crisis in Brazilian history, the largest foreign debt in the world and the greatest internal debt and inflation we have ever had’ (Selcher 1986: 7).
In 1985 MST held its first National Congress. Tracing its roots back to the quilombos and Peasant Leagues, the movement grew out of several different land disputes in southern Brazil during the late 1970s and early 1980s (Fernandes 1999). MST members argued that the military had not only failed to solve the agrarian problem, it had created new ones. MST employed an aggressive method of land occupations, while justifying its actions with an appeal to the Federal
Producing Community	505
506	Wendy Wolford
Constitution, which states that ‘land has a social responsibility to be productive’. Land occupations were organized by activists, many of whom came out of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches. Activists travelled through poor rural and urban areas, informing people about their rights to land and organizing occupations. Once an encampment was set up on occupied land, activists and new members waited for representatives of the government or the landlord (sometimes the same) to visit. Negotiations over expropriated/occupied land were often violent and protracted, but MST won key successes early on that fuelled the movement’s growing momentum.
THE IMAGINED COMMUNITY OF MST
From the very beginning, MST activists have envisioned a struggle that goes well beyond the simple demand for land. This has created some difficulties for the movement because most of those who join it do so as a means to a very definite end. Although members ascribe different meanings to land (Wolford forthcoming a), most join the movement in the hope of incorporation into the government’s agrarian reform programme. Successful members usually express gratitude towards the movement and remember their experiences with pride and even pleasure, but without a compelling reason to continue as sem terra (landless) after receiving land, many would cease to participate regularly in movement events or drop out altogether. MST cannot afford to let this happen, as landed members constitute a valuable source of ideological and material support. Landed members are often asked to provide food for people living in occupation camps, and they even participate in new occupations as a way of adding numerical and emotional strength (Fernandes 1999). Landed members also attend regular public demonstrations that are considered crucial for raising government and public awareness about the plight of landless workers and small family farmers.
MST leaders address this dilemma of participation among successful members by creating an imagined community complete with group norms and expecta- tions that will tie members into the movement. As Benedict Anderson wrote of nationalism, this community of sem terra is imagined because most of its members will never actually meet each other, no matter how many national meetings they attend. In addition, the community is imagined because adherence to MST’s ideological and practical guidelines requires each individual to go well beyond past experiences to imagine a new social, political and economic ideal. Borrowing the language of ‘frames’ from Erving Goffman (1974), Robert Benford and David Snow (2000; see also Snow et al. 1986) have referred to this sort of ideological guidance within movements as the creation of ‘schemata of interpre- tation’ that ascribe meaning to past, present and future events and relationships in order to explain and legitimate movement activity. MST leaders develop frames of community that will close the gap between what they see as the ‘objective conditions of exploitation’ and the subjective interpretation of those conditions as exploitation. Because the frames that MST presents conflict with hegemonic interpretations of reality, the imagined community needs to change
not just the settlers’ economic situation but their cultural and social situations as well.
The main element of MST’s imagined community is its oppositional class character. The movement argues that as small farmers in rural Brazil, the settlers are exploited by a capitalist system whose chief engineers are large landowners, politicians and corporations. The sem terra are landless because others (capitalists, bankers, politicians, etc.) stole, misused and abused property that should belong to society as a whole. Within the dominant system, rural workers have few options: ‘The rural worker justifies an anti-capitalist stance because his only alternative under capitalism is “inevitable proletarianization”’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 92: 6). As an internal MST document argues, quoting Karl Marx: ‘All progress in capitalist agriculture is progress in the art of exploitation, whether of the worker or of the soil’. Participation in MST is presented as an expression of a class for itself: ‘we aren’t fighting against one land-grabber, we are fighting against a class, the land owning elite’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 35). Although the movement has moved away from a dogmatic reliance on Marxist-Leninist theory, a recent anthology of ‘Marxism in Latin America’ cited MST as one of the most important ‘new tendencies’ in the region (Löwy 1999: 63). According to MST’s outline of class conflict in Brazil, the landowning elite is supported ideologically and practically by the Brazilian State. At the movement’s First National Con- gress in 1985, the 1600 delegates present decided to take a stand against the New Republic (1985–9), and MST has rejected every government since on the grounds that the administrations represented ‘a bourgeois state . . . invested with class interest’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 36, 51).
The other side of MST’s class positioning is that within the movement all members are theoretically equal, part of a class in itself. This is deliberately based on the socialist ideal of egalitarianism and embodied in the concept of ‘union’, or unity. In the words of one MST member: ‘è a união que faz a força’ (it is unity that makes us strong)’.7 Leadership in the movement is carefully structured to be as horizontal as possible and all offices are, in principle, occupied temporarily.8 All participants in national-level decision making are selected on a rotating basis or are elected by the members of their communities. Through this ideal of equality, members across the country are encouraged to feel kinship with, and pride in, their unknown but imagined companheiros (comrades).9
Through documents and rituals, MST leaders carefully embed the class nature of the movement’s imagined community in historical structures and experiences. The historical tradition that MST draws upon goes back 500 years to injustices that are depicted as a direct consequence of the way in which Brazil was colonized.10
7	Interview #10, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 8	Movement members at the first meeting in 1984 decided that they did not want a president because it would invest one office and one person with too much power. Six of the most visible MST leaders, however, have been in positions of power since the movement was first formed. 9	As a figure in one of MST’s educational booklets explains: ‘Companheiros! We have to stay to- gether – IN ALL OF BRAZIL, you know how it is! Unity brings Strength’. 10	A popular MST slogan reads: ‘500 Years of Injustice’.
Producing Community	507
508	Wendy Wolford
MST consciously unites time and space by invoking events that took place in different time periods and regions to explain the present reality of Brazil as a whole. In a document prepared for discussion, an MST leader argues: ‘If agrarian reform was originally justified because it was necessary for overcoming feudal relations in the countryside . . . in ‘modern Brazil’ it is justified for even more important reasons. Not only do feudal social relations remain, but [so do] pro- duction relations that are effectively slavery’ (Teixeira 1999: 17). MST activists emphasize their belief that the movement is only the most recent expression of discontent in the rural areas. They invoke Zumbi, the leader of the quilombo Palmares, and the Peasant Leagues to establish a noble line of predecessors. During an MST meeting in the State of Santa Catarina, a theatre piece featured settlers dressed up as participants in past resistance movements, all holding up MST’s flag in symbolic support of their contemporary counterparts. Establish- ing the belief that peasants throughout time have fought and died for causes similar to that of MST plays an important part in the movement’s imagined community. When the government or national media ridicules MST members, calling them vagabonds and bandits, they are reminded that others suffered the same ill treatment. To paraphrase Benedict Anderson, it is through such emo- tional linkages to heroic ancestors that ‘pasts are restored, fellowships are imag- ined and futures dreamed’ (Anderson 1983: 154).
The historical tradition extends globally to include heroes of Marxist-inspired resistance around the world. Posters of Vladimir Lenin and Che Guevera are regularly present at MST meetings, as in the case of this photograph taken during a 1999 meeting in Pernambuco (Plate 1). The large red flag stretched across the stage pictures Che Guevera, Fidel Castro, Rosa Luxembourg and Nelson Mandela, among others. The words framing the flag read: Proletarians of the World Unite.
MST’s imagined community, like most communities, has important rules about who can be included and who cannot. As one older woman on an MST settlement said: ‘We are all together here – you can already see how different someone is who isn’t in the movement’.11 Membership in the movement is ‘elite’ in the sense that theoretically only those who fulfil the appropriate criteria are accepted. The ideal settler is a combination of the traditional peasant and the so- called ‘new man and woman’. The early editions of MST’s monthly newspaper, O Jornal Sem Terra (The Landless Newspaper, or JST), were filled with discussions of the new ‘social citizen’ that MST wished to create, as well as imaginative ways of encouraging settlers to willingly conform to this image. The vices that MST members are warned against are ‘reflexes of a sub-ideology generated by the private ownership of the means of production’. The vices range from ‘individu- alism’ (where one person ‘puts himself above the organization’) to ‘spon- taneity’ and ‘immobility’ (which causes a person to not ‘involve himself with anything’) ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).12 MST activists are encouraged to
11	Interview #19, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 12	The full list of vices includes: personalism, anarchy, complacency, sectarianism or ‘radicalism’, impatience, adventurism and self-sufficiency.
Producing Community	509 Plate 1. Flag displayed at MST meeting, Pernambuco 1999
promote discussion so that people will ‘know the vices [in order] to overcome them’ ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).
Most movement leaders are not conscious of promoting an ‘ideal’ settler, but the outlines of what is considered acceptable behaviour are evident in the imagined community’s guidelines for participation. These guidelines are distributed by movement activists who travel regularly throughout the settlements, both to hear from the settlers and to disseminate information from the movement’s headquarters in São Paulo. MST activists provide information, material goods and ideas that have both practical and ideological value. Acceptance of one legitim- ates, and encourages, acceptance of the other. Being a member of MST’s imag- ined community requires some degree of involvement in movement activities, whether through participation or support. Adherence to the behaviour appropri- ate to membership in MST is continually assessed from within. Any individual can be kicked out of the group for violating the rules of personal conduct (although violations would have to be extreme). The practice of peer evaluation is supported by government legislation on the land reform settlements. Section 5, part e, of the Settlement Contract signed by all agrarian reform beneficiaries states that settlers can be kicked off their land if they ‘become disruptive ele- ments [that negatively affect] the development of the workers in the project area due either to poor conduct or inability to adapt to community life’. Sufficient agreement among MST members can result in a settler losing rights to his or her land as well as membership in the movement. During a 1997 demonstration,
510	Wendy Wolford
two supposed MST members were expelled from the movement because they were believed to be spies. This sort of discriminatory membership is an import- ant component of any community, particularly a social movement community. There would be little appeal to sacrificing everything for a movement that any- one could join.
MST’s imagined community is symbolically represented in the movement’s dramatic flag: a deep red, the flag is stamped by an outline of the Brazilian nation. A generic representation of a man and woman are poised at the edge of the outline, his hand holding high a machete to symbolize resistance and struggle. At the movement’s first meeting, members chose this symbol over a straw hat because they wanted to express the movement’s commitment to a better, more progressive Brazilian nation (Rocha and Branford 2002). The flag’s emblem is repeated on T-shirts, baseball caps and posters that can be seen at any MST demonstration and on any settlement.
One of the main methods for actively presenting the frames underlying MST’s community is through what the movement calls ‘mysticism’ (see Schwade 1992). Mysticism is a legacy of Liberation Theology, which relied on charismatic leaders who were able to re-engage people in the practices of the Church. MST activists build on this combination of worldliness and idealism by creatively using songs, theatre and chants to help form new ideas and mould behaviour. Symbols of the struggle for land that characterize mysticism include dramatic representations of a joyful harvest where people work together to bring in the crops, and visits from past resistance leaders. In 1998, one State-wide meeting in Santa Catarina opened with several children walking single file through the audience carrying the tools and fruits of working the land – a machete, a handful of beans, a large squash. These were all laid at the front on a large outline of Brazil, signifying the construction of a better nation through the practices and values of MST’s new community. The dominant messages of mysticism are humility, honesty, convic- tion, perseverance, sacrifice, gratitude, responsibility and discipline. According to an MST publication, mysticism ‘reduces the distance between the present and the future, helping us to anticipate the good things that are coming’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 102: 3). Movement leaders encourage activists to use mysticism to tie settlers more firmly into the movement: ‘the more that the masses attach them- selves to their symbols, leaders and the organization, the more they fight, the more they mobilize and the more they organize themselves’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 97: 3). Mysticism is always present at MST meetings, assemblies and public demonstrations.
NEGOTIATING MST, COMMUNITY AND THE STATE
Most academic discussions of MST refer to the imagined community as repre- sentative of the movement (Hammond 1999; Petras 1997, 1998; Robles 2000). MST leaders themselves attribute the movement’s success to the formation of an imagined community that resonates with the settlers’ historical experiences and new expectations. But MST members have come to the movement from many
Producing Community	511
Figure 1. Location of two MST communities
different backgrounds, and they bring with them varied experiences of com- munity. During field research conducted in 1998–9 and 2001, I found very dif- ferent ideas shaping community relationships on settlements in the sugarcane plantation region of northeastern Brazil and the small family-farming region of southern Brazil (Figure 1; Wolford forthcoming a). Members of the two groups negotiated MST’s imagined community in ways that reflected their particular understanding of community.
The historical community described by the rural workers on a settlement in Pernambuco named Flora was segmented hierarchically along occupational lines, from the plantation owner at the top to the day labourer contracted illegally at the bottom (Sigaud 1979). Members of the plantation community lived in close physical proximity, but relations between occupational groups were marked by social distance. The rural workers rarely met socially as a community, because as one older man who had worked on different plantations in the region since 1961 said, ‘in that time there were no workers’ meetings. A meeting was to do forced labour’.13
In contrast, the historical community described by the small family farmers on a settlement in Santa Catarina named Vento was organized horizontally, as there was little occupational differentiation between families. Unlike the families on Flora, contact among the families was relatively rare because houses were dispersed, and interaction was usually reserved for the weekend soccer game or church service. Families would co-operate occasionally, however, on tasks that
13	Interview #25, Flora, Agua Preta, PE.
512	Wendy Wolford
benefited the community, such as repairing the roof of the school house, or on tasks that benefited individual families, such as bringing in the harvest when it was ready or helping a neighbour build a fence. These mutirões, as they were called, usually took place among relatives, although many of the settlers on Vento remembered group projects that had involved the whole community. As one settler said: ‘we’d been working in a group since we were little. Everyone got along’.14 When the first occupation in Santa Catarina took place in 1980, the landless squatters (not yet a part of MST) sent a portion of their first harvest down to their counterparts on an occupation site in the neighbouring State of Rio Grande do Sul.15
These different historical experiences with community shaped the way that settlers on Flora and Vento interacted with MST’s presentation of community. For the settlers on Flora, MST was an organization that they participated in almost reluctantly (Wolford forthcoming b). As plantation workers, they had little experience deriving their livelihood from their own farming, and most expressed a preference for wage labour over working the land. As one older man on Flora said, ‘What I thought [about getting land] was the same thing that everyone thought. We were used to our boss, every week we worked, and the money came for us to do our little shopping in town. Afterwards, with agrarian reform, we didn’t have the right to that any more . . . And so this was why we thought [that becoming settlers] was difficult’.16 Thirteen of the forty-six families living on Flora had joined MST because they felt there was little alternative when they were unable to find work in the crumbling sugarcane economy. The re- maining thirty-three had effectively joined the movement when the government expropriated the plantation property they were living on and offered them a piece of land. MST’s propositions for community were not ones that resonated with the settlers, and many perceived the movement as a trade organization that provided services for the settlers rather than a political community. When asked whether he had joined MST, one settler on Flora said, ‘Listen, it’s like this, I live here inside the settlement, what they say that I have to do, what I have to pay and what I have to do about the association, these things, I do’.17
The settlers on Vento participated in MST’s imagined community very dif- ferently than the settlers on Flora. Only twenty-three of the ninety-six families on the settlement had received land on the settlement without participating in an MST occupation. The families who had come to Vento through MST said that they joined in order to get land for themselves or for their children. A young man preparing to get married said, ‘To have land is a beautiful thing’.18 A woman on Vento said she and her husband had joined MST because ‘our kids were growing up and they had no land – through the struggle, our kids have gotten
14	Interview #38, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 15	For more information on this, see Fernandes (1999). 16	Interview #27, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 17	Interview #14, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 18	Interview #3, Vento, Campos Novos, PE.
married and gone after their own land’.19 For the former small family farmers, many of the MST’s messages resonated with their own experiences of com- munity. They believed in MST’s struggle to ‘transform society’20 and to ‘fight for equality and a better life for everyone’.21 The settlers on Vento were willing to work within the general guidelines of MST’s imagined community, although collective production projects established on the settlement suffered severe prob- lems. MST settlers who had tried to work in the collective project and found they could not, remained committed to the movement. As one woman who was preparing to leave the collective for an individual plot on the settlement said, ‘We still participate – we are still in favour of the movement. The movement still helps us, they won’t throw us out. We are not leaving [the collective] because of them’.22
Even as MST members work with very different understandings of the move- ment’s imagined community, few cite the ideological frame components as the reasons for their continued participation. Members continue to attend meetings and demonstrations in large part because MST has successfully linked material resources to ideological resources by situating itself as the mediator between the settlers and the State. Although MST has theoretically and practically organized itself in opposition to the Brazilian State, one marked consequence of winning land through the movement is increased interaction with representatives and resources from the State. The settlers’ relationship with the State begins during the occupation period, when they rely on local government to send food and health supplies. Even though the act of occupying property is portrayed by the media and government as illegal, people living in MST encampments usually receive basic support from local government. Activists organizing occupations tell participants to bring enough food to last a few days, until the government and other settlers begin to contribute.
Once MST members receive land, the government becomes their landlord, creditor, educator and overseer. Technically, the agrarian reform process estab- lishes the State as a landlord because the settlers are given use rights, not title, to the land, although they are expected to begin paying for the land in ten years. Both MST and the settlers militate against being ‘liberated’ from government in this way. MST argues that the State has a moral obligation to give the settlers their land because wealthy landlords were able to acquire land without payment. The movement also recognizes that being liberated from the government would cut the settlers off from an important source of support. The State acts as the principal creditor for agrarian reform settlers because it provides significant funds for start up and investment. Start up funds include money to build a house and buy an initial set of supplies for production. Subsidized funds for short- and long-term investment are also provided on an annual basis, although these
19 20 21 22
Interview #21, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is a young man on the settlement. Interview #12, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is an older woman on the settlement. Interview #4, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	513
514	Wendy Wolford
are continually being reduced.23 The State is also involved in maintaining basic infrastructure on the settlements, including roads, primary education, health serv- ices, etc. In providing these goods and services, the State establishes itself as the ultimate overseer of settlement life and activities. If settlers want to move to a new settlement, experiment with alternative production practices or request ad- ditional assistance, they need to go through agents of the State.
Most settlers believe they need access to government resources to survive on the land. The government agrees, estimating that a majority of the settlers in the country would be forced to give up their land if they did not have access to the assistance it provides. A study conducted in 1998 estimated that only settlers in Santa Catarina had the means to pay back their State subsidized loans (Buainain and De Souza Filho 1998). Settlers are always nervous that the government will reduce their access to resources. As one settler in Santa Catarina said: ‘[The State is] going to abandon me, and I will only get resources from PRONAF. And this is how one loses the land’.24
MST’s ability to maintain participation turns on its presentation of the move- ment as the primary mediator between a cruel State and its members. The State is depicted as cruel because it is biased towards large landowners and, movement leaders argue, has no desire to see agrarian reform succeed. The State’s own visibility in the settlements makes it a good target. Poor roads, insufficient elec- tricity and a lack of resources all vividly maintain the impression that the govern- ment needs to do more in the settlements. As a settler on Vento said, ‘Even though we have a lot of things now, we cannot stop yet because the situation is not easy’.25 Having promised a regular supply of resources, the Federal govern- ment has had a very difficult time fulfilling what have come to be seen as its obligations. Short-term investment credit, for example, habitually arrives late or in the wrong season altogether.26 When this happens, settlers either have to simply give the money back or plant in the off-season and suffer significant production losses. MST activists and leaders continually warn settlers that the State will only fulfil its promises if constant and forceful pressure is applied. When resources are secured from the State, the movement argues that this is the result of successful organization within the sem terra community.
23	Until 2001, each settler had the right to almost R$20,000 when they received land through INCRA (National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform). This money included an initial amount of R$340, to be spent on emergency food supplies which many of the families need when they arrive in the settlement. The emergency money is followed by a grant of R$740 for start-up supplies such as a hoe, wheelbarrow and seeds, and as soon as boundaries between plots are legally documented, each settler received R$2000 to build a house. The remainder of the R$20,000 consists of long-term investment funds from the Program for Agrarian Reform Credit (PROCERA), which was created in 1985. Since 2001, settlers have been incorporated into PRONAF (Program for Small Farmers), where they are treated as small family farmers (instead of settlers) and eligible for less generous funding.
24 25 26
Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #42, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Beginning with an economic downturn in 1999, the Federal government began to hold back the
funds for agrarian reform more and more regularly. There was a noticeable deceleration in the number of settlements created and the amount of support disbursed overall in 1999.
And the movement’s positioning between settlers and the State has been very successful. During interviews with settlers on six settlements in the southern State of Santa Catarina and the northeastern State of Pernambuco, the main reason given for supporting MST and continued participation in movement activit- ies was the MST’s position of influence vis-à-vis local and Federal governments. As one older settler on Vento said: ‘Nothing would function without the move- ment. If it weren’t for protests, the struggle, everyone participating together, then we wouldn’t get anything’.27 Resources such as credit are seen as coming from MST rather than coming from the State. One former rural worker on Flora who was a spokesperson for the settlement in its struggle for State resources said: ‘The Federal Government is obligated to settle us, to provide infrastructure for the settlement and to give us credit. Unfortunately, it takes too long to do this – you only get [these things] through pressure, we only receive something after the government has been pressured, and this is done by the movement’.28 Most settlers feel that they won their land because of MST’s strength as an organization and they continue to see organization as an effective means to pursue resources. Movement demonstrations are considered largely responsible for ensuring a government-funded supply of credit in the first place: ‘Today the movement is respected because we have won some of the things that we wanted. Our credit is subsidized, for example, and not even the rural trade union got that!’29 Movement activists continually remind the settlers of the debt they owe the MST. And most people agree because they believe that ‘the people who get land through agrarian reform will be guaranteed a better life’.30
Over the past ten years, the State has increased the flow of resources to MST members. In some ways, the government has organized its own agrarian reform programme around social movements. As one government official said, ‘we are always just one step behind the movement’.31 Between 1993 and 1997, thirty- seven properties in Santa Catarina were distributed for the purposes of agrarian reform. Of these, only seven were not the result of organized pressure.32 In 1996, the country’s largest rural union, the Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG), identified 226 estates that were eligible for expropriation under the Federal Constitution. The Federal government inspected 198 of the properties and expropriated or bought 100. MST also identified 196 estates eligible for expropriation and the government followed up on 181, expropriating or pur- chasing 126 (Cardoso 1997, quoted in Deere and León De Leal 1999: 33). MST’s success in winning expropriations is such that new recruits and squatters con- sider it extremely unlikely that they will not win access to land (Deere and León
27	Interview #10, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 28	Interview #3, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 29	Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 30	Interview #36, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 31	Interview with Dr Alacir Pereira Batista, INCRA Superintendent, Florianopolis, SC. 24 March 1999.
32	Figures from the Regional INCRA office of Santa Catarina. Supported by an interview with the settlement division of the regional INCRA office in Santa Catarina, 26 March 1999. INCRA estim- ates that in Santa Catarina roughly 60 per cent of all expropriations are the result of social pressure.
Producing Community	515
516
Wendy Wolford
Table 1. Settlement projects created 1970–94 and 1995–7
Period	Years
Settlements
1970 –1994	25	795 1995 –1997	3	1454
Source: Seligmann (1998). Table 2. INCRA’s annual budget 1994–8
Year
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Source: Seligmann (1998).
Amount (in R$ million)
390 1279 1425 2020 2243
De Leal 1999; Hammond 1999). The Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) admin- istration (1995–2003) authorized the creation of more new settlements than all the previous administrations from 1970 to 1994 combined (see Table 1). And Cardoso’s administration more than quintupled the resources allocated for reform under the INCRA, the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform, since 1994 (see Table 2).
Even as resources from the State have increased, however, the movement has stepped up its offensive against the government, arguing that the FHC adminis- tration is a more dangerous enemy than any past administration. MST activists and leaders have travelled throughout the settlements, discussing the state of the national political economy with settlers. They argue that under Cardoso, the Federal government is providing resources with one hand and taking them back with the other through discriminatory trade and production policies. Discussion of these policies links Cardoso’s administration to neo-liberalism, US imperialism and the so-called Washington Consensus. MST documents argue that even if Cardoso authorizes settlements and provides credit for settlers, he is committed to an economic and political system incompatible with Brazilian sovereignty and small family farming. Included in the MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People, written during the 2000 National Congress, is an indictment of the Cardoso administration:
It is true that our society has always been unjust. Like any capitalist society, the poor have always been exploited and humiliated. And the rich class, earning more and more all the time, has always repressed the people and submitted it to the interests of international capital. But since 1994, with the neoliberal policies of Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s government, the
problems have become even more acute. This economic policy represents only the interests of the banks and of multinational companies. For these, the government guarantees high interest rates and financial help. Suffice to say: last year the government spent 64 percent of the national budget servicing the interest on internal and external debt. Despite all the social problems, the government of the Brazilian elites has the nerve to send 50 billion dollars to the rich countries every year. That is why there is a lack of money for education, health, public transport, popular housing and employment generation. In agriculture the situation is more grave still. The Cardoso government wants to ‘modernize’ the rural areas stimulating large export-orientated estates; handing control of the agricultural market over to the multinational corporations; and allowing agro-industries to con- trol the storage of food products. (MST 2000)
Settlers are reminded that even if access to land is authorized by the government, it is won through the struggle. As one settler on Flora said: ‘The one who gave me land was INCRA, that is to say, in the first place, it was MST, because if we were to wait for INCRA, it would never have come through. It had already been twenty years that we were waiting for INCRA. But then MST came and camped out here and they fought [for the land]’.33 Another settler on Flora agreed, although less robustly, saying ‘we have this here and they say it is because of the movement’.34
When Cardoso was re-elected President of Brazil in 1998, settlers were warned by the MST that they would have to increase their organizational efforts to protect their gains. As an older settler on Vento said, ‘Our government is against us. For all these four years [of Cardoso’s presidency], we are the ones who are going to lose. The big guys aren’t going to suffer. We need money – and they always hold it back. We always argued that we had to fight for a dignified life . . . Because if we don’t, [the government] will get us’.35
In presenting the State as the settlers’ primary enemy, MST is able to take advantage of necessary State resources without allowing individual members or the movement as a whole to be co-opted through incorporation. MST settlers rely heavily on the State for access to resources, including the basic recognition of their right to property, and so the movement has to justify the seeming paradox of reliance on a State it opposes. The movement has done this by presenting itself as the effective mediator between the settlers and the State and by insisting that continued access to State resources requires participation in the movement’s imagined community of sem terra. Framing the State as corrupt, cruel and incompetent is an effective means of convincing settlers that this com- munity is necessary long after they receive land. Even as settlers negotiate the movement’s imagined community, rejecting and adapting many elements, they are convinced that continued participation is necessary for their economic survival.
33 34 35
Interview #8, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #13, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #1, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	517
518	Wendy Wolford CONCLUSION
Although MST’s numbers are relatively insignificant compared to the total population of Brazil and its total land area, the movement is widely considered an important voice for effective national democracy (Gohn 1997; Rossiaud and Scherer-Warren 2000). The demand for land redistribution is a familiar one in the country, and MST’s agenda has won many supporters in the urban areas and universities.
MST’s consistent and coherent presentation of the movement’s community has led supporters and detractors alike to judge the movement according to statements made by representative leaders. But MST’s presentation of commun- ity differs greatly from the negotiations and experiences of community on the ground. MST leaders and activists have built the movement’s community around a series of frames – interpretive, diagnostic and prognostic frames, in Benford and Snow’s (2000) words. These frames explain rural workers’ subordinate posi- tion within Brazilian capitalism and provide workers with the means for address- ing their situation. The presentation of poverty as a result of class exploitation generates both opposition and solidarity, making it possible to identify whom to fight against and whom to fight with. Explicit ties to past resistance contextualizes participation in the movement, investing the present with a rich legacy. Move- ment members share experiences, and there is an expectation of shared values across community members such that a red cap or T-shirt symbolizes the fulfil- ment of movement criteria for participation. These criteria are disseminated regu- larly to members during organized movement activities.
And people throughout Brazil have joined MST in search of something better, or at least something different, than what they have. The elements of MST’s imagined community facilitate involvement in a movement that other sources, such as the national media, usually present as dangerous, radical and subversive. And the frames themselves work to present a coherent criticism of ‘politics as usual’. On the settlements, however, the test of MST’s community is not whether it makes sense, whether it introduces an acceptable or appropriate philosophy, but whether or not it works. Regardless of how committed settlers are to the ideas of MST’s imagined community, few would remain members if this meant total isolation from the State. In fact, most argue that they are grateful to the movement for improving their access to the State. MST leaders have had to work creatively to enable their alternative philosophy to be effective within the dominant economic, political and social system. This has involved persistent mediation between the State and their settler members.
REFERENCES
Anderson, B., 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Benford, D. and D. Snow, 2000. ‘Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment’. Annual Review of Sociology, 26: 611–39.
Buainain, A.M. and H.M. De Souza Filho, 1998. PROCERA: Productive Impacts and Payment Capabilities. Brasilia, DF: INCRA/FAO.
Cardoso, F.H., 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brasília, DF: Presidência Da República Secretaria De Comunicação Social.
Dean, W., 1969. The Industrialization of São Paulo, 1880–1945. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Dean, W., 1976. Rio Claro: A Brazilian Plantation System, 1820–1920. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Deere, C.D. and M. León De Leal, 1999. Towards a Gendered Analysis of the Brazilian Agrarian Reform. Storrs, CT: Center for Latin American & Caribbean Studies, Univer- sity of Connecticut.
Delgado, G.C., 1985. Capital Financeiro e Agricultura no Brasil: 1965–1985. Campinas, SP: Editora UNICAMP.
Eisenberg, P.L., 1974. The Sugar Industry in Pernambuco: Modernization Without Change, 1840–1910. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Fernandes, B.M., 1999. MST, Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, S., 1975, The Brazilian Peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press. Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. New York:
Harper Colophon. Gohn, M.d.G., 1997. Os Sem Terra, ONGs e Cidadania. São Paulo: Cortez. Goodman, D., B. Sorj and J. Wilkinson, 1984. ‘Agro-industry, State Policy and Rural Social
Structures: Recent Analyses of Proletarianization in Brazilian Agriculture’. In Proletar-
ianisation in the Third World, eds B. Munslow and H. Finch. London: Croom and Helm. Graziano da Silva, J.F., 1982. A Modernização Dolorosa: Estrutura Agrária, Fronteira Agrícola
e Trabalhadores Rurais no Brasil. Rio De Janeiro: Zahar Editores. Hammond, J., 1999. ‘Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Move-
ment’. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18 (4): 469–89. Houtzager, P.P., 1997. Caught Between State and Church: Popular Movements in the Brazilian
Countryside, 1964–1989. Berkeley, CA: University of Berkeley, Department of Political
Science. Johnson, H.B., 1987. ‘Portuguese Settlement, 1500–1580.’ In Colonial Brazil, ed. L. Bethell,
1–39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jornal Sem Terra. Newspaper published by MST, Sao Paulo. Lesser, J., 1999. Negotiating National Identity: Immigrants, Minorities and the Struggle for
Ethnicity in Brazil. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Löwy, M., ed., 1999. O Marxismo na Amèrica Latina: Uma Antologia de 1909 aos Dias
Atuais. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Mainwaring, S., 1986. The Catholic Church and Politics in Brazil, 1916–1985. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press. Martins, J.D.S., 1981. Os Camponeses e a Política No Brasil: As Lutas Sociais no Campo e Seu
Lugar no Processo Político. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes. Maybury-Lewis, B., 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade
Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. Medeiros, L.S.d., 1989. Historia dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE. MST, 2000. The MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People. Brasilia. http://
www.mstbrazil.org/manifesto.html/ Müller, G., 1989. Complexos Agroindustrial e Modernização Agrária. São Paulo: Hucitec. Navarro, Z., 2000. ‘Breaking New Ground: Brazil’s MST’. NACLA Report on the Amer-
icas, 33 (5): 36–9. Pereira, A.W., 1997. The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast
Brazil, 1961–1988. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Producing Community	519
520	Wendy Wolford
Petras, J., 1997. ‘Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left’. New Left Review, 223: 17–47. Petras, J., 1998. ‘The Political and Social Basis of Regional Variation in Land Occupations
in Brazil’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 254: 124–33. Prado Júnior, C., 1945. Formação do Brasil Contemporâneo. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Prado Júnior, C., 1966. A Revolucão Brasileira. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Rangel, I., 1956. ‘Iniciativa Pública e Privada’. Econômica Brasileira, 2 (3): 33–140. Robles, W., 2000. ‘Beyond the Politics of Protest: The Landless Rural Workers Move-
ment of Brazil’. Canadian Journal of Development Studies, XXI (3): 656–91. Rocha, J. and S. Branford, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in
Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau. Rossiaud, J. and I. Scherer-Warren, 2000. A Democratização Inacabavel: As Memòrias do
Futuro. Petropolis, RJ: Vozes. Schwade, E., 1992. A Luta Não Faz Parte Da Vida . . . E A Vida: O Projeto Politico-
Religioso De Um Assentamento No Oeste Catarinense. Florianopolis, SC: Universidade
Federal de SC. Schwartz, S.B., 1985. Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society: Bahia, 1550–
1835. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schwartz, S.B., 1992. Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels: Reconsidering Brazilian Slavery. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Illinois Press. Selcher, W., 1986. Political Liberalization in Brazil: Dynamics, Dilemmas and Future Pros-
pects. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Seligmann, R., 1998. PROCERA: Programa Especial de Credito Para Reforma Agrária.
Brasilia, DF: Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária. Sigaud, L., 1979. Os Clandestinos e os Direitos: Estudo Sobre Trabalhadores da Cana-De-
Açúcar de Pernambuco. São Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades. Skidmore, T.E., 1999. Brazil: Five Centuries of Change. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Snow, D., E. Burke Rochford Jr, S. Worden and R. Benford, 1986. ‘Frame Alignment
Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation’. American Sociological Re-
view, 51: 464–81. Stedile, J.P. and B.M. Fernandes, 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta Pela
Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Stein, S.J., 1985. Vassouras, a Brazilian Coffee County, 1850–1900: The Roles of Planter and
Slave in a Plantation Society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Stolcke, V., 1988. Coffee Planters, Workers and Wives: Class Conflict and Gender Relations on
São Paulo Coffee Plantations, 1850–1980. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Teixeira, G., 1999. Fatos e Mitos da Politica Agricola do Governo FHC. Brasilia, DF:
Movimento Sem Terra, MST. Viotti da Costa, E., 2000. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories, Revised Edition.
Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. Wolford, W., forthcoming a. ‘Families, Fields, and Fighting for Land: The Spatial Dy-
namics of Contention in Rural Brazil’. Mobilization: An International Journal. Wolford, W., forthcoming b. ‘Of Land and Labour: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane
Plantations of Northeast Brazil’. Latin American Perspectives. Wright, A., 2001. ‘The Origins of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers’.
Paper prepared for presentation at the meeting of the Latin American Studies Association,
6–8 September 2001, Washington, DC. Zamosc, L., 1986. The Agrarian Question and the Peasant Movement in Colombia: Struggles
of the National Peasant Association, 1967–1981. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2009
Law
Journal of International Women's Studies
The Failed Marriage between Women and the Landless People’s Movement (MST) in Brazil
Rute Caldeira

The present article examines the processes of inequality reproduced inside the MST-run rural encampments; specifically the ones affecting women the most, and in particular women heads of households. This examination leads to the related consideration of the relationship between the MST, its lideranças, and women settlers. Although women are the ones most affected by these processes of inequality, their disadvantaged position is ignored by the movement, in theory an organisation on the Left. This relationship between the MST and women or ‘women’s issues’ mirrors the old question of the ‘failed marriage’ between women, feminism and the Left in Latin America. Finally, it is argued that two main obstacles prevent women who remain inside the MST-run encampments and settlements from organising autonomously: the lack of community and/or the institutional weight of the social movement. Hence, either the MST drops its reluctance to deal with ‘women’s issues’ and acts upon them, or women will have to effectively join outside women’s organisations that provide them the support and information needed to fight for their emancipation, against inequality, as well as against the social movement’s phobia of approaching all things deemed class divisive.
Keywords: Brazil, women’s movements, rural social movements, MST
Preamble
I got off the bus and looked around for a man wearing a red cap with the MST logo. Not a difficult task since the bus stop was in the middle of nowhere; any other human being on sight would have been hard to miss. Antônio approached me even before I realised that there were not just one but three men wearing the MST cap. Antônio and Luís were both lideranças, Januário, I was told, was the encampment’s best rower. Why we needed a rower it puzzled me, but only until we had to jump on a tiny canoe to cross the river.
The Itatiaia encampment was just on the other side. The land which made up the occupied fazenda, or encampment, was set on a small mountain. From afar the makeshift shacks made from wood and rusted zinc blended with the intense green of the landscape. Already ashore, I was lead into the communitarian kitchen/canteen, which was still being built. It was lunch time. Men were having lunch. Women were nowhere to be seen. Over lunch and coffee, I was bombarded with questions: about Portugal, Europe, the world. When men went back to work, women finally came out of the communitarian kitchen. I realised then that it was there where they were ‘hiding’, in the kitchen. Before I could even engage in a conversation with them, Antônio came back for me to tour me around
1 School of Law The University of Manchester Oxford Road Manchester M13 9PL 0161 275 4783 rute.caldeira@manchester.ac.uk
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	237
the encampment: the plots, the school, the planned irrigation system. After this informative guided tour I decided to just wander around the encampment, to see, feel and, talk to the people, the settlers. The designated communal area was deserted. Settlers were either ploughing the land or at home. Correction: male settlers were ploughing the land; female settlers were in or around their shacks.
Few days later I hit the road again to Campos de Goytacazes, where I spent some time in the occupied fazendas of Dores, Saquarema, and Mergulhao. Nelson picked me up at the bus station. We had the same arrangement: I would identify him from the MST cap. No canoe this time. Only an old red car equipped with powerful sound boxes blaring Lula’s campaign songs, and literally wrapped in Lula’s campaign posters. The fazendas were actually a complex rather than separate and individual landholdings. The sum of the three amounted to the land refereed to as the Oziel Alves encampment. The vastness of land was impressive. The land was so plain that in the horizon it met the sky in a perfectly horizontal straight line. It was sparse of trees and left brown/grey-coloured by the successive fires: cane fields are burnt in pre-harvest to remove the unnecessary green leaves, dead leaves, top growth, and to kill any vermin. In the three fazendas, the makeshift shacks were built close to the main entrance and to the most accessible road. In Mergulhao, as well as in Dores, most men either worked ‘outside’, in the nearest city, or in their plots. The majority of women spent their days in the built up area, in their shacks. They minded the children, cooked, cleaned and some also grew their own vegetable gardens right next to their shacks. In Saquarema on the other hand, women were a rare sight. This fazenda was the farthest away from a main road. There were no public lamp posts within reasonable distance to allow settlers to hack into the electricity lines. There was no water. Saquarema, I was told, was no place for women. ‘Their’ women, men told me, were left behind, in the city. They would move back once they, men, would be able to ‘give’ them a proper home.
Strong gales had battered the encampment over night. Fazenda das Dores was the most badly hit. Serena was inconsolable. Her shack’s fragile structure, built from plastic bags and scavenged light wood, had been shattered by the strong winds. Half of what she called home had literally flown away. Liana tried to give her solace, whilst Liliana was walking around in a desperate bid to find any remains of what was once Serena’s, and her two children’s, home. ‘I will not give up’, she told me in distress, ‘only because I have nowhere to go’. ‘The others will give you a hand’, I replied attempting to console her. ‘Qui nada! Here the big ones eat the little ones’, said Liliana, while picking up a torn zinc sheet from the floor. In no time some other women were joining the conversation. Many of them were single mothers. They fitted the category which in sociology is commonly labelled as female-headed households. And what started off as a conversation about the previous night’s strong gales, ended up in a torrent of complaints about life inside the encampment, the MST and its lideranças. This was to be the first of many conversations I would hold with these and other women living in MST-run encampments and settlements.
Introduction
In 2002 when I travelled to Brazil for the first time to do my fieldwork in Rio state’s MST-run encampments, I had no intention to look specifically at ‘women’s issues’. My research objective was a different one; instead I aimed to uncover the internal
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	238
dynamics of a rural social movement in the complex context of globalised politics. Yet I stumbled into it inevitably: it was too much in my face, or in anybody’s face for that matter. It was just there, in the interstices of the encampments’ everyday life: in the gestures, faces, small talks, signs, undercurrent hierarchies, behaviours and language. The encampments were a men’s world.
Notwithstanding my initial research objective, I could not simply ignore the fact that women, who actually animated daily life inside the encampment, were ‘hidden’ away in their shacks, absorbed in domestic chores. Yet whenever they ‘came out’, whenever they felt at ease to talk, they would expose the grievances which afflicted them, the lack of support and solidarity, their abandonment.
I set off on this journey with the view that the MST was a progressive left wing social movement, one which continuously tried to deconstruct Brazilian’s conservative social structures. These conservative structures are deeply rooted in, and are supported by, the unequal distribution of land and consequent unequal distribution of economic, social and political power. The MST was forged in the peasant struggles for the democratised access to land in the backbone of Brazil’s right wing military dictatorship. In its inception the movement was influenced by progressive Catholics, partisans of the Theology of Liberation, and left wing political opponents to the regime (on the emergence of the MST, and its struggles see, for instance, Strapazzon 1998; Fernandes 2000; Branford et al. 2003; Carter 2003; Caldeira 2008a). Since the mid 1980s the MST has frequently renewed its full commitment to a just and equalitarian society, the last time being in the fifth National Congress in 2007 (see Caldeira 2008a). Gender equality is, in principle, part of this social movement’s progressive agenda. Indeed, the MST, in the description of its various yet integrated struggles, went as far as to state that the organisation of women is seminal for the undermining of the ‘sexist capitalist model’ which the movement purports to fight against. Concomitantly, and according to the MST’s public official discourse, this dismantling of existing sexist relations that devaluate and subjugate women purposively undermines Brazilian’s colonial and post-colonial conservative social structures since women’s subjugation to the patriarchal family unit has been undoubtedly one of these structures’ long-lasting and sustaining pillars (Saffioti 1969; Samara 1983; Bernardes 1989; Del Priore 1989 and 1997) (1).
Hence, and for the above reasons, in the movement’s settlements and encampments I expected to find progressive microsocieties where land was either collectively owned or equally distributed, and where women were full members of the community, equal to their fellow male members. Instead I was close to find out that in these self-labelled progressive communities, processes of inequality are reproduced and in some cases exacerbated. In the course of this research I have identify in particular two processes of inequality which tended to be reproduced inside the MST-run communities: socio-economic and gender. In this article I examine the latter, the former having been examined elsewhere (see Caldeira 2008b). This examination leads to the reflection upon the relationship between the MST, its leaders, and women settlers. Although women were the ones most affected by these processes of inequality, their disadvantaged position was ignored by the movement, in theory an organisation on the Left. This relationship between the MST and women or ‘gender issues’ mirrors the old question of the ‘failed marriage’ between women, feminism and the Left in Latin America.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	239
Interestingly, many contemporary academics would dismiss such problematic, while probably arguing that this dichotic relationship between the Left and women’s rights and organisation is in fact outdated. Simply because academically this question is considered outdated, it does not make it disappear from reality. And the reality for women living inside the MST-run encampments is that discrimination is part of their daily lives greatly because attending to women’s needs and boldly addressing their discrimination may potentially inflict damage to the unity of the ‘class’ in particular, and to the strength of the collective social movement in general. In addition, these women find themselves trapped since their ability to organise autonomously whilst ‘married’ to the MST is considerably weakened by the inexistence of a community and by the sheer institutional weight of the social movement. On the other hand, their social and economic vulnerability prevents them from dropping out - they feel they have nowhere to go back to. The fact that this happens in the MST-run encampments and settlements is greatly significant of the still ingrained discrimination of women in the Brazilian countryside where social movement is a major player. The MST, although indirectly, is greatly responsible for the selection of land reform beneficiaries, and for the organisation of land reform settlements. The Brazilian government traditionally keeps the MST-run encampments and settlements at arm’s length, conceding the social movement a high degree of autonomy when it comes to the internal organisation of these sites (2).
Back to the old question: the Left, women’s emancipation, feminisms, and ‘failed marriages’
“This is a revolutionary period and we expect these things to happen. With time, they will be resolved because they reflect the contradictions of capitalism”, Nelson, a national MST leader explained this to me when I interviewed him for the third time and inquired him about the processes of gender discrimination in the MST-run encampments. When unpacking his statement, one realises that the encampment, the stage which precedes the settlement, corresponds to the ‘revolutionary period’ and ‘these things’ are the processes of inequality, especially of gender inequality, with which I was most concerned about. ‘These things’ are also the women. Ultimately, his reply did not dissipate my concern that in the ‘revolution’ women were clearly being ignored. I doubted seriously about their possible change of status in aftermath of the revolutionary period, from ‘things’ to female humans, if ever they managed to actually stand rather than fall.
This discussion is not a new one. The difficulty of the Left to incorporate women’s specific demands was the object of a heated academic debate in the 1970s further propelled by Hartmann’s “The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism”. Hartmann recognised that socialist political structures subsumed feminism and women’s specific demands in the struggle against capital, whereby the needs of the working class as a collective entity would inevitably take precedence over potentially class-divisive issues (Hartmann 1981). For the sake of the struggle, women’s demands run the risk of not being addressed at all: the collective entity which is the working class is predominantly a masculine one. As a socialist feminist, Hartman did not advocate the separation or divorce between socialist parties or Marxist party structures and feminism. Instead, in an attempt at marital mediation, Hartmann hoped to “organize a practice” which addressed “both the struggle against patriarchy and the struggle against capitalism”
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	240
(Hartmann 1981, 33). Other feminists however argued that such marriage was beyond salvation. A patriarchal society would survive the fall of capitalist, the rise of socialism and thrive in any other political system, Left or Right. Socialist parties were patriarchal in themselves, and often argued that women’s emancipation would ‘naturally’ develop from women’s increasing and “fuller participation in the public, economic sphere” (Ray and Korteweg 1999, 60; see also Chinchilla 1991). Hence, autonomous organisation of feminist women was the only way forward. For the battle for women to be won, divorce was the only solution.
Wherever a gender and “feminist consciousness” developed (Klatch 2001) this discussion permeated the debate between women who integrated autonomous movements and women who decided to continue their feminist struggle from within party structures. In Latin America the development of this discussion is illustrated in the several debates which took place in the Encontros, a region wide biannual meeting that brings together feminists, women’s movements’ representatives, and activists (Sternbach et al. 1992; Alvarez et al. 2003). In the 1960s and 1970s the Latin American continent was plagued with populist and autocratic regimes. Women began to organise or more often than not began being organised by either the progressive Catholic Church organisations, or the Left, or both. Initially, dismantling and eradicating patriarchy altogether was not these women’s conscious aim. Instead, women’s participation in the public sphere was fuelled by women’s increasing difficulty to ensure the reproduction of the household and the fulfilment of their duties as mothers, wives and housewives.
Economic pressures, accelerated urbanisation (Rodriguez 1994), migration, and the severing of fallback networks facilitated women’s discontentment and propelled their mobilisation. As it complied with their traditionally and culturally ascribed roles, women’s participation in the public sphere at this stage did not seem to threaten the established social order. Within Latin American cultural tradition “the subordination of women is anchored to the strongly cohesive family group that constitutes the base of the whole system of social relations” (Jelin 1990: 2). This ‘whole system of social relations’ apparently was not questioned, but reinforced, by women’s mobilisation and public demands.
Women’s preoccupations were not apolitical and through their participation in the public sphere, seen and felt as ‘harmful’ (Lovell 2000), women hoped to ‘push’ policies into other directions. Nevertheless, in many cases women began questioning their traditional and ascribed roles. Sexuality and reproductive rights were just some of the issues that many women began to address and which could potentially emancipate them from their ‘nurturing’ and ‘mothering’ roles. Hence, rather than reproducing and reinforcing women’s traditional roles within the family and in society, women’s participation on such basis allowed many to question tradition and to embrace new/different identities (Neuhouser 1995; Stephen 1992; Safa 1990; Caldeira 1990; Schirmer 1988). Women went from ‘pushing’ policies to ‘doing’ politics (see Molyneux 1986; and also Chinchilla 1991). Some broke from the religious or political groups which first harboured them, whilst others remained operating from within. Some would rather label themselves feminists whilst others avoided the category altogether in favour of the women’s movements’ designation. The decision to stay in or opt out, to be a feminist or a movement’s women was a rational one. These differences paved the way for the cracking of the varnish in the Encontros (Sternbach et al. 1992; Alvarez et al. 2003). The políticas
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	241
asserted the viability of advancing with the struggle for women from within party structures, whereas the autónomas argued that sexism “was shaped by a relatively autonomous, patriarchal sex-gender system” (Sternbach et al. 1992, 712) rather than the consequence of capitalism, and that political parties were in themselves patriarchal institutions (Chinchilla 1977).
In Latin America this is still an open-ended discussion. The 1996 Encontro was especially confrontational and in some ways deepened the trench between the antagonist champs. The last Encontro of the Millennium in 1999 might have been construed as an attempt to find a common ground yet the different approaches as to how organise women and their struggle were not bridged (Alvarez et al. 2003). The anxiety to create harmony after the heated Encontro of 1996 led to the rushed leap into a possibly less contentious debate on ‘cultural feminism’ (Alvarez et al. 2003) centred around the feminist self. It ignored however that the avoidance of conflict, which can often be creative, and the non- debate on whether or not women can possibly deconstruct a sex-gender system from within party structures is actually counter-productive. Women, autónomas or políticas, ought to reflect upon their practices and to permanently assess the impact of their achievements. This particular conflict provides a sort of quality control assurance to those who, on whatever side of the barricade, struggle against patriarchy. Indeed, it is actually necessary to further the debate, no matter how painful it may turn out to be, in order to uncover the strengths and failures of working independently or from ‘within’.
The MST’s approach to gender issues may just prove the autónomas right. Some feminists discuss the ways in which feminism can operate from within party structures, advising them on how to build partnerships (Ávila 1997). All they have to do, it seems, is to devise “how to link practical (women’s) interests derived from the existing gender division of labor and strategic (feminist) gender interest derived from a critique of the existing gender hierarchy” (Chinchilla 1991, 302). Others argue that Latin American feminism was too “severe in its criticism of the left” and that the real problem now lies with the ‘NGOisation’ and institutionalisation of women’s movements instead (Castro 2001). However, why is the burden of resolving the conflict between the Left, party structures or social movements on the Left and the emancipation of women always on women themselves? If these structures have to be ‘pushed’ and pressured into dealing with women’s and feminist issues, then perhaps dealing with such issues from within may not be such a great idea after all.
The old question in Brazil: the urban and the rural mobilisation of women
The progressive deepening of the economic situation in Brazil after the military coup in 1964 favoured women’s increased participation in popular and social movements (Blay 1985; Corcoran-Nantes 1990; Wheeler 2003). The degradation of families’ economic situation and the dilapidation of social rights and civil liberties pushed women to the forefront of social protest. This progressive move was nevertheless inspired by traditional values. As pointed above, women protested as mothers, as wives and as housewives. For many women the Catholic Church-inspired organizations were their platforms for protest.
In the late 1960s the Roman Catholic Church underwent a process of institutional ‘reformation’ (Alvarez 1990). Consequently, in Latin America the Church, a traditional ally of conservative and autocratic regimes, proclaimed its commitment to the poor.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	242
Liberation theologians played an important role in the re-shaping of this ‘reformed’ Church. Comunidades Eclesiais de Base (Ecclesial Based Communities, CEBs), organised by local churches at the parishes’ level, brought together the ‘poor’ and the local religious leaders. The faithful were invited to discuss the Church ‘new social teachings’ (Alvarez 1990; Hallum 2003) and to debate and share their more earthly concerns.
Women’s participation in these gatherings was welcomed by the priests who now preached the equality of women according to the Bible (Alvarez 1990). CEBs allowed women to break through the isolation of the domestic sphere. Alternatively, women were now able to share and compare their experiences with each other and more importantly, they were able to voice their concerns. Nevertheless, their roles in this new public sphere were limited by their self and socially and religiously ascribed identities. In CEBs women’s “roles seldom transcended the spheres of activity which “God” and “nature” assigned’ to them and remained ‘consistent with their traditionally defined “nurturing and mothering” roles” (Alvarez 1990, 386). Put differently, CEBs organised women “around a diffuse but effective ideology that identified them as mothers acting in the public sphere on behalf of children” (Drogus 1999) and the family.
Women’s mobilisation and participation became especially important in the urban contexts where migrant families were crammed in shantytowns or peripheries (Neuhouser 1995) and where the provision of basic needs was a major concern (Sarti 1989; Corcoran- Nantes 1990). These women were soon waved as the mothers and wives of the ‘popular classes’. Concomitantly, “[F]eminism began to find fertile ground among the urban middle sectors as a radical proposal to politicize the private, to rethink or reinvent the most fundamental relationships in the family, in daily life, in habits which had become ‘natural’” (Sarti 1989, 76). Women’s movements, feminists, the Left and the Church, despite the expected contradictions, worked together in opposition to the military regime. Yet, the severance between women and the Church was bound to happen (Drogus 1999 and 1997). The rigidity of the Church’s moral principles, and the reluctance to bend its interests for the interests of women facilitated women’s retreat (Sarti 1989; Ávila 1997). Some women’s movements became autonomous. Others were incorporated in and developed under an autonomous feminist framing provided by urban middle-class women and former exiled women (Baldez 2003; Lovell 2000; Alvarez 1990; Hahner 1982). Social movements’ on the Left as well as political parties, after the initial reaction of repugnancy for all things ‘feminist’, were also all too keen to harbour women’s initiatives especially in the period of transition to democracy, or abertura (Drogus 1999, Schmink 1981).
In the countryside however, not all factors that affect the reproduction of the household in the urban settings are present. Whereas in the cities women’s demands sit more easily with their traditional roles, in the countryside this might not be the case. In the countryside land is the most important resource for the survival of the family unit and the reproduction of the household. But land has always been regarded as an exclusively male mean of production, and landownership a male prerogative. Men own the land and work the land. In the countryside, a woman’s role within the family unit is limited to her reproductive role (Deere and León 1986). Women are also the family carers and the men’s ‘helpers’ (Spindel 1986). However, rural women did integrate collective struggles, especially struggles for rural workers’ social and labour rights (Spindel 1986) despite the
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	243
social and material obstacles to their participation (Thayer 2001). Nevertheless, female landownership for instance remained a peripheral issue for quite some time. In a not so distant past, in Latin America women were not constituted as land reform beneficiaries because a plot was due to ensure the sustainability of the family unit. Instead, household heads, the representatives of the family unit who happened to be male, were (Deere and León 2001). In Brazil, women’s equal rights to title of ownership and concession of use were only granted in the 1988 Constitution, Article 189 (Guivant 2003). Consequently, since 1988 rights to title of ownership and/or concession of use can be granted both to the men and the women in a couple when requested. Government institutions such as INCRA do not seem too engaged in enforcing this legal option (Guivant 2003) nor do, unfortunately, unions, the MST, political parties, and Church inspired rural organizations (Deere and León 1999). Moreover, until 2001 most rural women in Brazil wishing to become land reform beneficiaries hardly fitted INCRA’s selection criteria. Particularly the criteria according to which priority should be given to larger families and to experienced candidates in agricultural work (Deere 2003). Female-headed households are usually and on average smaller than male-headed households, and women’s experience of agricultural work is rarely recognised as ‘work’ and often devaluated (Deere 2003).
In 2001 the Brazilian government abolished most of these discriminatory criteria and introduced further rules to tackle gender inequality in the process of land reform. Yet, enforcing rules and laws in the Brazilian countryside has proven to be an almost insurmountable task, especially laws that enshrine women’s rights to land. Inheritance rights to land are also and still a problem in the countryside, where women are systematically discriminated (see, for instance, Carneiro 2001 and Brumer 2004) since often male heirs are given precedence whilst women are left with two options: marriage or migration (see, for instance, Stropasolas 2004). However, in the countryside few parties or movement structures have taken women’s struggle to heart.
The making of MST-encampments
Findings and observations presented in this article derive mostly from non- participant observation in Oziel Alves rural encampment in the Goytacazes region, in Rio de Janeiro state. Nevertheless, conclusions are also supported by further in-situ non- participant observations in other encampments I visited in 2002. Since the bulk of my ethnographic work took place in the MST-run encampments, as opposed to settlements, it is therefore necessary in this section to explain the difference between encampments and settlements as well as to disclose the process behind the formation of MST-run encampments and settlements. These are the spaces and places where the social movement trials the formation of what its leaders call the MST’s progressive and revolutionary communities.
The MST is known for its land occupations or rather for the occupation of unproductive lands. The argument for the ‘legitimacy’ of the occupation is rooted in the Land Statutes, published by the military government in the mid 1960s. According to this bill those who own fallow (and socially unproductive) lands will be expropriated. This bill is still the backbone of the present legal corpus that regulates land reform in Brazil. The assessment of the productive status of the land and the on-site technical inspection (vistoria) is due to be carried out by INCRA’s technicians (3). The vistoria is a decisive
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	244
and conclusive moment in this process. If, after the vistoria, the land is considered unproductive, INCRA initiates the negotiation of compensation with the landowner.
In 2001, under Cardoso’s presidency, extra legal clauses were added to the existing legal corpus that regulates land reform in Brazil. According to one of these legal clauses land that is occupied before INCRA’s productivity assessment will not be inspected at all by this government agency. In such cases, the process of negotiation with the landowner/expropriation cannot be initiated. Consequently, land can only be occupied after INCRA’s productivity assessment. This has had wider implications for the MST. Before 2001 the MST occupied unproductive lands in order to force INCRA to carry out vistorias. Nowadays the MST is forced to collaborate with INCRA: usually MST regional leaders identify unproductive lands in a given area and report them to INCRA. INCRA then carries out a vistoria. Only after this productivity assessment the MST occupies the land and sets up an encampment. It can take some time before the land is legally sanctioned. The process of expropriation can take (and usually does take) several years. Presently the landowner has much more to gain when s/he decides either to negotiate compensation or to appeal in court. According to Law No. 8,629 published on the 25th of February of 1993 a fair (justa) compensation is one which fully reflects the land’s market value. Several elements are taken into account when determining compensation, specifically: the property’s geographical location; the land’s agricultural (productivity) potential; the size of the property; the area of the property; the history of ownership and use; the functionality; and the state of conservation of the improvements made throughout the ownership years. The longer an appeal takes, the more likely it is that the landowner will be awarded interests on any, compensation paid.
Nevertheless, the MST settles its people on these lands because once the land is legally sanctioned those who are already living on the land will automatically earn the right to become land reform settlers/beneficiaries. That is, INCRA gives priority to those who are already living on the land, i.e., in the encampments. Encampments precede settlements. They designate the occupied lands prior to the completion of the legal process of adjudication after which encampments will then be designated of ‘land reform settlements’.
The living conditions in these encampments are often very poor. In most cases there is no access to clean and safe water, sanitary infrastructures are nonexistent, and settlers usually have to coexist with rats and fleas in makeshift shacks. Shacks are built in strategic locations inside the occupied property. Built up areas in the encampments are often found within easy access to a main road as well as further away in order to prevent other squatters from settling in. While living in these encampments, there is not much settlers can do besides waiting for the determination of the process of expropriation, i.e., for the legal sanctioning of the encampments. They cannot yet plough and work on their plots and they are not in a position to apply for subsidies and/or loans.
However, in most cases, the MST leaders, assisted by INCRA technicians, divide the encampments’ land area into individual plots. Settlers are then allowed to start ploughing their plots for future crops. This is nevertheless an informal arrangement since these encampments are not yet legally sanctioned. Moreover, the work settlers can do on their plots is very limited. Usually these are lands that were kept idle for many years for speculative gain. Huge investment is required to increase these lands productivity levels and bring them into use. Settlers are not in a position to invest: legally these plots do not
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	245
belong to them; consequently they cannot apply for loans/subsidies. But because the determination of the expropriation process can take years, the division of the plots is one of the MST leaders’ strategies to boost settlers’ moral and avoid an increase in the number of dropouts. Settlers cannot yet live off the land, but by having the property divided into plots they feel as if something has been achieved. In reality however, even after this informal division of the land into individual plots, life inside the encampments continues to be unduly harsh. Families struggle financially. Even the construction of makeshift shacks represents a huge cost. The Government no longer provides basic staple foods to those living ‘inside’. Local Churches and catholic groups donate what they can: plastic and zinc sheets, light woods, clothes, occasionally food.
These material concerns are matched by more ‘social’ ones. In the encampments new communities are taking shape. People who did not know each other at all before are brought together in one place where their existence is put under pressure due to the poor or total lack of material living conditions. All is new. All is sometimes too hard to bear. Away from previous extended family, church or community associations networks, suspicion and fear are more likely to settle in than solidarity. Each own with their own. In the encampments communities are more likely to be atomised into relatively small family units than in Brazilian society in general. But it is with these communities that the MST is prepared to work. The movement hopes to shape a community that does not resemble the ones ‘outside’: one where solidarity and equality prevail over inequality and individualism. Yet that was not, it seemed to me, what was taking shape in Oziel Alves. The next section examines the process of reproduction of unequal social relations that in the encampment affected women the most, and especially women heads of households.
Processes of reproduction of unequal relationships in a ‘community of strangers’
‘Here I have eight kids with me, eight’: heavily pregnant for the thirteenth time, Lilia was proudly telling me how she had raised her twelve children single-handily. ‘Men come and go’, she said with her arms folded across her chest, ‘women are left with the children’. ‘But in here’ she added, ‘life is harder for a woman with no man’. ‘Personally I trust no-one’, Veronica added, ‘here we live in a community of strangers’.
Although women living in Oziel Alves felt they lived in a community of strangers, the leaders thought differently. In theory, the MST aims to create a different ‘country’ based on a different configuration of social relations rooted in equality, solidarity and more “humane values” (4). For this to happen, the movement takes the view that inside the encampments, communities have to be regulated. The MST is a highly structured social movement. Despite the somewhat public image of a fluid and informal organisational structure, the social movement has a tightly structured internal hierarchy. This structured approach to the organisation of the movement, at the national and regional levels, is reflected within the individual encampments where a more anarchic form of organisation would in fact be expected. Biding rules are the preferred mechanism of organisation in the encampments. Knowingly or unknowingly, settlers agree to a contractual relationship once they settle in the MST-run encampments. In sum: the MST represents them, fights for their rights; settlers contribute by taking part in the struggle, by demonstrating, and by obeying to a set of rules. Whether or not the actions of ones match the expectations of the others is a different matter (see Caldeira 2008b).
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	246
According to one MST’s internal rule, often imposed in the encampments, settler families cannot be absent from the encampments for any substantial amount of time. Otherwise, when it comes to distributing the plots, non-abiding families will be penalized by getting the worst ones (5). Ultimately, these families may be expelled. This same rule applies to INCRA-run settlements. However, in theory in the settlements settlers are already able to live off the land whereas in the encampments they are not. In the encampments settlers cannot apply for any governmental subsidy/loan/support to start off their production. Hence, they are still economically dependent on a job. Inside the encampments there are no paid jobs. Sometimes settlers have to commute long distances to actually find one.
Holding a job is, in many respects, incompatible with the MST’s internal rule on ‘compulsory sedentary living’. This rule is very important for the MST. The strength of the MST comes from being a movement of the ‘masses’ and this rule ties the ‘masses’ to the movement. It is also a guarantee that squatters organised by the MST will become land reform settlers/beneficiaries once the land is legally sanctioned. Therefore MST’s influence is perpetuated inside the settlements giving the social movement even greater political power.
For the large majority of settlers and their families it is inconceivable to survive without at least one paid job. This rule constrains their mobility. Hence, for many families the way around the rule was to have some family members working and often living ‘outside’, in the nearest town or city, whilst the others lived ‘inside’, in the encampments. The large majority of the families in Oziel Alves were composed of two adults (usually the couple) and their children. In these cases the husband/father would leave the encampment during the day to go to work for instance, while women and children stayed ‘inside’. Still, most families were in fact forced to survive on one salary instead of two (6).
In Saquarema however women were the breadwinners. Because of poor or nonexistent infrastructures in this particular fazenda, female settlers stayed in the city with the children, where they were also able to keep their jobs. These families were not de facto female-headed households. Instead, they corresponded to female-maintained family units: all the decisions that affected the family members’ lives were still taken by the male member of the family (often the husband/father). Women provided the incomes but men controlled the money. Men often decided to invest on farming tools, seeds and small animals to rear. Their wives were effectively physically and socially absent from the encampments. Alternatively, for these men having women as the main breadwinners was not felt as a humiliating condition since men stayed in the encampments alone for reasons seen as ‘manly’. They were seen as better able to live in the encampments and to perform the few agricultural chores.
Yet whilst traditional family units were able to work around this particular rule, not all units were able to organize strategies of intra-familial labour division which would allow them to have at least one member working ‘outside’. Female-headed households were particularly affected. In the encampments observed very few female heads of households were widowers. The large majority of them were separated from their husbands; a minority had had several partners, never married and kept the children. Almost all of them were born and bred in deprived urban neighbourhoods, shanty towns, and their decision to join the movement was theirs and theirs alone. In two specific cases
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	247
these women’s extended families were so much against their decision to join that they severed contact. In most cases, extended families had never provided much material support, a factor which along with the promise of a plot of land also weighted in these women’s decision to join a collective social movement. All female heads of households I encountered in the encampments visited argued that they were seduced by the promise of a plot of land because cultivating their own plot of land would allow them to ‘work from home’ and to closely care for their children. Likewise, they thought that their integration in a rural and cohesive community would provide a safer environment for their children to grow up in.
However, once in the encampments, these women were soon confronted with the need to keep their jobs (if they had one) or to look for a job ‘outside’ the home. Paradoxically they could not be absent from the encampment for any substantial amount of time or otherwise they would be breaking the rule. Under this condition, it was extremely difficult for them to keep their previous job or any job. They made no attempts to organise themselves collectively to share labour like childcare: the community was not as collective and as cohesive as they initially imagined it would be. Moreover, even if they did attempt to share childcare, this still meant that some of them would have to be absent from the encampment for a substantial amount of time.
Nevertheless, women heads of households did tried to bend the rule. In cases where they had more than two or three children living with them, they would officially register at least two of them in order to gain access to government benefits, and especially to become eligible for the Programa Bolsa Escola (7). These benefits, which are these women’s social right, would secure them at least one source of income. Unregistered children (especially their oldest and male children) were often put to work. They were sent to the roadsides to sell wild fruits, picked from the surrounding forests, to drivers and passers-by. Other women would also sell wild and/or dry fruits/seeds at the roadsides at least twice a week. Others still would work one or two days a week for the few landowners in and around the area where the encampments were located as sugarcane cutters.
From the sociological point of view, this rule is very interesting due to the impacts of its implementation. On one hand, it deepens the reproduction of the processes which bring about inequality and that the MST purport eradicate and believe to be characteristic of the communities ‘outside’ only. On the other hand, it lays bare the MST- run encampments’ immunodeficiency towards these processes. Unequal gender relations for instance, and women’s position in the social geography of social relations in the encampment were mimicked, if not exacerbated. In fact, in the community of strangers of Oziel Alves women became ever more invisible. Husbands were reluctant to have them taking up leadership positions, or spending too much time chatting around or ‘jogando conversa fora’. Because most women gave up their jobs, women’s domain and social space was confined to the home. This situation of relative isolation was in stark contrast to these women’s previous lives ‘outside’ where the large majority of them used to work away from home, go to the church, community gatherings, live close to their extended family, and know ‘their’ community inside out.
Women heads of households led an even more isolated existence. Their social space of interaction was forcibly restricted to the encampment where they were often the subject of gossip amongst married women. Some married women tended to see ‘women
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	248
with no men’ as a threat to their own marital relationship. Also, ‘manless’ women were seen as a temptation to men in general, and to men whose wives were still living outside, in particular. Some married women took their role as moral guardians of the institution of marriage too seriously, to the point of ostracising other women, especially single women and female heads of households.
The process of reproduction of socio-economic inequalities is yet another process taking place inside the encampments, for which the rule of ‘compulsory sedentary living’ is of particular importance (Caldeira 2008b). Being the ones most affected by it, female heads of family complained that this rule was intrinsically unfair. Families who were able to obtain support from relatives living ‘outside’, who had any other sources of income (either a job, or a rented shack in a city’s favela somewhere, or both), or who had savings, were less likely to drop out and more likely to survive through the harshness of the encampment. ‘In the end’, Veronica concluded in the course of an agitated conversation regarding women’s situation inside the encampment, ‘the ones who really need it, who really needed land in the first place because they have nothing, are the ones who will give up’. In the encampments, similar to what happens ‘outside’ female-headed households and their children were the visible face of poverty.
Nelson, a regional and national leader living in Oziel Alves brushed off such criticisms. I argued that inside the encampments the reproduction of the already unequal economic and social hierarchies which existed in the ‘outside’ was a reality. Women and especially female-headed households were perhaps its worst victims. Equality, I was then reassured, will be restored with time. Nelson, through his highly politicised discourse punctuated by countless political jargons, argued that the encampment embodied a ‘revolutionary’ period where although chaos seemed to be taking place order and equality would eventually be restored. The real question was, I thought, will these women stand or fall during this ‘revolutionary’ period?
Liana approached us women when she noticed Isabel was crying. Isabel, like Serena, had not yet been able to reconstruct her shack. She needed a job, she was telling me, but she could not leave the encampment and she would not leave her children at the care of the others. She trusted no one ‘inside’, she argued. ‘Why don’t you find a boyfriend?’, Liana enquired, ‘I got myself one and he helps me a lot’. He stayed over twice a week and helped her ploughing the land. She was lucky she said: he did not mind her being pregnant from another man.
Women and the MST: an uncomfortable and contentious marriage
Despite the MST’s public commitment to gender equality as a strategy to undermine what the movement leaders call a ‘sexist capitalist model’, on the ground women’s issues are still seen as devise. There is clear dissonance between what are the social movement’s stated political stances and hence ideology, and what is the movement and its leaders’ practices and hence praxis.
In practice the movement has developed a highly organised and hierarchic internal structure, which Guivant (2003) describes as patriarchal, and internally leaders are expected to abide by an iron disciplinary code. According to these leaders the MST is a class movement. Its geographical political domain par excellence is the countryside hence the MST’s class members are the ‘rural workers’, or the sem-terra. The urban proletariat is the rural workers’ twin brother. The poor, a category widely and commonly
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	249
used by the movement’s leaders, are both: the urban and the rural working class. The needs of the working class, in the sense of the poor, take precedence over all other issues. When confronted with the question of the reproduction of gender discrimination
inside the encampments in my interviews the leaders would, more often than not, argue that women do not occupy a different class position. Within the movement women are, above all, sem-terra and the sem-terra form a class-in-itself (Wolford 2004). When women join the MST they become part of the sem-terra community, which equates to being part of a class-for-itself (8). Only the problems that clearly affect this community as a whole, as a collective or as a class-for-itself are given priority. Additionally to women’s dilution in the class struggle, women are also diluted substance in the family cell. The family unit is central for the strategic struggle against the forces of neo- liberalism and imperialism. The MST does not separate women from the family unit.
According to Guivant “in spite of the collective perspective of the MST’s political discourse and some community experiences in collective settlements, the family is still the “natural” unit of reference for discussing women’s issues” (Guivant 2003, 26). Women’s roles within the movement are still determined by women’s attributed ‘mothering’ and ‘nurturing’ roles (Paulilo 2004; Guivant 2003) and women’s discrimination and subordination is rarely acknowledged.
Family, I was told by one national leader, is also the most important variable in the making of a sem-terra community which also depends upon the sharing of common traditional and moral values. These values, conveyed within the family, are those “shattered by the foundations and development of the capitalist society” (9). Women ought not to rise above their ascribed roles within the family. In the encampments they remained tied to them and it was on this basis only that they were ‘mobilised’. Alina a national and regional liderança living in Oziel Alves was adamant that women did have their ‘spaces’. In the encampment there was a women’s group which met regularly to talk about women’s problems with ‘their’ men. In these meetings women were not there to discuss men in general, nor women’s issues and patriarchy for that matter, but simply to complain about the one man they dealt with on a daily basis and within the family unit: their husband or partner.
At the national level, the constitution and development of the MST’s Coletivo Nacional de Mulheres (National Women’s Collective, CNM) has not been a peaceful one. In the mid 1980s the MST created the Comissão Nacional de Mulheres (National Commission of Women, CNM). The CNM was due to tackle the prevalence of machismo and other forms of discrimination; to create ‘spaces’ for the debate of women’s problems; to increase women’s participation in collective structures (i.e., trade unions and social movements); and to increase women’s contribution for the conceptualization of the MST’s policies (Deere 2003). In 1989 this Commission simply disengaged itself and women were advised to look for this kind of collective structures outside the social movement (Deere 2003). MST women had to wait seven years for gender issues to be again introduced into the social movement’s agenda. In 1996 the MST CNM was re- established and consolidated as a sector of activity. According to Deere (2003), women’s land rights, for instance, began to be directly addressed by this sector. This is indeed an issue that has deserved a lot of attention in Latin America, particularly in Brazil, where women were systematically discriminated against when it came to the legal titling of the land. However, though women’s landownership was addressed, the MST CNM’s major
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	250
focus continued to be on men and women’s equal participation in the MST-run settlements’ cooperatives.
Another of the principal tasks of the CNM is the organisation of women’s collectives at the state and settlement levels. Yet, this has been a slow and rather unsuccessful process (Guivant 2003). On one hand, the national leaders in the National Leadership tend to show little interest and support for the CNM’s activities. The CNM has always struggled to convince the national leaders in the National Leadership of the need for an institutional approach to gender-specific issues. On the other hand, female leaders themselves find it difficult to combine their leadership activities with their more traditional roles (Guivant 2003). Additionally, they are often the target of a twofold discrimination process: they are discriminated by the national leaders in the National Leadership as well as by other women within the movement (Guivant 2003).
At the encampment and settlement levels, the neglect of gender discrimination issues contributes for the reproduction of women’s traditional social positioning in the countryside: one of subordination and vulnerability. What stroke me the most was that despite these women’s disadvantageous position within the configuration of social relations in the encampment, and the common problems that they face, no attempts to organise an autonomous women’s only group had been made so far. Nevertheless I would later realise that the non-emergence of an autonomous women’s group inside the encampments, and to a certain extent inside the settlements, resulted mainly from two main factors which are explained in the next section.
The non-emergence of autonomous women’s groups: trapped in the movement without a community
Because I was the one who frequently encouraged informal and causal meetings amongst women and doorstep conversations, I had the feeling that I was the link between them, especially between women heads of households. In the encampment women led an isolated existence: their domain was their shack, their family unit. Despite their common problems and grievances, despite the occasional meetings organised by Alina to discuss men’s problems rather then women’s, women remained atomised. Occasionally I would ask them why they would not get together in order to sought solutions to their common problems. I would get sarcastic smiles for an answer. From their other comments however I have established two possible reasons why women in the encampment did not attempt to form a common front to tackle the problems that affected them all. These reasons, I argue, work either, or, or together in preventing the formation of autonomous women-only groups inside the MST-run encampments and settlements.
The first reason is community. In the encampments communities are on the making. Encampments do not correspond to longstanding communities where family and friendship ties have developed over the years and neighbourhood relationships matured. In the encampments settlers do not know each other; they do not trust each other. Additionally the community on the making is not a vibrant one. Settlers live in a compass of wait for the legal sanctioning of the land. Time is painfully slow and the relative geographical isolation of the encampments contributes to the almost absolute isolation of those who spend most of their time ‘inside’.
In Oziel Alves no social bonds were being formed. If one is to accept that women’s mobilisation often “arises from the social bonds which are created via their
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	251
socioeconomic activities in the community” (Corcoran-Nantes 1990: 253; see also Hallum 2003; Singer and Brant 1980), one can understand why in Oziel Alves, after almost four years, women had not mobilised autonomously around the issues that affected them the most. Indeed, the existence of relational networks is essential to mobilisation (Melucci 2001). In the formation of women’s movements, communities have proved especially important. As Corcoran-Nantes argued “women’s lives are centred within the community; even if they undertake paid work outside it, women tend to build up a wide range of relationships with neighbours through their dealings with local commerce, schools and nurseries, health centres, the Church and local government” (1990, 255). In some encampments there might be a school, but there is rarely any other collective space conducive of collective interaction. In Itatiaia encampment for instance there was a community area, as well as a community kitchen. Nevertheless the community was strongly divided. In addition to the inherent difficulties in the making of a community, Catholics and Evangelists were finding it hard to live side by side (9). In Oziel Alves the community was a broken one, and in many aspects beyond repair. Competition for resources was fierce. Plots were being divided and there were settlers who used intimidation as a strategy to get a ‘better plot’. In this context of distrust, intimidation and fear, families tended to become even more inward-looking and isolated.
Whereas in the encampments communities are at their most incipient stages, in the settlements the community of settlers is expected to have matured. Hence social bonds are expected to have emerged, providing women with the opportunities to network and to mobilise autonomously if needs be. However, this is not always the case. In Zumbi dos Palmares, with 508 families and the third largest encampment in the country, a ‘community’ was practically inexistent. Five years on since the legal adjudication of the land and settlers had not yet received any governmental subsidies or loans. There was no school inside and many settlers had abandoned their plots. In older settlements, even in the ones which are marketed by the MST as exemplary, and where some sort of a community has indeed taken shape, the post-revolution period did not revolutionise women’s position within the geography of social and power relations. In Conquista da Fronteira (10), for instance, Silva (2004) concluded that leaders often blamed women themselves for the non-resolution of important gender inequalities which prevailed. Leaders argued that women had the power, yet for ‘cultural reasons’, would not use this power to act upon processes of inequality that still subdued them (Silva 2004; see also Salvaro 2003). Instead women would tend to naturalise and reproduce the existing relations of symbolic domination (Delgado and Caume 2004). By ‘cultural reasons’ leaders meant women’s affection to the home and the family.
Hence whilst in encampments the lack of a mature community and networks seems to prevent women from bonding and organising themselves autonomously, in the settlements the existence of a community does not seem to foster women’s mobilisation either. Yet a second possible reason for the non-formation of a women’s group inside MST-run encampments and settlements is related to the sheer institutional weight of the MST. The MST is a highly structured and hierarchical social movement. There are very little things spontaneous about the movement. Its rational, hierarchical, and structured approached is replicated inside the encampments where some settlers who were groomed to leadership and who often hold regional and national leadership positions live inside.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	252
No doubt they are treated differently by the other settlers. Their presence marks the presence of the movement in the encampment where they live. They are the permanent reminder of the overreaching influence of the MST that in effect organises the encampments and settlements and imposes rules that affect basic social interaction. Some of these rules go as far as regulating relationships between couples and punishment for those who transgress or hold ‘immoral attitudes’ such as adultery (Silva 2004).
The autonomous organisation of a group of women for instance is very likely to enter in collision route with the leaders who see no need to tackle gender issues in the first place and who arrogate to themselves the task of organising whomever for whatever. Women know they would readily be labelled as dissidents. As they told me countless times, they were now at a stage where they had nowhere else to go. Frequently they entertained thoughts of dropping out yet they could not envisage any other alternative to living in the encampment. They could not afford to be expelled. Hence their complaints about the movement and their leadership (and there were plenty of) was done in confidence. Also, especially as ‘women with no men’, another label was the last thing these women wanted. Silva (2004) argued that women’s non-participation in the ‘politics’ of the settlement Conquista da Fronteira, despite their visible unequal position within the structure of social relations, could be understood as a form resistance. Women’s everyday life was not conducive of participation: they were responsible for multiple domestic and nondomestic tasks which left them little time to engage in the politics of the settlement. However, their non-participation was also, according to Silva, a demonstration of their discontentment (Silva 2004). In Oziel Alves the same holds true: women heads of households especially showed little, if any interest, in collective meetings, activities, and/or initiatives. Since they were too afraid to verbalise their discontentment they expressed their contempt by being absent from most collective happenings. Their contempt was mostly towards leaders, but also the other settlers, by whom they felt let down. What kept them ‘inside’ was destitution, the same reason which had led them to the movement in the first place, and the feeling that in this revolutionary ‘adventure’ they had lost the little they had that potentially granted them some independence.
In sum, what prevents these women from organising in the communities observed is not the diversity of these women’s status or the complexity of their needs and challenges (which are nevertheless complex). These encampments do not mirror the postmodern western urban society. These women’s biographies are extremely similar. They are uneducated, illiterate or functionally illiterate. They come from a historically and structurally excluded social background: they are likely to descend from slaves and poor European settlers who escaped famine and poverty to encounter more poverty and famine. Their motivation to leave behind the shantytowns and deprived neighbourhoods where they grew up is also similar: they want the certainty of a mean of production with which to ensure their and their children’s survival, they want to escape urban violence. These women’s needs and challenges are indeed complex however they do not organise themselves collectively either because of the lack of a conductive communitarian and collective context or because of the institutional weight of the MST in the communities where these women live (in the cases where these communities do exist). In fact, the institutional weight of the MST is an indicator of how stratified and hierarchical these communities are likely to become. In the end, these women are not able to establish a dialogue between them; they are not able to share the verbalised version of their common
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	253
experiences inside the encampments, they are unable to materialise their common denominator. Instead they remain atomised and perhaps fixated in their residual differences, feeling isolated in the social geography of the power relations in the MST- run encampments. Interestingly this is not to say that these women do not resist, because they do. Their reluctance to take part in the leaders’ imposed activities and meetings can and should be seen as these women’s resistance to the possible ideological use the social movement might give to their participation, and their demonstration of discontentment for the inexistence of a clear and supportive gender-oriented policy.
Conclusion
The MST is the largest rural social movement in the world. It was forged in the opposition to a cruel right-wing military regime that ruled Brazil, the fifth largest country in the world in land area, for over 20 years. The movement forced the distribution of land in a time when land occupations were received with atrocious violence perpetrated by hired hit men and the military police. It took the streets to demonstrate against unjust agricultural policies despite police violence and repression. It forced the ‘land question’ in Brazil into the political agenda. Many of its activists died, murdered by the powers of be, in this fight for land distribution and reform. Women were there: in the front line of the occupations, in the front line of the protest marches. But women’s role in this struggle stops here. In the encampments and settlements women seem to be relegated to a secondary position: that of carers and helpers, that of mothers and daughters, reproductive beings only. Their specific demands, needs, wishes, aspirations are often, very often, ignored: by the community and the leaders. They have no identity: it is diluted in the category of class. Their integration in new and fragile communities fosters their isolation and prevents the formation of social bonds and networks. In these circumstances, women rarely turn to each other. Yet, even when communities mature and social bonds are established, in the MST-settlements the institutional weight of the social movement is such that renders the organisation of autonomous women-only groups almost impossible. This is unfortunate because in my view at the encampments the autonomous and independent organisation of women is the only way forward to ensure that women’s needs are addressed and that their structurally disadvantaged position in the geography of social relations in the encampments will not be carried through to the settlements. The social movement had over 20 years to develop a gender-oriented policy. This has not been done, and definitely it is not the will of the movement to develop one. It is vital that women in the MST-run encampments and settlements set up their own autonomous structures in order to finally implement change: in their status as women, in their status as farmers. Otherwise the countryside, the movement, as well as macro-agricultural policies will continue to ignore women, laden as they are with a patriarchy ideology.
References
Alvarez, Sonia. 1990. “Women’s Participation in the Brazilian “People’s Church”: A Critical Approach.” Feminist Studies 16(2): 381-408.
Alvarez, Sonia. et al. 2003. “Encontrando os feminismos latino-americanos e caribenhos.” Revista de Estudos Feministas 11(2): 541-575.
Ávila, Maria Betânia. 1997. “Making Alliances and Partnerships: Challenges for the Feminist Movement.” Reproductive Health Matters 5(10): 117-123.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	254
Baldez, Lisa. 2003. “Women’s Movements and Democratic Transition in Chile, Brazil, East Germany, and Poland.” Comparative Politics 35(3): 253-272.Bernardes, Maria Thereza. 1986. Mulheres de ontem?: Rio de Janeiro – século XIX. São Paulo: Coleção Coroa Vermelha (Estudos Brasileiros).
Blay, Eva Alterman. 1985. “Social Movements and Women’s Participation in Brazil.” International Political Science Review 6(3): 297-305.
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha. 2002. Cutting the wire: the story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.Brumer, Anita. 2004. “Gênero e Agriculatura: a Situação da Mulher na Agricultura do Rio Grande do Sul.” Revista de Estudos Feministas 12(1): 205-227.Caldeira, Rute. 2008a. “Up-dating its strategies and amplifying its frames: the Landless Rural Workers' Movement in Brazil and the displacement of the struggle for land.” Journal of Perspectives on Global Development and Technology 7(2): 133-149.
Caldeira, Rute. 2008b. “My Land. Your Social Transformation? Conflicts within the Landless People Movement (MST), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.” Journal of Rural Studies 24(2): 150–160
Caldeira, Teresa. 1990. “Women, Daily Life and Politics.” In Women and Social Change in Latin America, ed. Elizabeth Jelin. London: Zed Books.
Carmen Diana Deere and Magdalena León. Bogotá: Siglo XXI de Colombia. Carneiro, Maria José. 2001. “Herança e Gênero entre Agricultores Familiares.” Revista
de Estudos Feministas 9(1): 22-55. Carter, Miguel. 2003. ‘The origins of Brazil's Landless Rural Workers' Movement (MST):
The Natalino episode in Rio Grande do Sul (1981-84). A case of ideal interest
mobilization’. Oxford: University of Oxford Centre for Brazilian Studies. Castro, Mary Garcia. 2001. “Engendering Powers in Neoliberal Times in Latin America: Reflections from the Left on Feminisms and Feminisms.” Latin American
Perspectives 28(6): 17-37. Chinchilla, Norma Stoltz. 1977. “Mobilizing Women: Revolution in the Revolution.”
Latin American Perspectives 4(4): 82-102. Chinchilla, Norma Stoltz. 1991. “Marxism, Feminism, and the Struggle for Democracy in
Latin America,” Gender and Society 5(3): 291-310. Corcoran-Nantes, Yvonne. 1990. “Women and Popular Urban Social Movements in São
Paulo, Brazil.” Bulletin of Latin American Research 9(2): 249-264. Deere, Carmen Diana, and Magdalena León, eds. 1986. La Mujer y la Política Agraria en
America Latina. Bogotá: Siglo XXI de Colombia. Deere, Carmen Diana, and Magdalena León. 2001. “Who Owns the Land? Gender and
Land-Titling Programmes in Latin America.” Journal of Agrarian Change 1: 440-
467. Deere, Carmen Diana. 2003. “Women's Land Rights and Rural Social Movements in the
Brazilian Agrarian Reform.” Journal of Agrarian Change 3(1-2):257-288. Del Priori, Mary. (Org.). 1997. Historia das mulheres no Brasil. São Paulo: Contexto. Del Priori, Mary. 1989. A mulher na historia do Brasil: raízes históricas do machismo
brasileiro, a mulher no imaginário social, “lugar de mulher e na historia”. São
Paulo: Contexto. Delgado, Andréa and David J. Caume. 2004. “Relações de gênero na luta pela terra: narrativas femininas do assentatmento 16 de Março (Pontão-RS).” Revista da UFG 7(1).
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	255
Drogus, Carol Ann. 1997. “Private Power or Public Power: Pentecostalism, Base Communities, and Gender.” In Power, Politics, and Pentecostals in Latin America, eds. Edward Cleary and Hannah Stewart-Gambino. Boulder: Westview Press.
Drogus, Carol Ann. 1999. “No Land of Milk and Honey: Women CEB Activists in Posttransition Brazil.” Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 41(4): 35 51.
Edward L. Cleary and Hannah W. Stewart-Gambino. Boulder: Westview Press. Fernandes, Bernardo. 2000. A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes. Guivant, Julia. 2003. “Agrarian Change, Gender and Land Rights. A Brazilian Case
Study.” Geneva: UNRISD. Hahner, June E. 1982. ““Women’s Place” in Politics and Economics in Brazil since 1964.”
Luso-Brazilian Review 19(1): 83-91. Hallum, Anne Motley. 2003. “Taking Stock and Building Bridges: Feminism, Women’s
Movements, and Pentecostalism in Latin America.” Latin American Research
Review 38(1): 169-186. Hartmann, Heidi. 1981. “The Unapphy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism:Towards a
more Progressive Union”. In Women and Revolution, ed. Lydia Sargent. London:
Pluto Press. Jelin, Elizabeth, ed. 1990. Women and Social Change in Latin America. London: Zed
Books. Klatch, Rebecca E. 2001. “The Formation of Feminist Consciousness among Left- and
Right-Wing Activists of the 1960s.” Gender and Society 15(6): 791-815. Lovell, Peggy A. 2000. “Gender, Race, and the Struggle for Social Justice in Brazil.”
Latin American Perspectives 27(6): 85-102. Melucci, Alberto. 2001. Challenging codes. Collective action in the information age.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Molyneux, Maxine. 1986. “Mobilization without emancipation? Women's interests, state,
and revolution.” In Transition and Development: Problems of Third World
Socialism, eds. Richard Fagen, et al. New York: Monthly Review Press. Neuhouser, Kevin. 1995. ““Worse than Men”: Gendered Mobilization in an Urban
Squatter Settlement, 1971-91.” Gender and Society 9(1): 38-59. Paulilo, Maria Ignez. 2004. “Trabalho Familiar: uma Categoria Esquecida de Análise.”
Revista de Estudos Feministas 12(1): 229-252. Ray, R. and A.C. Korteweg. 1999. “Women’s Movements in the Third World: Identity,
Mobilization, and Autonomy.” Annual Review of Sociology 25:47-71. Rodriguez, Lilia. 1994. “Barrio Women: Between and the Feminist Movement.” Latin
American Perspectives 21(3)(2): 32-48. Safa, Helen Icken. 1990. “Women’s Social Movements in Latin America.” Gender and
Society 4(3): 354-369. Saffioti, Heleieth Iara. 1969. A mulher na sociedade de classes: mito e realidade. São
Paulo: Quatro Artes-INL. Salvaro, Giovana Ilka Jacinto. 2003. “Jornadas de Trabalho de Mulheres e Homens em
um Assentamento do MST.” Revista de Estudos Feministas 12(1): 321-330. Samara, Eni de Mesquita. 1983. A família Brasileira. São Paulo: Brasiliense.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	256
Sarti, Cynthia. 1989. “The Panorama of Feminism in Brazil.” New Left Review I/173: 75- 90.
Schirmer, Jennifer. 1988. “‘Those Who Die for Life Cannot be Called Dead.’ Women and Human Rights Protest in Latin America.” Harvard Human Rights Yearbook 1: 41-75.
Schmink, Marianne. 1981. “Women in Brazilian Abertura Politics.” Signs 7(1): 115-134. Silva, Cristiani Bereta da. 2004. “Relações de Gênero e Subjectividades no Devir MST.”
Revista de Estudos Feministas 12(1): 269-287. Singer, Paul and Vinicius Caldeira Brant. 1980. “O Feminino e o Feminismo.” In São
Paulo: O Povo em Movimento, eds. Paul Singer and Vinicius Caldeira Brant. Rio
de Janeiro: Editora Vozes. Spindel, Cheywa. 1986. “La Invisibilidad Social del Trabajo de La Mujer en la
Agricultura Brasilena.” In La Mujer y la Politica Agraria en America Latina, eds.
Carmen Diana Deere and Magdalena León. Bogotá: Siglo XXI de Colombia. Sternbach, Nancy Saporta et.al. 1992. “Feminisms in Latin America: From Bogotá to San
Bernardo.” Signs 17(2): 393-434. Strapazzon, J. 1999. E o verbo se fez terra. Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem
Terra (SC) 1980-1990. Florianópolis: Grifos. Stropasolas, Valmir. 2004. “O Valor (do) Casamento na Agricultura Familiar.” Revista
de Estudos Feministas 12(1): 253-267. Thayer, Millie. 2001. “Transnational Feminism: Reading Joan Scott in the Brazilian
Sertão.” Ethnography 2(2): 243-271. Wheeler, Joanna S. 2003. ”New forms of Citizenship: Democracy, Family, and
Community in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.” Gender and Development 11(3): 36-44. Wolford, Wendy. 2004. “Of Land an Labor. Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane Plantations of Northeast Brazil.” Latin American Perspectives 31(2)(135): 147-
170.
Notes
1 Information which is publicly available on MST’s website, www.mst.org.br . 2 The MST occupies fallow lands and settles its people on these lands. In Rio de Janeiro state, where the fieldwork took place, MST’s settlers are recruited by the so-called ‘mass-front sector’ that recruits people in the most deprived urban areas. Leaders working in the ‘mass-front sector’ organise talks in these communities where they propagate the movement’s ideals and activities. Once occupied lands are legally sanctioned those who are already living on these lands will automatically earn the right to become land reform settlers/beneficiaries. That is, INCRA, the government body responsible for the implementation of the Central Government’s agricultural policies, regarding those who are to become land reform settlers, gives priority to the ones who are already living in landed properties suitable for expropriation. Thus, selection of land reform beneficiaries is almost entirely left to the MST alone. Between 1999 and 2002 INCRA claims to have settled 286,370 families (see www.mda.gov.br/arquivos/PNRA-2004.pdf, in Portuguese). During this same period, the MST set up 1704 encampments, settling 285,502 families (see www.mst.org.br, in Portuguese). What INCRA’s statistics do not reveal is how many of these 286,370 families were not already encamped and living on occupied land by the MST and/or other rural social movements. Because priority to become a beneficiary is given to those already living on the lands (considered suitable for expropriation) it can be concluded that the percentage of those who were not living on occupied properties and were settled by INCRA is indeed low. That is, the percentage of those who were actually selected by INCRA to become beneficiaries is probably very low. 3 INCRA stands for the National Institute for Colonisation and Agricultural Reform. 4 Interview with a regional and national male leader. 5 The worst plots are the ones ill-suited for irrigation, or farer from the main roads and of more difficult access. 6 In 2002 the minimum salary in Brazil was 200 reais (US$94). Most of the settlers who worked ‘outside’ earned the minimum salary. In some cases, even less. 7 This social program was set up by the Distrito Federal (Federal District) and is managed by an Executive Commission coordinated by the Secretário da Educação (Secretariat of Education), in articulation with the Secretário do
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	257
Desenvolvimento Social (Secretariat of Social Development), the Secretário do Trabalho (Secretary of Labor), representatives of the Gabinete do Governador (Governor’s Office), the Fundação de Serviço Social (Foundation for Social Service), the Fundação Educacional (Educational Foundation), of the Movimento de Meninos e Meninas de Rua (Movement Street Boys and Girls) and of the Conselho dos Direitos da Criança e do Adolescente (Council for the Rights of the Children and the Adolescents). This program pays the equivalent to one minimum salary to families whose income is not enough to provide the minimum standards of living (in Brazil this is measured by the cesta básica, the latter calculating the final cost of the basic goods and services needed to provide the basic living standards of a family unit).
8 Becoming a class-for-itself implies living through the revolutionary experience of struggling not only for land but also of fighting against capitalist exploitation. According to the MST leaders, this fight against capitalism is not ‘destructive’. It is instead a constructive struggle since it implies the setting up of a different, alternative model of production based on cooperative work and production in the rural sem-terra communities. This setting up of an alternative model of production is seen by the leaders as representing the embryo of a new political project, a new mode of organising the social alternative to capitalism and neoliberalism.
9 Catholics deemed Evangelists ‘fanatics’ and ‘fundamentalists’, whereas Evangelists criticized Catholic families for drinking alcohol, smoking, and Catholic women for their ‘liberal’ dress code. Religion is another issue totally ignored by the MST: religious conflicts inside the encampment were not mentioned at all by the resident leaders. 10 Conquista da Fronteira is one of the most visited MST settlements by researchers, journalists and activists alike.
Journal of International Women’s Studies Vol. 10 #4 May 2009	258

2000
Social Sciences
Latin American Perspectives
The MST Challenge to Neoliberalism 
Monica Dias Martins 

Source: , Vol. 27, No. 5, Radical Left Response to Global Impoverishment (Sep., 2000), pp. 33-45 Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2634156 .
Accessed: 12/03/2011 23:30
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
TheMST ChallengetoNeoliberalism
by Monica Dias Martins
Quandoeu morrer Cansadode guerra, Morrode bem Coma minhaterra. -FranciscBouarqudeeHollanda1,997
Brazil'sMovimentodosTrabalhadoreRsuraisSemTerra(Landless WorkersM'ovement-MST)isoneofthemostcombativpeopularforcesin contemporarLyatinAmericaI.temergedin 1979withitsfirsltandoccupa- tioninEncruzilhadNaatalinoR,ioGrandedoSul.Supportebdychurchorga- nizationsuchas thegrassrooctommunitieasndtheComissaoPastoralda Terra(PastoralLandCommission-CPT) andbythePartidodosTraba- lhadores(Workersp'arty-PT),amongotherst,hemovemenstpreadall over thecountryas landreformwasincludedinthepoliticalagendaduringthe redemocratizatidoanysofthemid-1980s.'Inthe1990s,itbecameanimpor- tantmassorganization.
TheMST's ruralsettlemenatrsecharacterizebdycooperativreelations, collectiveplanninga,nd self-managemenSto.lidaritys,ocialjustice,and autonomyareitsfundamenteatlhicalvalues.Ithasestablisheda monthly newspaperto communicatietsideas,an educationaslystembased on the "work-and-studmy"ethoda,ndan intenseprocessofpolitical-ideological formatiotnhroughstudygroupsonradicaltheoryW.ithinthesegroupsis emerginagnewlydevelopedconsciousnesosfthenecessityforsocialowner- shipofthemeansofproductionT.heirleadersappearinthemediaandnego- tiatewiththegovernmenatn,dtheiractionshaveconsolidatedan alliance withworkerst'radeunionsandurbanmovements.
M6nicaDias Martinissa sociologistwith25yearsofprofessionalndpoliticaalctivityamong rurawlorkerisnBrazilcombinedwithacademicstudiesattheFederalUniversitoyfCeara.She is theauthorofTheChallengesofCooperationintheRuralSettlement(1s994) andinJune successfullycompletedherdoctoradlissertatioontheNortheasotfBrazil.Sheisindebtedto TimothyHardingR,obertAustinP,abloPozzi,andJamesPetrasfortheirusefulcommentsA.n earlierversionofthisarticlewaspresenteadtthe21stCongressoftheLatinAmericanStudies AssociationC,hicago,Septembe2r4-26, 1998.Thisarticleis dedicatedtothememoryofthe MST activistasssassinatedinthestrugglfeora bettersociety.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue114,Vol.27No.5,Septembe2r000 33-45 i 2000LatinAmericanPerspectives
33
34	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TheMST's complexpracticeis designedtodealwitha centraqluestion: Howcana peasantorganizationac,cordingtomanyintellectuaalsndpoliti- ciansa "vanishings"ocialcategoryc,h2allengetheso-calledbenefitosffree- markectapitalismanditsideologyn,eoliberalismL?andlessworkerhsave becomea powerfunlewsocialforceinBrazil.Despiterepressivveiolence and attemptast co-optationt,heypromotemass mobilizationto occupy unproductivperopertieasndpublicbuildingsL.and occupationisncreased from43in1990to180in1997,totalin6g98inthesesevenyearsT.heMST's beliefshavealreadybecomeintegrateidntoa popularmovementhathas thousandosfactivistfsightinfgorlandwithrevolutionarpyassion.
Aftera briefpresentationfthecontroversicaolnceptoflandreformt,his articleanalyzesthemainfeatureosftheMST's actionsandperspectiveosn resistancteotheneoliberasltateanditseffortsoconstrucatnalternativpero-
ject in termsofclass struggle.
LAND REFORM
Landreformis notnecessarilyradical.U.S. scholarsuchas Barrington MooreandSamuelHuntingtohnaveusedtheconceptoflandreformtomea- surevulnerabilityosocialrevolutioindevelopingcountrie(sSilva, 1971). DuringtheperiodoftheKennedyadministratiaondtheAllianceforProg- ress,manyLatinAmericangovernmenwtsereputunderpressurteocarryout landreformprogramsI.3n BrazilduringJoaoGoulart'spresidency(1962-
1964),popularmobilizatiofnocusedonlandreformas thekeytodemocrati- zationandmodificatioonfthesocialstructurIen. themilitarydictatorship period(1964-1985)itwasconsidereda nationaslecurityissue,strategifcor capitalistdevelopmenatndindustrializatioinparticularIt. has also been usedasastatepolicytorestraicnlassstrugglienruraalreasandtotransform potentiallryevolutionarpyeasantsintoconservativsemallfarmerBs.utland reformhasalsobeenimportanttorevolutionarsytructurcahlanges,asin Mexico,Bolivia,Chile,Colombia,Cuba,NicaraguaP,eru,andelsewhere.
Thus,landreformis betterdefinedas a contradictorpyrocessoftrans- forminpgroductioanndpowerelationtshatdependsi,nitsformulatioand implementation,thecorrelatioonfpoliticaflorcesandthespecificourse of theclass struggle(Martins,1994). This conceptreinforcetshelinks betweeneconomicp,oliticala,ndideologicalconditionsa,s opposedtothe viewoflandreformas eitheraneconomicissueora socialpolicyorsimplyan ideologicalproblemT.hereproductionfaclassofsmallfarmertshrough accesstoruralpropertiys occurrinigna conjuncturoefintensivperoletar- ization (expropriationof means of production).This challenging
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	35
contradictiohnelpstoexplainwhylandreformcannotbelabeledas "conser- vative"or"revolutionarpye"rse.Itisa tool,andwhatmakesthedifferencise whocontrolist.Theansweris complexandleadsus toanalyzelandreform as a movemenitnwhichsocialclassesdirecthiscontradictorpyrocess. Whethelrandreformis capitalisotrsocialistmustbe consideredinthecon- textofa newproposalemerginfgromthehandsandmindsofhundredosf acampadosandsettlersa,proposalantagonistticotherulingclasses' agrar- ianproject.
Thepolitical-ideologicpaollarizationbetweentheMST andtheUniao DemocraticaRuralista(RuralDemocraticUnion-UDR), a landowners' organizationp,a4rticulardlyuringtheelaboratioonfthefirsNtationaPllanof LandReformin 1985andthe1988ConstitutionAalssemblyl,edtothecon- structioonftwodifferenmtodelsoflandreformthatexpressthecapital-labor forceconfrontatioAnc.entrailssueistheownershiopfthemeansofproduc- tion(individuaolrcollectivea)ndtheprocessofwealthdistributio(pnrivate capitalaccumulatioonrsocialcapitalaccumulatioanndthedevelopmenotf productivfeorces).5
The UDR's	proposaldefendsindividuailnterestasndprivateproperty, and,to theextenthatthebourgeoisieacceptsredistributioint,mustbe througthheparcelingofthelandintohundredosfunitsafteritslegalacquisi- tionT.hemodelofprivataeppropriatioisnsimilartotheclassicalcapitalistic agrarianredistributiotnhatpromotesagriculturamlodernizationunder agroindustriecso'ntroolftheworkersp'roductiopnrocess.Inthe1970s,it wasimplementeidna limitedwayundertheBrazilianmilitardyictatorship throughtheestablishmenotfcolonizationprojectsI.n fact,theso-called colonoorparceleiroreceivedindividuatlitletoproperttyhatallowedhimto applyforcreditandtechnologyA.s hewasisolatedfromotherasndthedeci- sionsconcerninwghatandhowtoproduceortowhomandwhentosellhis productwsereimposedbythegovernmentinalstitutionansdtheagricultural policies,themajorbenefitwsentothehegemoniacgroindustrsiaelctorT.his is theparadigmoflandreformacceptedbyvariousfractionosfthedominant classes.
TheMST's modelofsocialappropriatioins basedoncooperativreela- tionsamongdirectworkerasndalternativpeatternosflandappropriatioand use.Throughdemocratisctructuroefsdecisionmakingsettlemenmtsayvary informfromfamilybasistocollectivpeossessiond,ependinogntheworkers' experiencet,hequalityofthesoil,thekindofcropst,hemarkesttructuraen,d manyotherfactorsF.orinstancep,ropertcyanbe individualloywnedbutthe workandtheproductiodnonecollectivelyo,rworkandproductiocnan be individuaolnpartofthelandandcollectiveonanotheprart,orall theprop- ertycanbecollectivbeutfamiliewsorkonpartofthelandtoproducefortheir
36	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
ownuse.Agrowingproportioonfsettlersm'onetariyncomeisnotdivided butusedcollectivelytomaintaintheexistingmeansofproductionf,ornew investmentosr,foreducationalh,ealtha,ndtechnologicalssistancetotheir familiesT.hesedifferenktindsoffundos(reservesp)rovidevidenceofan experimenint socializedcapitalaccumulationL.andreformas proposedby theworkingclasshasthepotentiatlobecomea moreegalitarianmeansof wealthdistribution.
Rurallandownerospposecooperativfeormsofpossession,production, andworkT.heyseemawarethathesexperimenctasnconsolidatneewprac- ticesofsocialorganizatioandpoliticaplarticipatiotnhatunderminperivate propertryightasndmayescalatefromthelocaltothenationaslphereT.he BrazilianscholarandUDRsupporteMriguelRealeJuniordescribestheir class positionin thejournalof theSociedadeRuralBrasileira(Brazilian RuralSociety-BRS) (1985: 9) as follows:
FromtheendofWorldWarII toourdays,itisevidenthathereisnoagrarian chaosinBrazil,butinsteadperfecctoherencbeetweentheland'sstructuraned itsuse andthepresenetconomic-sociaslysteminthiscountryandthecurrent neoliberaildeology.
A newmassiveandradicalandreformproposalis notsimplylandredistri- butiontoincorporatmeorefarmerisntothecapitalistsystembutinvolves shiftintgheentireagrarianstructurpe:roductionp,ower,andculturarlela- tions.Itmeansthathewholeeconomic-social-politicsaylstemisgoingto bechanged.EvenbeforetheMSTbecameinfluentianlationwidethe agrarianbourgeoilseaderswereconsciousthatheprojectofcollectivoeccu- pationandproductiornepresenteadchallengetotheirclassinterestasndto capitalism.6
ACTS OF RESISTANCE
To analyzetheimportancoeftheMST's resistancaegainstneoliberalism, theconceptof class is essentialA.	class-strugglaepproachallows us to understantdhelimitsand thepossibilitieosf itsproposalof landreform vis-a-vistheclassicalredistributiavgerarianreformandBrazilianstatepol- icyandlegislation.
Thespecificourseofthebattlebetweenthetwoantagonistimcodelsof landreforminBrazil,datingtothe1980sbutstillinflux,is thekeytoan understandinogfwhytheMST hasbecomethemostimportanstourceof
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	37
resistancteotheneoliberaplrojectI.nbrieft,heconfrontaticoanbeexpressed in termsofthedualityprivatizatiovnersusoccupation.
The MST developedan efficienstrategyof pressureon theInstituto NacionaldeColonizac,aoe ReformAagraria(NationalInstitutfeorColoni- zationandLandReform-INCRA),a stateinstitutiomn:assiveandcontinu- ouslandoccupationsB.y1964Brazilianlandlaw,privatepropertcyanbe confiscatewdhenitisnotcultivateodrwherethereareconflictbsetweenthe ownerandworkerosrenvironmentdalmage.ThustheMST's directaction supporttshisconstitutionparlovisionandviceversa.7Thisstrateghyasalso beeneffectivienrevealinglandconcentratiotnh,ecauseofmostofthepres- entsocialproblemsT.heoccupationprocessc,alledafesta("theparty"b)y themovementh,asa specialmeaningforthelandlessthemselvesT.hedeci- siontosettleonandseizea privatperopertyno, taneasyone,requirems	atu- rityc,ohesiond,isciplinea,ndhope.
Thisdirectactionturns"passive"peasantsintopowerfualctorsfighting forlandandpoliticaplarticipatioTnh.eynowcallthemselve"sfreeworkers." Theyrecoverthecapacitytocreatematerialndculturaclommoditiedsenied thembyboththetraditionlaaltifundiuamndthemodernagribusinescsom- plex,wheretheyare"workerfsorcapital."Theiractionthreatentsheruling classes,whichreactwithviolencea,s wellas arguingthatheoccupationasre illegal.Accordingtothem,landseizuresareleadingtoa breakdownof authoritiynBraziliansocietyT.omaintaipnublicorderr,epresentativoefsthe staterespondtowhatis consideredan obviousabotageofdemocraticnsti- tutionbsyprosecutintgheMST leaders.
Whatis beingchallengedbythisradicalaction?Basically,theprivate propertryightgsuaranteebdybourgeoilsaw,oneofthevaluesofthecapital- istorderthatisreinforcebdytheneoliberadliscourseI.tchallengePsresident FernandHoenriqueCardosobothinhispoliticaplerformanocnethenational sceneandintermsofthegovernmentc'sommitmentosstructuradljust- mentsimposedby theWorldBank and theInternationMalonetaryFund (IMF) intheinternationaarlena.
Market-assistleadndreformwasproposedbytheWorldBankin 1995as a solutionforunstablepoliticallydevelopingcountriesuchas SouthAfrica andColombiab,utBrazilwasincludedintheproposawlhentheWorldBank begantoviewtheintensitoyfmassivelandoccupationasndtheradicaliza- tionofconflicatsadangertotheneoliberarlegime.T8heagreemenwtiththe federaglovernmenwtastointroducmearket-assistleadndreforminCeara'i,n theNortheasotfBrazil,withthesupporotfa modernlocal administration controllebdythepresidentp'sartyt,hePartidoSocial DemocrataBrasileiro (BrazilianSocialDemocratipcarty-PSDB). Anothereasonforthechoice
38	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
ofCearaseemstohavebeentheoutstandinsguccessofthesettlemenrtessult- ingfromlandoccupationandcooperativperactice(seeMartins1,994)coor- dinatedbytheMST,whichaccelerateldandconfiscatiobnylegalmeansT.he WorldBankandthegovernmenhtadtorecognizethathesepracticeswere importanitn explainingCeara's performancTe.heirprojectproposesto transforamgrarianreformintoa privatbeusinesss,timulatintghelandmarket as a properplaceforthelandlessandlandownertsonegotiatuendercondi- tionsof"equality.T"hroughtheBankoftheNortheasotfBrazil,theproper- tiesarebeingsoldbytheirownertsothelandlessonanindividuablasis.Rural workerst'radeunionsandlocalassociationhsavebeeninvolvedinthisproject largelytoguarantetehedebtpaymenotftheirmembers.
Despitetheproposalto privatizelandreformsponsoredby theWorld Bank,thestrugglgeoeson.Occupationandproductioanrebothconsidered partoftheMST's economicandpoliticasltrategaygainstneoliberalismT.he settlemenist conceivedofas a wholeproductiounnitandnotonlya legal propertyIn.deed,productioanndmanagemenhtavebeencrucialtothesuc- cessoftheMST's alternativperoposala:griculturcaoloperatio(nMST,1993;
1996),combiningtheeffortosfindividuawlorkertsoaccomplishthingsin common-buyingmachinesandtools,raisingcattle,sharingland.Forthe settlerso'rganizationsp,lanningmeansdemocraticdecisionsconcerning productionm,arketinegd,ucationh,ealthcare,politicsc,ulture,tc.Butthis isnota simpletask,especiallyifhundredosfpersonsareinvolvedD.uring theirfrequenatssembliesf,amilymemberpsarticipatine manyways:making proposalsa,skingquestionsd,iscussingproblemsc,omingtodecisionss,ing- ing.9Normallyt,heagendais knowninadvanceandsomemethodological toolsare used to improveparticipationM.ost womenand teenagerspeak independentalys companheiradse luta.In someofthesettlemenatsmarried memberis acceptedonlyifbothspousesjoin. The annualbalanceis pre- sentedinageneramleetingandthedistributionfprofit-forepairss,oil improvemencta,ttlefeedingc,omputersh,ousebuildingt,eacherss'alaries, childcare,mobilizationan,dsoon-hastobeapprovedbythemajoritoyfthe membersT.heparticipatorpylanningprocessis influencebdythefamilies' previousexperiencesr,egionalandecologicaldifferenceasn,daccessto materiaclonditionosfproductiosnuchascreditt,echnologyan,dtraining. The resultsmayvarywidely(Medeiros,1994).
TheconceptofcollectivweorkingandlivingisthecoreoftheMSTstrat- egyfordevelopingsustainablaectsofresistancienthesettlementOsn.cethe landisappropriateda,periodofdemobilizatiomnayoccur.Peasantswho havefoughftora placetoliveandworkmaybe seducedbythesupposedben- efitsoffree-markceatpitalismT.otheextenthathisistruec,onfrontation also takesplaceinthesubjectivfeieldofbattle.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	39
Educationtoeliminatneotonlyilliteracbyutalsothetechnologicaglap andpoliticaml	isinformatiosna prioritoyftheMST's landreformprogram. Ina generalsense,as PauloFreiresaid(1983:58),"a settlemenptr,ecisely becauseitis a productiounnit(thereis noproductioonutsidetheman-world relation)s,houldalso be a wholepedagogicunit."Educationalactivities involvethesettlersc'hoosingtheirownteachersc,hangingthesubjectsand methodsoftheregularpubliclearningprocess,organizinbgrigadesforthe political-ideologicfaolrmationfactivistsa,ndcoordinatintgrainincgourses forentrepreneuraianldtechnologicailmprovemenTth.eMST'stwo-year schoolforsecond-levetlechnicianisnagriculturcaoloperationhasrecently beenaccreditedbytheMinistryofEducation.
In Brazil,therearetwocooperativoerganizationTs.heOrganizac,odas CooperativadsoBrasil(CooperativesO'rganizatioonfBrazil-OCB) repre- sentstheruralandownerasndis linkedwiththeUDR andtheSBR. The Confederac,oNacionaldas Cooperativasde ReformaAgrariado Brasil (NationalConfederatioonf AgrarianReformCooperativesof Brazil- CONCRAB) wascreatedbya networokflandreformcooperativeisn1994 andis calledthe"economicarm"oftheMST,supportinigtssocialandpoliti- cal mobilizations.
As efficienats thelargeprivatfearminsgectort,heMST settlerosrganize agriculturparloductiocnooperativelsocallya,tthestatelevel,andnationally. Neverthelests,hereis an essentialdifferencbeetweenthissystemand the OCB. Infactt,heMST's cooperativsetructureemphasizesocialneedsand politicarlesultassmuchaseconomicreturntsothesettlerCs.reditm,arketing supporta,ndtechnicaalssistanceareofferebdythecooperativetsoincrease theiragriculturacltivitiesp,rofitabilitayn,dlivingstandard(sMST, 1998). The CONCRAB systemhas becomean instrumenftorestablishingsolid relationshipamsongproducerasndconsumersd,emonstratitnhgerelevance oflandreformfortheurbanpopulationa,ndguaranteeinrgelativfeinancial autonomya,t leastcomparedwithotherpopularorganizationtshatdo not havecontroolftheirownproductionA.lthoughtheMST believesthateco- nomicpowerisfundamenttaolachievingpoliticaplowerm,ostofitsefforts areaimedatcreating"a newmananda newwomanfora newsociety."
THE ALTERNATIVE PROJECT
Social scientisthsavetendedtofocusmainlyontheactionsofpopular movementDs.espitetheirimportancteh,isisanelitistviewofthesocialpro- cess.Itlegitimatetsheauthoritarianrgumenthatworkerso'rganizations need to be tutoredbecause theyare incapableof articulatinigdeas and
40	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
transformitnhgemintoacoherenvtisionforchangeinsocietyA.ctionand conceptioanreequallyimportanintexaminintgheMST's effortsoconstruct an alternativperojectforBrazil.
TheconceptionofthePopularProjectas democratiacndparticipatory planningcomesfromtheday-to-dapyracticeisntheoccupationasndsettle- mentsa,s wellas fromthestudyofotherpeople'shistoricaelxperienceisnthe schoolsandthebrigadesT.hecontributionftheMST's supporters-profes- sors,politicianst,echnicians,tudentsp,riests-isorganizedthrougha net- worktosupporsteveralgroupsthatmeetsregularltyodiscussthenumerous proposalscomingfromthebases andto producedocumenttshatreturnto themT.oconfronteoliberalismwithitsownpoliticawleaponst,hestrategy hasbeentocreatea consultapopularm,	obilizingthepopulationandstimu- latingthemtoparticipatine theformulationfeconomics,ocial,andcultural policiesforall Brazilians.
Toprovokea broaderdebateonthePopularProjectt,heMST leda march toprotestheCardosoadministrationtr'sansferrionfgthepeople'swealth, througphrivatizatiotno,powerfuBlraziliansandtopromotteheconstruction ofa trulydemocratiscocietywithsocialjustice,incomedistributioan,dsol- idarityF.romAugust3 toSeptembe7r, 1998(BrazilianIndependencDeay), almost6,000workerso,rganizedinmorethan80 colunas,marchedthrough- outthecountryd,iscussingissuessuchas employmenhte,althe,ducationa,nd housing.
Thebeginningosfthisnationwidmeovemenctanbetracedtothe1980s. AttheFirstNationaLlandlessCongressi,n1985,itwasdecidedthatstruggle andmobilizatiowneretheonlywayofpressurintgheSarneyadministration toimplementthelandreformprogramT.hesloganwas"LandOccupationIs theSolution."The SecondCongressi,n 1990,duringFernandoCollorde Mello'sadministratiofna,cedadifferenrtealityw,ithneoliberalreforms beingimposedalloverLatinAmericaF.ortheMSTtosurviveasanation- widemovemenatndovercomteheisolationimposedbythestateinstitutions, itneededmoreconomicandpoliticaelxpressionD.elegationfsrom20 states enthusiasticallaypprovedtheproposal"Occupy,Resist,and Produce." Includingproductionbecameextremelyimportantto invalidatethestate strategbyasedoneconomicallydestroyintgheruraslettlemenatnsdtreating thelandlessas invader(sFolhade Sdo Paulo,June13, 1997).
AfterCardoso'selectionin 1994,theThirdLandlessCongressi,n 1995, discussedaproposatlonegotiatweiththenewpresidenTt.histimethefocus was"LandReformE:veryone'sStruggle.I"treflectedthemarketexperi- mentsofthecooperativets,helandoccupationnsearthecities,andtheinflu- enceonthesettlerosfurbancultureT.hemajorityofthesewereyoungcou- ples thathad improvedtheirlivingstandardasnd changedtheirconsumer
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	41
preferenceGs.enerallyt,heproposalconcretizetdhepopularallianceanda newpoliticalagendaincludingtheneedsandinterestosfthemajority.
ThegovernmentrtiedtoimposesomeconditionosntheMST,oneofthem beingthatnegotiatiownouldstartonlyiftherewereno morelandoccupa- tions(O Globo,December26,1997).Awarethatthisstatepracticewas directedatweakeningitsnegotiatinlgeveraget,hemovementa'snswerwas toincreaseanddiversifmyassmobilizationTs.hemoraldefeatsufferebdy Cardoso'sadministratitohnenraisedtheidea ofthegreat"MarchAgainst Neoliberalisma,"s itbecameknownT. heNationaMl	archforLandReform, Employmenatn,dJusticoef1997,ledbytheMST,wasaneffectivienstru- mentforarticulatintghedemandosftheworkinsgectorasndthepoorestpop- ulationT.hetwo-month-lomngarcharriveidnBrasiliawiththesupporotfthe leftpoliticalpartiest,hepress,andthechurchT.hemarcherpsubliclypre- sentedtheauthoritiwesitha setofproposaltshatconstitutetdheoutlineofthe PopularProjecti,ntendetdobeanalternativtoetheneoliberaploliciesadopted bytheinternationcalpitalismandimplementebdytheBrazilianstate.
AvarietyofmeasurewsereusedtointimidateheMST:massacresuchas theonesthatookplaceatCorumbiarian 1995andEldoradodos Carajasin 1996,changesinthelegalapparatusju,dicialprosecutionps,ublicaccusa- tionsofbeingmarijuangarowersa,ndsoon.AtfirsCtardosotriedtoignore themovementap,plyingthemodern-versus-traditdiounaalilty".Modernity" is oneofthemythosftheneoliberadliscoursea,ndCardoso'spoliticswere portrayeads"modernw"hiletheMSTwassaidtorepresenatnarchaicpast. Nextcame attemptast co-optationandisolationandthenpunishmenatnd negotiationw,hichwereequallyunsuccessfublecauseoftheprecedinmgass mobilizationsM.orerecentlyt,hegovernmenhtastriedtodividetheMST leaders,exploitintgheirinternadlebateinthemedia.
Meanwhilet,helandlesshavebeendevelopingurbanactionsT.heysup- portprogressivuerbanpolicies,helpto organizehousingoccupationsa,nd visitsmallcitiestodonatebloodandfoodandtocleanthestreetsF.urther- more,becauseof theincreasedproductionof theirsettlementcsompared withthatofindividualgriculturteh,eyareimprovintgheirproductivsetruc- tureandintensifyinagroindustriparloductiounnderworkersc'ooperative control.
ThesecretothegrowincgredibilitoyftheMST amongtheBrazilianpeo- ple lies in theextraordinasriymplicityb,orderinogn thenaive,oftheircon- duct,theircollectivestructurteh,edeclaredsupporotfimportanotrganiza- tionsuchas thechurcheasndAmnestyInternationanl,dthecooperatioonf intellectuaalsndartists.S1u0rveyresultshowthat94 percenotftheBrazilian populationis favorablteolandreformS.omesaythattheMST's strength comesfromthemystiquoefmilitancycombinedwithitssymbolst:hered
42	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
flag,thehymna,ndtheemblematifciguroefCheGuevaraO.thersarguethat itis duetoitsmilitaryformation-thberigadesinspiredbyrevolutionary populararmiesE.conomistwsillemphasizetheproductioanspectsp,olitical scientisttshepowerrelationsg,eographertsheterritorialiatnyt,hropologists theculturahleritageh,istoriantsherootsofthemovementp,edagoguesthe learningprocesss,ociologisttsheorganizationfaelaturesa,ndsoforthE.ach disciplinefocuseson itsparticulasrubjectin attemptintgo understantdhe landlessmovementO.bviouslya multidisciplinaarpyproachcombinedwith participatioandmilitancwyouldcontributoebothacademicunderstanding andpractice.
Forme,fourchallengincgonceptasrisefromMST practice(:1) itscollec- tivewayoflife,whichrangesfromproductiotnotheartisticreationprocess, (2)theoriginalitoyfitseducationaslystemm,arkedbythework-and-study method(,3) itsrespecftora diversitoyfopinioncsombinedwithunityofper- spectivea,nd(4) itsinsistenctonfrontatiwoniththeneoliberaplroject.
Increaseinlandoccupationsd,enunciatioans falseoftheofficialgrarian reformdata,andsupporftorthepresidenticaalmpaignofthePT's LuisInaicio da Silva (Lula) wereimportanptointson theMST agendafor1998. The emphasish,oweverh,asbeenontheelaboratioonfanalternativneationaplro- jectfocusingas wellonglobalthemesuchas employmenetd,ucationh,ous- ing,food,healtha,ndculturaalctivitiesA.lthoughthePopularProjectdeals witha varietyofproblemsl,andreformremainasnessentiailssue.InMST politicaplracticeit,hasbeenthekeyelemenitnunifyinBgrazilianworkers- urbanandruralm,anuaalndintellectual-itnheirstrugglfeorabettesrociety.
Atthemomenta,ccordingtotheMST leader,JoaoPedroStedile,the agrarianissue,whilecentralt,akessecondplace,sinceitdependson the adoptionofa newmodel(interviewpublishedin0 Globo,December26, 1997).ItseemsthatheMST's proposaloflandreformforallcanonlybe thoroughliymplementewdithinewpowerstructuraensdanewmodelfor developmendtifferenfrtomcapitalismT.hisdebatehasseverailmplications, butonecouldexpecta radicalizatioonfthesuccessfusltrategieosflandsei- zureandcollectivperoductionT.heimmediatcehallengies,atthesametime, todemonstrateotheBrazilianpeoplethatheirday-to-dapyroblemasrea consequenceofneoliberaplolicies.
CONCLUSION
The MST practiceis beingcloselyobservedbythelandlessthemselves and by Braziliansocietyin general,notas a laboratoryexperimenitn free-markpeotlicya,s LatinAmericahasbeenusedinthepastdecade,butas
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	43
theembryofa newsocietythatwillemergefromtheeffortosfthepopular sectorsT.hePopularProjecti,nvolvinmgass,directr,adicalc,ontinuousa,nd sustainablaectionsofresistanceh,astobeconstructeidna processoriented fromthebase thatrespecttshesocialheritagec,onceivesofalternativefsor themajorityp,resentisdeasinasimpleandconvincinwgay,transformidseas intoprojectsforstructurcahlange,makespeopleunderstanadndfightfor thema,ndmobilizesforces.
AnimportanctomponenotfthePopularProjectis landreformofa very differenktindfromthecapitalistmodel.Insteadofindividuaplarcels,the workertshemselvews,hohavefoughftorandwonaccesstoland,capitala,nd knowledgea,reconstructinagneworganizatioonftheproductiopnrocessI.n somesettlementshereis evidencethatsocializedcapitalaccumulationis underway.Mass occupationandcollectiveworkarechallengingprivate propertryightsand legitimatinagnotherkindof appropriatioand wealth distributioTnh.isemerginglandreformsectorplaysacentrarloleineco- nomic,social,politicala,ndculturaclhange.
Workersc'ooperationdoesnotfitintotheneoliberaplrojecta,ndthenext stepistomobilizeforcesB.razilcertainlnyeedslandreforminthecontexotf changingthewholemodelofdevelopmenTt.heMST appearstohavethe capacitytotransfortmhecollectivdereamofmillionosfBrazilianswhowant a betterlifeintoradicalaction.Itremaintsobe seenwhetheirtwilldo so.
NOTES
1.Particularilmyportanatm,ongtheliteraturtehatexaminetshesignificancaendtheviabil- ityofBrazilianlandreforminthatperioda,retheworksthatreflecthedynamicosfthedebate amongintellectualasndworkerleaders(CONTAG,1982;Carvalho,1982;Figueredo,1984). Duringtheso-calledNewRepublicthisdebateintensifieadn,da nationaclampaignforland reformt,heCampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria/CNRAw,asorganizedtocoordinattehe proposalsandthepopularmobilization(CsNRA,1987).
2. TheruralpopulationofBrazilhasdeclinedto23percentofthetotalof156,664,223 (IBGE, 1993).Therearenearly12,000,000landlesspeasants.
3.ChileundertheFreigovernmenhtadaprototypAellianceforProgresslandreform project.
4. TheUDR, theBrazilianruralentrepreneurosr'ganizationw,as createdin 1986(Bruni, 1987).Becauseoftheviolenceofitsactionsh,iringunmenandmaintaininagprivatearmyto defendruraplropertyit,lostitspoliticaslupporitnthe1990s.ItsleaderR,onaldoCaiado,hada weakperformancaes a candidateinthe1990presidentiealection.
5. A theoreticalpproachtothetwomodelsoflandreformis developedinMartin(s1997: 57-71).
6. Atthebeginninogfthe1960s,thelandownerwserefrightenbedya strongmovemenftor landreforme,speciallyintheNortheasTt.hiswasoneofthecausesofthemilitarcyoupin1964 andthebrutarlepressionofpopularorganizationusntilthemid-1980sA.tthatime,therural
44	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
workersn'ationaltradeunion,theConfedera,coNacionaldeTrabalhadorensaAgricultura (NationalConfederationfRuralWorkers-CONTAG)a,ndthemostimportanpteasantmove- mentt,heLigas Camponesas(PeasantLeagues),weremoreconcernedwithlandredistribution thanwiththeproductiopnrocess(Silva,1971).
7. Accordingtothislaw,theINCRAisresponsiblfeortheconfiscatioonfprivatperoperty. UnderdesapropriaCJo(dispossession)the owneris compensatedforthe land; under
(expropriatiotnh)elandbecomespublicpropertwyithouptayment. expropriaCdo
8.ThedocumenMtarket-AssistLeadndReformd,iscussedattheAgriculturCeonferencoef theWorldBankin 1995,saysthat"thelackoflanddistributiognenerateasn unstablepolitical situationw,ithruralunemploymencti,vildisordersa,ndarmedviolenceinmanydeveloping countrieisn,cludinBgrazil,"andcontinuetshat"therheasbeenalong-timienteresitnpromoting landreformintheNortheasBtrazil,withoneoftheworld'sworstincomedistribution(sG"ov- ernmenotfCeara,1995).
9. ThemeetingstaratndendwiththeMST hymnandpopularsongsaboutthestrugglfeor land,thealliancewiththeproletariaatn,dwomen'sparticipatioOnn.eofthebest-knowsnays, "To changesocietythewaywe wantto,we havetoparticipatweithouftearofbeingwomen." Beforemakingdecisionstheysometimedsramatizoerdraw"pictureosflife,"andtheyuseseeds toindicatetheirapprovaolfstatuteosrelectrepresentativreasthetrhanraisingtheirhands.
10.InMay1997,thePortuguesweriteJroseSaramangoandtheBraziliansingersMilton NascimentoF,ranciscoBuarquede Holanda,andthephotographSerebastiaoSalgadogavethe authorsr'ighttsotheMST,andtheproductisnquestion(books,postersa,ndCDs)weresoldat culturaelventsheldsimultaneousliynmanycountries.
REFERENCES
Bruni,Regina 1987"UDR:paraalemdaviolencia."TempoePresenca/CEDIn,o.221(June).
CarvalhoA,bdiasVilareD'incaoandMariadaConcei,cao(eds.) 1982Reformagrdria:SignificadeoviabilidadeP.etr6polisV:ozeseCEDEC.
CNRA(CampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria) 1987ReformagrdrianaConstituintPer:opostaM.imeo,Brasilia.
CONTAG(Confedera,coNacionaldos Trabalhadorensa Agricultura) 1982PosiCdodaCONTAGsobreoProgramNaacionaldePoliticaFundidriaM.imeo,Sep- temberB,rasilia.
FigueredoV,ilma(ed.) 1984AquestdodareformagrdrianosanosoitentaR.iodeJaneiroT:empoBrasileiro.
FreireP,aulo 1983Extensdoucomunica,coR.iodeJaneiroP:azeTerra.
GovernmenotfCeara 1995"A reformagrariassistidapelomercado."Septembe2r6.
IBGE (InstitutBorasileirode Geografiea Estatistica) 1993CensodemogrdficborasileiroB.rasilia.
MartinsM,6nicaDias 1994Osdesafiodsacoopera,donosassentamentodsareformaagrdriaS.aoPaulo:Peres. 1997"Aradicalidaddeareformaagraria.C"adernosdoCEASno.171(September/October): 57-71.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	45
MedeirosL,eonilde 1994Assentamentorsurais:UmavisaomultidisciplinSarao. Paulo:UNESP.
MST (MovimentdoosTrabalhadoreRsuraissemTerra) 1993"AcooperacaoagricolanosassentamentosC."adernodeFormacdono.20.Sao Paulo. 1996"Cooperativadse producao:quest6espraticas."Cadernode Formaca-noo.21. Sao Paulo. 1998CONCRAB:Quatroanosorganizandoa coopera,do.Sao Paulo.
Silva,JoseGomes 1971 A reformaagrdria no Brasil: Frustracdo camponesa ou instrumentode desenvolvimentRoi.o de JaneiroZ:ahar.
SRB (SociedadeRuralBrasileira) 1985A rural.65 (December):7-12.

2000
Sociology
Latin American Perspectives
An Interview with João Pedro Stédile
Maria Orlanda Pinassi, Fátima Cabral, Mirian Cláudia Lourenção and Laurence Hallewell 

Latin American Perspectives 2000 27: 46
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X0002700504
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/27/5/46
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/27/5/46.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
An Interview with Jo&atilde;o Pedro St&eacute;dile
by Maria Orlanda Pinassi, in collaboration with
F&aacute;tima Cabral and Mirian Cl&aacute;udia Louren&ccedil;&atilde;o Translated by Laurence Hallewell
Introduction: Land reform in Brazil today is not just o n e	of the m o s t press-
ing needs to make a clearly bourgeois developments viable but also (and in the first place) our country’s oldest historical obligation. From the old promise held out in the times of the early colonial land grants, proprietorships, and
slave plantations to its reappearance as a key motif in the popular rebellions under the Brazilian empire and in the settlements of Canudos (in the Bahian outback in 1896-1897) and Contestado (the no-man’s land between the states of Parana and Santa Catarina in 1912-1916), land reform has been regarded as one oftheprincipalinternalproblemstobeovercome,justifyingandfos- tering the Brazilian military and paramilitary apparatus.
In the twentieth century, history repeated itself, just as bloodily as in the nineteenth, and, since 1964, when the new military regime of President Humberto de Castelo Branco enacted the Land Tenure Statute, the state has
itself assumed responsibility for carrying out land reform, depriving it, of course, of its most obvious political context. The cost-the very high cost- ofthearmy’sruthlessrepressionwas thedestructionofthegreatmass move- ments represented,principally,bythePeasantLeagues’andthePartidoCom- unista Brasileiro (Brazilian Communist party-PCB). The consequences of this w e r e harrowing but not fatal. Despite its violence toward popular m o v e - ments, the military regime lacked the courage to tackle the underlying prob- lems that created the demand for land reform. The civilian governments that have been in power since 1985 have been equally timid, with the result that the question has transcended the transition from dictatorship to democracy- a transitionthathasbeenratherpoorlydefinedinmanyotherrespectsas well. Theroots oftheproblemlieina rulingclassforwhichlandspeculationisthe
Maria Orlanda Pinassi is a professor of sociology at the Mar&iacute;lia campus of S&atilde;o Paulo State Uni- versity, the author of Tr&ecirc;s devotos, umaf&eacute;, nenhum milagre (1998), and a contributor to the jour- nalsPraxisandCr&iacute;ticamarxista.F&aacute;timaCabralandMirianCl&aacute;udiaLouren&ccedil;&atilde;oare professorsin the Faculty of Philosophy and Sciences of the S&atilde;o Paulo State University, Mar&iacute;lia campus. Laurence Hallewell, was, until his recent retirement, Latin American librarian at Columbia Uni- versity. This article records an interview with the president of the Movimento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Sem-Terra (Landless Workers’ Movement&mdash;MST) in February 1998.
46
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
principal way of enriching itself. This historical legacy, however, has n o w had added to it other woes, such as unemployment and the economic ruin of smallfarmersandbusinesspeople,creatingan accumulationofproblemsthat seem atfirstglancetobebeyondsolution.
Behind its changing faqade, be it of violence, bourgeois (&dquo;yuppie&dquo;) val- ues, or enlightenment, the Brazilian state has always been balanced in favor
of the big landowners, and it has always shied away from any reform beyond the palliative and rhetorical. The proof lies in theconcentration of landowner-
shipandtheproportionofunproductiveland,bothamongthehigheston the planet.Thestatisticsbearthisout.Brazil’sbiglandownersown 35,083prop-
erties, 1 percent of the total, with a total acreage of 378 million (153,000,000 ha), almost half the area of all rural landholdings put together. Even more unreasonably, these 35,083 holdings belong to a much smaller number of owners. Moreover,only14percentoftheirarableareaproducescropsand48 percent livestock; the remaining 38 percent is totally unproductive wilder- ness. According to a survey conducted by the newsweekly Veja (April 16,
1997), the &dquo;country’s 4.5 million farming families o w n a quarter of the lands
used for agriculture, directly supporting 18 million people, or almost 12 per- cent of the Brazilian population. And quite a few of these rural smallholders lacktheresources andthetechnologytodomore thansurviveon subsistence agriculture,growinglittlemore thanwhattheirfamiliesneedtoavoiddying of hunger.&dquo;
TomakeBraziliansawareofthissituation,toopposeit,andtofightthe
tragedyofinequalityinBrazil,therearose in 1978,inthemunicipio(county) of Ronda Alta in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, what could be called the embryo of the MST. This was the start not only of one of the largest and best-disciplinedorganizationsinBrazilbutalsoofone ofthemostcombat- ive.Thankstotheactionsof MST’smilitantmembership,governmentcanno long treat land reform with paternalistic, benevolent condescension. Over and above its general aims regarding economic growth and income distribu- tion, the M S T has inspired fear and respect through the extremely detailed way in which its members have gone about planning their successive inva-
sions of unproductive land and organizing the squatter settlements they have established there. They have linked pragmatism to proposals of a socialist
nature, mostly inspired by the ideas of the Sandinistas and the Zapatistas,
tinged with a strong dose of liberation theology. For a number of years the MST was despised as a simple nuisance the
police could deal with, but as it gradually came to have an impact on the nationalscene a seriesofreactionsandconfrontationsservedtodividepublic
opinion, and its future has become less predictable. Congress has been split over themovement’slegalposition.Deputiesfromruralconstituencieshave
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
47
48
formed two opposing groups. One group represents the big landowners. The other, mostly made up of deputies affiliated with the Partido dos Traba-
lhadores (Workers’ party-PT), has endeavored to give legal cover and pro- tectiontothelandlessmovement’sstruggle.Atthesame time,openrepres-
sion, traditionally left to the army to carry out, has been reinforced by the
undercover violence of paramilitaries, encouraged and paid for by the big landowners, united in their own organizations, such as the Uniao Demo- crdtica Ruralista (Rural Democratic Union-UDR). Between them, the land- owners andtheparamilitarieshaveperpetra~dsome oftheworstabusesthat have occurred in contemporary Brazil: repeated murders, isolated or en masse, of landless workers exercising their lawful rights.
None of these crimes and threats have, however, been sufficient to break the spirit of the MST. On the contrary, the leadership and the active member- ship are increasingly resolved to continue the struggle and find better ways of doingso.Thecauseoflandreformisthusadvancedbytherebelliousspirit and concrete actions of the MST, increasing its political involvement and showing the country and the world that there are ways to embark on an effec- tive transformation of the hostile reality that is capitalism.
MOP: Only a few years ago, few people knew of the MST’s existence. Thishasbegunto change.TheMST occupiesspaceinthemediaandattracts the support and sympathy of broad sectors both inside Brazil and abroad. What has given the M S T this visibility? Has this had the approval of everyone in the movement?
JPS:Therearemanywayswecananalyzewhichfactorshavebroughtthe land reform question into the center of public debate. Clearly, the perfor- mance ofthecurrenteconomicmodelandtheworseningofthesocialcrisis have been influences. But as for the factors linked directly to the MST, I would like to list the following:
First, our cause isjust. However much conservative sectors may criticize
our tactics, no one with any conscience can defend the present concentration
oflandownershipinBrazil.Second,our struggleispersistent.Whateverthe difficultiesandchallengeswehavehadtoface,wehaveneverrunawayfrom the fight. We are very obstinate, whether the circumstances are favorable or not. Even under the New Republic,’ when many sectors of the Brazilian left, especially those linked to the Brazilian Communist party and to the Partido Comunista do Brasil (Communist Party of Brazil-PCdoB [Translator: orig- inating in 1962 as a Maoist split from the PCB]), opted to compromise with thegovernment,we choseto continuethestruggle.Thirdly,we havenever had any illusions about the government or the situation. We have always
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
believedinmass organizationsas theprincipalwaytocarrythestrugglefor- ward. And, finally, having learned from many other workers’ organizations thatprecededus inBrazilandinSpanish-speakingAmerica,we havesought toputintopracticecertainprinciplesoforganizingthathavehelpedus topre- serveourmovementfromtheattacksoftherulingclasses.Thereisnoroom totheorizeon theseprinciplesnow,butIwouldjustcitesome ofthem:collec- tive leadership, division of tasks, discipline, permanent links with the masses, andthepracticeofnew valuessuchas solidarityandunityofaction.Havethe decisions within the movement always beet~~unanimous?Obviously not. We areamassmovement,andthereforeweincludearangeofopinions,andthis ispositive.Butintheprocessofbuildingupourmovementwehavealways soughttoguaranteeunityofactionon thebasisofa solidmajoritythatisnot justamatterofvotes.Whenthereisnoconsensusaboutsomequestionorif themajorityisonlya smallone, we preferto waita littlelongerandletopin- ions mature until it becomes clear to a broad majority what is the best way forward in this process of building up our movement.
MOP: During the nearly 180 years of struggle for land reform in Brazil, the landowning elite, supported by the repressive forces of the state, has imposed many defeats and losses on the movement. Their activities have increased during the New Republic, even while many militants and intellec-
tualson thelefthavebeguntoputtheirtrustin&dquo;Sarney-styledemocracy.&dquo;On thisquestion,howfarare theMST’schannelsofnegotiationwiththegovern-
ment from the political independence so necessary for an emerging rebel movement?
JPS:Since1984,whentheMSTbecameanationwidemovement,wehave adoptedcertainguidelinesthathavecome tocharacterizeit.Forinstance,we defineourselvesasamassmovementofthepeople,becauseweuniteevery- one,regardlessofage,andonethatisatradeunioninthewayweareorga- nized and a political movement in the way w e fight the state and the big landowners. The MST has, therefore, a clear class basis. Another of our chosen guidelines is independence from the church (despite its doctrinal influenceon muchofour activemembership),frompoliticalparties,and, obviously, from the government and the elites. Political autonomy is what gives us strength, because our principal objective is the conquest of rights, and we are not concerned with how this affects our relationships with other organizations.
At the same time, we have always negotiated with governments. To negotiatedoesnotmeantogiveinortomakeconcessions;itmeanstomove forward and win victories over our enemies. We see negotiating not as a
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
49
50
stand-alone process but as the result of our struggles. We do not negotiate until after each battle. In our debates within the movement, we compare negotiation to visiting the Soccer Federation the day after the<match	to have the score officially recorded. Recording the score makes sense only if there hasbeena match,iftherehasbeena confrontationon thefieldofplay.Any- one whodoesnotrecognizethisbutgoestonegotiatethescore intheFedera- tion’s offices without ever having played the match will always lose out. Our
ruling classes will just claim victory by walkover.
MOP: Speakingofyourexpectedgrowth,thiscan bea two-edgedsword, can’tit?Ontheone hand,ifitsmembershipincreases,themovement’spoliti- calweightwillalsogrow.Butatthesame time,suchincreasecan bringwithit difficultiesinsomethingthathascharacterizedthemovement: howitsmem- bers’ activities are coordinated. With the growth of unemployment and mis- eryinBrazil,willnottheMSTrun theriskofhavingitsmembershipfilled with people it will find difficult to organize and make politically aware, such as the lumpenproletariat (or the socially excluded, as the liberals and the Christians would prefer to call them)?
JPS:Obviously,theneweconomicmodel’beingimplantedinBrazilhas created crises in agriculture, in employment, and in society that are marginalizingruralworkersinagriculturejustas muchas thoseinindustry. Thisgivesusasocialmixfromwhichwecanmoreeasilyorganizemassesof the socially excluded. But the existence of a greater number of the unem- ployed and the desperate has not been a problem for us. It is only fair to say that being out of work does not turn people into a lumpenproletariat. The lumpenproletariat is in a more permanent social situation resulting from a previously existing condition. In general, the lumpenproletariat is work-shy, dislikes organization, and has little interest in becoming squatter farmers, withalltheattendantsacrifice.Other,simplerformsofstrugglesuchas dem- onstrationsor even themarchon Brasliawouldattractmore lumpenproletari- ansthanourlandinvasions.Evenwhentheydogetinvolvedinourlandinva- sions and squatter settlements, the ways these are internally organized are poison for them and lead them to quit. They want immediate results, while our struggles are long-term and involve sacrifice.
Ourgreatestchallengeistobeabletotrainmore activememberstogoout andorganizethemillionsofruralpoorwhoare feelingmore andmore hope- lessandareanxiousforproposalsthatholdoutsomeprospectofafuturefor their families.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
MOP:Fortheunemployed,acommitmenttotheMSTmustrepresentthe recoveryof a modicumofdignitytotheirlives.Nevertheless,whathavebeen MST’s strategies to raise the political awareness of its grassroots member- ship ?How does itgetitsrank and fileto distinguishbetween their immediate struggle for survival (to acquire a patch of land) and the wider struggle that themovementisengagedin?
JPS: I have already mentioned the increase in rural unemployment. According to the official figures for the pa4ttwo years, over 800,000 rural workers have lost their jobs, particularly in the cotton, cacao, and sugarcane sectors,andthishasincreasedthesocialbasisofour struggleforland.Obvi- ouslytheimmediateconcern ofthecomradewhohaslosthisjobisjustforan alternative way to support his family and give it a future. But from the very moment hejoinsthefight,ina landinvasion,ina squattersettlement,or on a march, he has entered a real school of the class struggle that will transform him and help him discover his class identity. He learns that just obtaining a pieceof landisnotthesolution,thatsocietypresentsotherchallenges.Wein the MST are combining various forms of mobilization and struggle such as programs of education and of political preparation. People do not learn on their own; they must have a solid political and ideological background. This isan ongoingprocess.Thegreaterthecontradictions,thegreaterthereadi- nesstostudy,thegreaterthenumberofactiveyoungmembers,andthemore quickly they learn to struggle for their rights and for changes in society.
MOP: In economic terms, how do the MST’s proposals for land reform differ from the struggles of the movements that existed before 1964-the Peasant Leagues, for example?
JPS: Well, this is a very long story. W e really need to review the history of the struggle for land reform in Brazil. Explaining the objectives of the pre- 1964 peasant movements and comparing them with those of today requires consideration of the many changes that have occurred. We think of ourselves as thesuccessors, or theconsequences,ofthePeasantLeagues,andtheywere very radical in their methods, as their motto bears witness: &dquo;Land Reform by Law,or byForce.&dquo;TheMovimentodosAgricultoresSemTerra(Movement ofLandlessFarmers-MASTER4)insouthernBrazilwas alsoradical.The Uniao dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agricolas do Brasil (Union of Farmers andAgriculturalWorkers ofBrazil-ULTAB),5underthetutelageoftheCom- munist party, was more bureaucratized and tended toward institu- tionalization. This in fact happened when in 1961 it became legal to form trade
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
51
52
unionsandtheywere allmergedintoa new SindicatodosTrabalhadoresRurais
(Union of Rural Workers). But all of these showed their naivete by struggling
justforlandtoplanton. Itistruethatcapitalisminagriculturewasitselfless
developedthen.Andperhapsthiswas theBrazilianrulingclass’slastchance
to undertake a land reform of the classic capitalist type, to develop the inter-
nal market and capitalism in agriculture. Unfortunately, the elites opted for the so-called conservative modernization of our agriculture, as Jos6 Fran-
cisco Graziano da Silva [1981] has clearly shown. In other words, our elites chosetopromotea capitalisminagricultureIbasedon largelandholdings.
Thesituationinour capitalistagriculturetodayisentirelydifferentfrom thatofthe 1960s.Undertheobjectiveeconomicconditions,our proposalfor
land reform has to avoid the oversimplification of classic capitalist land reform, which merely divides up large landholdings and encourages their
productiveuse. Weare convincedthatnowadaysitisnecessarytoreorganize agricultureon a differentsocialbase,democratizeaccess to capital,democra-
tize the agroindustrial process (something just as important as landowner- ship), and democratize access to know-how, that is, to formal education. We
mustcontemplateanew socialreorganizationofurbanspace,creatingagro- cities where an electricity supply becomes viable and community activities
possible. W e also need to reformulate the present-day technological model, which is totally dependent on the multinationals, who cause both our con-
sumption of toxic agricultural inputs and our adoption of farm machinery ill-suited to conditions in Brazil. In the days of the Peasant Leagues, they did not have to bother about any of this.
MOP:Andinpoliticalterms,can we achieveanyeffectivechangeinthis agrarian structure of ours that has remained unchanged for centuries?
JPS:Inpoliticalterms,thebigchangeisthatthepeasantsno longermake up the majority of the population. Today, the rural population constitutes only 23 percent of the national total, estimated at 164 million, and therefore its
political strength has decreased. Nevertheless, our urban society has now begun to take an interest in land reform-not just as a result of propaganda butbecauseourcitydwellerscan seethattheserioussocialproblemsthatthe towns are having to confront-unemployment, hunger, misery, violence, socialexclusion,andruralout-migration-willonlybesolvedifwe firstsolve the land problem, that is to say, the land problem as I defined it in answering yourpreviousquestionandnot,as itwas intheearlystagesofcapitalism,just a question of the concentration of land ownership.
Nevertheless, this widening of the base of political support for land reform has not yet been transformed into effective political acts that could change the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
correlation of forces. Why? Because the social and political situation of Brazilneedsmore thanjustchangesinagricultureandlandreform;we have to change the economic model that the Cardoso government is implanting, and that will involve society in a far greater dispute! The challenge of land reformtodayisthatitwillworkpoliticallyonlyifwe alsochangetheeco- nomic model. This is why our struggle is so complicated and difficult, even thoughwe havewidespreadsupportthroughoutsociety.Inthissense, thehis- toricalsituationwe arelivingthroughparallelsthestruggletoabolishslavery. Allofsocietywas againstslaveryexceptfora sectionoftheruraloligarchy, whose members also happened to be the grandfathers of the big landowners of today. But abolition’ happened only after many years of struggle, because the change w a s not just o n e of social status but of the economic model, that is to say, it involved a shift from an economy based on exporting agricultural products to one based on manufacturing.
MOP: Is the MST’s land reform proposal aimed at family farming?
JPS: Asking whether our proposed land reform is consistent or not with
family farming suggests to m e a mistaken assumption. Our land reform pro- posal requires the reorganization of the form of production in Brazilian agri- culture. Obviously, the workers, those who produce, will then be the protago- nistsintheproductiveprocesswitharighttotheresultsoftheirownwork.
Butthiseconomicprinciplecan beappliedtovariouswaysoforganizingpro- duction.Wecan havegreatexpansesofarablefarms,we can havecollective farms,andwe willcertainlyhavefamilyfarmunits.Onetypeoffarmcom- plementstheother.Theonlythingswewanttowipeoutarelarge-scale, unproductive landholdings and the landowners who live solely from their income from renting out their land.
MOP: There is a tendency among the population to interpretthe actions of
theMSTas aimedatcreatingatypeofindependentpeasantrybasedon sub- sistence farming. To what extent does this idea apply in fact to the MST?
JPS: There is a lot of confusion about what exactly land reform is. At pres- ent Brazilian society is confusing three quite different concepts. There is the concept of the classic capitalistland reform that has been carried out by bour- geoisindustrialgovernmentsinvariouscountriesoftheworld,suchas Japan, Taiwan, and Korea, and in Europe and that, basically, is just the breaking up ofthelargelandholdingsthat,as we havesaidabove,were merelyhangovers of the stage capitalism had reached in agriculture between the end of the nine- teenth century and World War II. The Brazilian government uses this concept
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
53
54
withoutputtingitintopractice.Eveninthecase ofsuchclassiccapitalistland reform, its basic characteristic is the elimination in a short period (a year or
two)ofalllargelandholdingsthroughoutthecountry-all,notjustsome. I havealreadyheardJungmann’sayon anumberofoccasionsthatanyprocess of land reform takes 10-15 years to be completely implemented. This is a fib, butbecausehisjobisjusttospoutthegovernmentlinewe forgivehim.No capitalist country has taken that long.
There is a proposal for land reform put forward, with slightdifferences, by various social movements in Brazil-we could call this a workers’ proposal
for land reform-that goes well beyond just giving out land, as I explained earlier. And there is a rural settlement policy. That is to say, the government realizes that some social movements are ready for direct confrontation, invadinglandandsettlingon it.Insuchcases,itmayresignitselftopurchas- ing or confiscating such properties and allow these bold landless families to take them over, lest their continued resistance give it an even greater head- ache. However, the Cardoso government and all its predecessors have been only practicing a policy of settlement, not o n e of land reform, e v e n o n e of the capitalisttypesuchas theone theU.S.generalDouglasMacArthurimposed on Japan at gunpoint.
Our struggle is a struggle of resistance, audacity, and conquests. We are trying to go forward in a continual conquest of political and territorial space togivetheworkersmore powerso that,whenthetimeisripeinBrazil,condi- tions will allow us to carry out a real land reform. This is our policy. Clearly, we areatthemercyofhowsocietyoracademeinterpretsthesituationandthe nature of our present land settlements. But, strictly speaking, they are only spaceswehavewon andevidenceofourresistance-thenewtrenchesofthe struggle, not its ultimate objective.
MOP:InvariousstatementsbyyouandotherleadersoftheMST,onesees
special attention being given to the organization of cooperatives and to set- ting up agroindustries in the settlements or forming connections with any
suchindustriesexistingnearby.Willyousaysomethingon thissubjectand on theproposalsoftheMST’sunionofcooperatives?
JPS:Well,we haveawell-thrashed-outpolicyon howproductioninour settlements should be organized. We want this production to contribute toward resolving the problems of the real income of the families settled there so thattheycan reallyimprovetheirlives.Butwe knowthemodel’slimita- tions,andwe donotdeludeourselvesthatwe can reorganizeproductionor the market as a whole. Our general aim is the production method known as
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
thepolicyofagriculturalcooperation.Why?Becauseour 18years’experi- ence ofestablishingsettlementsandwhatwe knowofwhathashappened
elsewhere have convinced us that progress and improved incomes are possi-
ble only if there is a stimulus to agricultural cooperation. It is o n e thing for eachcomradetoreceivehisown individualplotofland,buttoorganizepro-
duction it is necessary to keep developing farm cooperatives. And the secret of introducing farm cooperatives is never to impose them, only encourage
them. There are, however, different, complementary forms of cooperative
farming appropriate to the objective conditions of each settlement: its natural
resources, type of farming, how much capital has been saved, the distance to
markets, and the degree of technological sophistication among the settlers. There are also such subjective conditions as the settlers’ level of political
awareness, their cultural tradition, etc. It is these conditions that determine thebestwaytofarmcooperatively,whichcan rangefromthemostbasic,such
as making harvesting a group effort or cooperative purchasing and market- ing, to m o r e complex forms such as the installation of a processing factory.
We have a sector within MST called the Settlers’ Cooperative Sector that
unites formal and informal cooperatives and is the body responsible for
applying and adjusting the organization’s policy of setting up cooperative farmingon thesettlementsinaccordancewiththeprevailingconditions.
It is clear that the ideal w e dream of would be for each settlement to install
itsown planttoprocessitscrop,therebyincreasingitsincomeandproducing a m o r e rapid improvement in the settlers’ living conditions. But this doesn’t
dependonlyon thewilloftheorganizationor oftheMST,doesit?Itdepends, once again,on thecorrelationof forcesinsocietyandour confrontationwith
the elites and the government, the controllers of the market, capital, agricul- tural industries, and farming policy.
MOP: This would be a production strategy for the settlements directed by the MST whereby they would become competitive in order to confront the
rules of the market, by being competitive. To what degree does this strategy of action go beyond fundamentally capitalist objectives? In other words, what is MST’s policy toward capitalism and what its policy for the march toward
socialism?
JPS: Our strategic objective is to contribute to such a reorganization of the BrazilianeconomyandsocietythatallBrazilianscan havework,education, housing, food, health, leisure, cultural activities. That’s simple, isn’t it? But it cannotbeachievedaslongaswehavetocontendwiththegreedofourruling class.Wedonotcareforlabels.Wearefightingforanideal:theidealofalife
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
55
56
andbetterconditionsforeverybody,andImean everybody.Capitalismhas alreadyprovedthatitcan neitherprovideforeveryone’slivingconditionsnor
improve them. How can w e escape from capitalism, and what will replace it? There lies a challenge for the whole of Brazilian society and one that must be tackled by the organizations of all of the working class. We do not consideritataskfortheMSTalone,whichiswhywearenotexplicitlycon- cerned with it.
MOP:Itseemsthereisaverymarkeddifferenceintheresultsachievedby the different settlements depending on where they are situated. How does MST tackle this regional difference?
JPS:Ihavealreadycommentedearlierthatthereare objectiveandsubjec-
tive conditions in each settlement that result in differences in the level of
development of production, of cooperative farming, and obviously in the resultingimpacton incomeandthebettermentoflivingconditions.Fromour concrete experience, w e find that individual settlements have rather similar histories and, that, subject to the differences in conditions I have mentioned, such similar histories generally recur.
There is a first stage, which can last two or three years, immediately after the land has been secured, in which the families are concerned only to pro- ducefortheirown subsistence,buildtheirlittlehouses,andsee thattheirchil- dren go to school. That is, they are concerned with reorganizing their lives. At thisstage,theyrecover thedignityofworkingon theirown account,staunch theirhunger,andgettoeatreasonablywell.Theysoon see that,althoughthis is fine, it is insufficient for them to be able to make further progress. Then comes thesecondstageofstruggleon thesettlement,whentheydiscussthe needto grow somethingforthemarket. We endeavor,throughour production sector, to further this discussion, discovering markets that are nearby or that haveappropriatespecializations,cropsthatdonothavetobegrownon large ranchestobeviable,productsthatgivemore incomeandthatcan makeuse of more manpower.Thesettlerstrytoproduceforthelocalmarket,forthemass of ordinary consumers, and to obtain greater income. This is not always pos- sible.Settlementsthatare farawayfromthemarketare gravelyhandicapped. Thisiswhywe opposethecolonizationoftheAmazonregion,becausethe colonists will be going to a hell where it is impossible to produce for the m a r - ket. There are also settlements that delude themselves into growing such cropsassoybeansorcornandtrytocompetewiththebiglandowners.They fall flat on their faces. We cannot hope to improve our income by growing cereals for the market. The majority of the settlements are in this phase: of
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
discoveringthemarket.Fromtherewe enterthethirdphaseinthehistoryofa settlement, when its members realize that they are going to improve their incomeonlyiftheyinstalltheirowncrop-processingplants.Buttodothat they have to form a cooperative or introduce some other type of cooperative farming.Thisisone ofthemostdifficultstagesbecauseitrequiresmore capi- tal.Andthemarketiseven more specialized,althoughatthelocallevelthere are many opportunities, provided that the product is of good quality. This is thewayoursettlementsevolve.Settlerswhodonotmanagetogobeyondthe stage of subsistence farming are not going to progress.
All the same, w e cannot analyze the success of a settlement justby its eco- nomic results or its participation in the market. There are two other criteria that have to be taken into account. A settler turns himself into a citizen; he ceases to be a modern slave. He walks with pride, he votes with awareness. He participates in society. His children study. When he lived as a landless peasant,sharecropper,daylaborer,or crofter,hewas a pariahunwantedby society, a commodity in the bosses’ labor market. The very fact of having escapedthis condition transforms the subjectinto the citizen. No statistic can measure that!t
Another criterion is to compare the social functions of the land that has
beeninvaded.Beforetheinvasion,whenitwas alargelandholding,society receivedlittlefromit,anditcouldhavesupportedfarmore inhabitants.Now,
manymore peoplelivethere,anditgrowscropsthatare destinedforsociety. Thecomparisonswe havemadealmostdefybelief.Wehavefoundincreases of at least 10 or 15 to 1.
MOP: Until a few years ago, when the new trade unionism was coming into existence as the only organizational way out for the Brazilian working class,theruralmovementswereseenassectorsthatcameintheirtow.Today the M S T is capable e v e n of attracting the attention of sectors o n the left that in
generalsee thecountrysideas a theaterofpetty-bourgeoisstruggles.Whatin facthaschangedinthisrelationshipthatuntilrecentlywas soproblematic?
JPS: Just like the elites, the Brazilian Academy of Letters has always been
colonized, and both of them, equally, have assumed the posture of colonials,
alwaysthinkingas iftheirfeetwere stillplantedinEurope.Unfortunately,the Brazilian left has also been under this negative influence and, perhaps for this reason, has never understood the countryside. There are many jokes about how old-fashioned the theories in favor among the Brazilian left are. The Trotskyites are always hoping for the insurrection of the great apes of Sao Bernardo,8 the&dquo;Partidao&dquo;[thePCB]isalwaysintow tothenationalbourgeoi-
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
57
58
sie, the PCdoB remains in its Maoist phase, waiting for the Japanese invasion
to begin the Great March, and the Christian left trusts in the free action of the
people and the hope that the poor will conquer the heavens. Despite this, I
thinkthatallofus arelearninginourideologicalunderdevelopment,andnow we seemore clearlywhatourpoliticalchallengesare,theneedforvarietiesof
mass organization,thefightagainstvanguardism,thediscourse,etc. Ithink thattheMSTisthefruitofitsown experience,ofitsmistakes,andofthe
learningprocessoftheleftas a whole.Andcertainlynew formsoforganiza- tionwillemerge,newmovements.Thinkinginthisway,theMSTcanbeseen
as an exampleor a perennialexperiment.We are instrumentsforachievingan objective, but the main thing is the objective, not the instrument.
MOP:ThereisapolicyoftheMSTtoattractandacttogetherwiththe urban sectors, above all the unions. Are there links between the MST leader- shipandtheCUT?Ifthereare,whatarethey?
JPS:FromthebirthoftheMST,withitsformalizationasanationalmove- mentinJanuary1984,wehavebeenconcernedtoplaceasoneofourprinci- palobjectivesan alliancewiththetrade-unionmovement,andwe defineour strategic alliance as being with unionism as understood by the CUT-a unionism of the grass roots, of the masses, combative, democratic, and class- based.Becauseofthiswe havesoughtfromthebeginningtocontributetothe strengtheningoftheCUTunionsjustas we havealwayssoughttoworkin conjunction with them. Our links are therefore of objectives and practices. It mayhappenthatwe dothingstogether,butthisisadetail.Themainthingis nottohaveacommonprogram,foreachsocialmovement,popularorunion, hasitsown dynamic,itsown wayofacting.And,attimes,forcingtheadop- tionofacommonprogramcanbemorehindrancethanhelp.Wealsotakepart in various forums run jointly with other workers’ organizations, for example, the National Forum AgainstViolence in the Countryside. We worked together in mobilizing the people for the Constituent Assembly of 1987-1988. Then we carried out the march to Brasilia, in April 1987 as a jointendeavor. In that march,althoughitwas calledtheMarchof theLandless,we oftheMSTnum- bered in fact only 1,500. It was a march of all Brazilian workers and all of societyagainsttheneoliberalprogram.Itwas theCUTunionists,theUniao Nacional dos Estudantes (National Union of Students-UNE), the churches, and the Federation of Popular Movements that together made the great march onApril17,1997.Thiseventwas alandmark,foritprovedthatitispossible for us to unite to defeat the Cardoso government and its neoliberal model.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
MOP:WhattypeofrelationhastheMSTbeenestablishingwiththePT
and the other political parties, considering both the history of the m o v e m e n t and its relations with them in the run-up to the coming presidential election?
JPS: Among the characteristics of our movement, as I explained above,
is our determination always to defend the MST’s independence. As an
autonomous social movement, w e are free to choose our political direction
anddoctrine,toplanour own struggle,fixour own objectives,anduse our
ownhumanandfinancialresources,andwearealsofreefromchurchesand
parties-and from the PT, too. We do, however, feel a greater identity with
thePT.Mostofour activemembers,totheextentthattheyhavebecomepolit-
ically involved and are increasing their political participation in society, opt forthePTas theirpartyofchoice,andthisideologicaltieistheresultofour
commonhistory,ofsharedstruggles,andtosomedegreeowessomethingto thewaywe respecteachother’sautonomy.But,our grassroots-theland-
less, those in the camps, the squatters-reproduce what happens, to a lesser degree, in the general run of rural communities, albeit with, in our case, a greaterlevelofpoliticization(accordingtoan opinionsurveycarriedoutin ourcampsbyDataFolha,about65percentregardthemselvesas supportersof thePT).Thisrepresentsa higherdegreeofpoliticizationandpartyallegiance
than in the society in general. Amongour activemembersthereare alsosome whorepresentotherpar-
ties on the left such as the PDT, the PSB, and the PCdoB.9 And as we all
respect each other’s independence, we have never had any problems, even during the run-up to elections when the movement is discussing policy and defining itself clearly by its support of specific candidates for state and fed- eral legislatures, governorships, and the presidency of the republic. For example,we came outlastyearinsupportof Lula’srun forthepresidency 10as the best instrument with which to overturn the government of Fernando HenriqueCardoso.Andwe choseLulanotbecausewe aretiedtothePTor driven by it but simply because Lula is greater than the PT as a political and electoral vehicle. We feel, moreover, that he is the only candidate with cha-
rismaanda fightinghistory,capableofunitinga broadenoughpopularbase, especially among the excluded and the unorganized. And he is the only one with enough strength to be able, after he has won, to really force through a land reform and implement a n alternative economic model to neoliberalism.
Imyselfam convincedthatifwe achievea broadenoughmass mobili- zation,ifwemanagetotransformthisyear’selectoralcampaignintoareal movementtoraisepeople’spoliticalawareness,ifwe managetojointogether
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
59
60
specificmass strugglesagainstneoliberalism,ifwe managetoshowthepeo- ple that what is really in play is national sovereignty, that the choice is betweentwodifferent.futuresforour society,thepeoplewillliaveno doubts about choosing Lula and seeing to it that this government will not be able to selloutBrazil,nor theenemiesoftheworkerscontinueintheirinfamousmad rush to hand over our country to the interests of international capitalism and plunge our people into a state in which it will be harder and harder for them to survive.
Iamanoptimist.Wewillcarryoutareallandreforminourcountry,and w e will succeed in defeating these colonized elites whose only dream is of Miami, Florida.
NOTES
1.ThePeasantLeagues(LigasCamponesas)were thefirstandbroadestformoforganiza- tion of the rural social movement. Founded as the Sociedade Beneficiente de Defuntos (Death Benefit Society) in the 1950s and 1960s, the leagues organized the struggles of the tenant farm- ers, squatters, small landowners, and farm workers in general in the coastal z o n e of the Brazilian Northeast against the expropriation and exploitation caused by the expansion of large-scale landholding in the region. This movement began in reaction to the founding of the Sociedade Agr&iacute;cola de Plantadores e Pecuaristas de Pernambuco (Agricultural Society of Farmers and Ranchers of Pemambuco&mdash;SAPP) in 1954 on the Galil&eacute;ia sugar plantation in the county of Vit&oacute;ria de Santo Ant&atilde;o (in Pernambuco state). As it was a mutual-aid society, its aims were to establisha school,buildupa funeralbenefitfund,supplyfarmtoolsandseeds,andeven obtain technical help from government agencies. The leagues spread throughout the Northeast and into other parts of Brazil, with the support of the Brazilian Communist party, marking with their struggle the first land reform movement in Brazil. The military coup d’&eacute;tat of 1964 suppressed the movement, and its leaders were driven into exile abroad or killed.
2. In the 1980s, after 20 years under the military regime, a large part of the urban population came onto the streets to clamor for direct elections. The opposition, representing the popular will,drewupthenecessaryconstitutionalamendmentso thatthecountrymight,atlast,electits presidentonce more (thelasttimethathadhappenedhadbeenwhenJ&acirc;nioQuadroswas elected, in1961).Therewere 11monthsofintensecampaigningfordirectelection,butthebilllost(in Congress) by 22 votes, and Brazil tasted bitter defeat in its struggle for democracy. Tancredo de Almeida Neves, of the Partido do Movimento Democr&aacute;tico Brasileiro (Party of the Brazilian DemocraticMovement&mdash;PMDB),hadtakenan activepartinthedemonstrationsbutcavedinto the maneuverings of the outgoing dictatorship and ran for president under the indirect voting system,withJos&eacute;Sarney,formerpresidentof theSocialDemocraticparty(PartidoDemocr&aacute;tico Social&mdash;PDS).The75-year-oldTancredoNeveswas electedin1985butdiedjustbeforehis inauguration.Itwas lefttoSarney(withhisclosetiestothedictatorship)tobeginBrazil’sreturn todemocracy.(Translator:Sarney,dissatisfiedwiththecandidatechosenbythecaucus ofthe PDS, the direct successor of ARENA, the military regime’s parliamentary support, had bolted his party with several of his chief associates to form a n e w party that offered its essential votes in the electoral college to Tancredo in exchange for the number-two position on the slate.) Thus began the period we know as the New Republic. Sarney governed for six years and almost
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
became a popular hero for his Cruzado Plan, which consisted, basically, in freezing the prices of allconsumergoodsandsocreatinganenormousconsumerboom.Butthisveryboomwrecked
the plan, frustrating the efforts of Sarney’s price police&mdash;the citizen volunteers, mostly house- wives,whowentroundthestorestoensurethattheywere observingthepricefreeze.InDecem- ber1989thecountryemergedfromtheyearsof leadonlytosinkintheseas ofmudofthepresi- dency of Fernando Collor de Melo.
3. The economic model is based on the external imposition of neoliberal reforms.
4. In Rio Grande do Sul, in the 1960s, an area of 1,600 ha (3,954 acres) occupied by 300 squatterscame tobeclaimedbya supposedowner. Theattempttodriveoutone squatterresulted in the organization of the rest, creating the first nucleus of the MASTER. In 1962 the landless begana formofstrugglethatcame totypifytheirmethods:establishingcampson theedgesof unproductive large landholdings. New camps mushroomed, built by expropriated peasants whodemandedtherighttotakeoverstatelandofdoubtfultitle.Until1963thecampshadthe support of the then Governor Leonel Brizola. In 1964 the movement was	smashed by the mili- tary takeover.
5.UndertheguidanceoftheBrazilianCommunistparty,ULTABwas createdinS&atilde;oPaulo in 1954 with the aim of coordinating the peasant associations already in existence. It functioned as a party front in unifying the rural struggle and that of Brazilian workers in general toward unionization.
6.Themore generalpolicy,implementedforthephasingoutofslaveryinBrazil,datesfrom 1871 with the Free Womb Law. This declared that all children born from that date to a slave woman wouldbelegallyfreefromthemomentofbirth.Thislawencouragedboththeabolition- ist movement and acts of resistance by the slaves themselves, whose own freedom would be
enacted o n May 13, 1888, after m o r e than 300 years of forced labor. But three centuries of slav- ery and the consequences it left in the most diverse aspects of Brazilian life were, obviously, not obliteratedbyamereActofParliament.
7. Raul Jungmann has been Minister of Land Policy in the Cardoso administration since 1996.
8. A city of the most industrialized region of the state of S&atilde;o Paulo, cradle of Brazil’s biggest trade-union federation, the Central &Uacute;nica dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Unique Federation&mdash; CUT) and of the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ party&mdash;PT).
9. Translator’s note: The Partido Democr&aacute;tico Trabalhista (Democratic Labor party&mdash; PDT)wasformedinMay1980byLeonelBrizolawhenthecourtsforbadehimtheuseofthetitle "Partido Trabalhista Brasileira." The party’s strength has been in Rio de Janeiro (where Brizola waselectedgovernorin1982and1990)andinhisnativestateofRioGrandedoSul,butithas also had its candidates elected mayor in S&atilde;o Luis, Curitiba, and Natal. The Partido Socialista Brasileira(BrazilianSocialistparty&mdash;PSB),thefourthBrazilianpoliticalpartytobeso named, was formed in February 1947 under the leadership of Joao Mangabeira out of the earlier Esquerda Democr&aacute;tica. It advocated a mildly socialist program and campaigned against Get&uacute;lio Vargas’s authoritarian "fascist" leanings. In 1960 it w o n only 1 percent of the national vote. Its best-knownmemberwas thePeasantLeagues’FranciscoJuli&atilde;o.Reestablishedin 1986afterthe fallofthemilitaryregime,itwas deridedas the"PartyoftheIntellectuals"andelectedonlytwo deputies to the Constituent Assembly of 1987.
10.Lu&iacute;sIn&aacute;cio(Lula)daSilvabecamefamousas leaderofthestrikesintheABCindustrial zone ofGreaterS&atilde;oPauloattheendofthe1970s,whenBrazilwas stillunderthemilitarydicta- torship.Atthatperiod,underhisleadership,300,000carworkersstoppedwork.Lulawas one of the founders of the PT and is currently its honorary president. He established his definitive place inBrazilianhistoryas thefirstblue-collarworkertobecomea presidentialcandidate.Thatwas in 1989,whenhelosttoFernandoCollordeMelo.In1994heran again,thistimeagainstCardoso,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
61
62
andalthoughhelostagainhisdegreeofsuccess invote gettingwas one of themost amazingphe-
nomena inBrazilianpolitics.In 1998heagainran unsuccessfullyagainstCardoso,whowon a second term in office.
REFERENCE
Silva, Jos&eacute; Francisco Graziano da 1981 A moderniza&ccedil;&atilde;o dolorosa. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2005
International Development
Open Research Online
Relocating participation within a radical politics of development: Development and Change
Samuel Hickey and Giles Mohan

Abstract
In response to (and in sympathy with) many of the critical points that have been lodged against participatory approaches to development and governance within international development, this article seeks to relocate participation within a radical politics of development. We argue that participation needs to be theoretically and strategically informed by a notion of ‘citizenship’, and be located within the ‘critical modernist’ approach to development. Using empirical evidence drawn from a wide range of contemporary approaches to participation, the paper shows that participatory approaches are most likely to succeed where (i) they are pursued as part of a wider radical political project; (ii) where they are aimed specifically at securing citizenship rights and participation for marginal and subordinate groups; and (iii) when they seek to engage with development as an underlying process of social change rather than in the form of discrete technocratic interventions. However, we do not use these findings to argue against using participatory methods where these conditions are not met. Finally, the paper considers the implications of this relocation for participation in both theoretical and strategic terms
Authors
Samuel Hickey is a lecturer in international development at the Institute for Development Policy and Management, University of Manchester. Giles Mohan is a lecturer in development studies at the Open University in the UK.
1 This article is a shortened version of three chapters by the authors in Hickey and Mohan (2004). Many thanks to Tony Bebbington, Uma Kothari, Diana Mitlin, Kristian Stokke and Neil Webster for their insightful comments on this work, and also two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions on this particular paper.
Introduction
Over the past thirty years participation has become one of the shibboleths of contemporary development theory and practice, often directly linked to claims of ‘empowerment’ and ‘transformation’. Initially a marginal concern within development, most development agencies now agree that some form of participation by the beneficiaries is necessary for development to be relevant, sustainable and empowering. However, the past decade has witnessed a growing backlash against participation (e.g. Cooke and Kothari, 2001), on the basis that participatory approaches have often failed to achieve meaningful social change, largely due to a failure to engage with issues of power and politics. Despite the veracity of this critique, particularly in relation to particular forms of participation, it has notably failed to halt the spread of participation as a development concept and strategy. Apparently undeterred, and increasingly underwritten by policy and funding support from virtually all major development agencies, the participatory turn has actually become expressed more deeply and diversely within development theory and practice over recent years.
It is not our intention to review this contested trajectory per se, but to examine the extent to which participatory reforms and approaches necessarily fail to generate transformations to existing social, political and economic structures and relations in ways that empower the previously excluded or exploited. Our empirical review suggests that certain participatory approaches and agents appear to transcend this critique and have resulted in genuine forms of transformation. Moreover, a series of common threads underpins the transformatory potential of these interventions, and these threads, including the pursuit of participation as citizenship, can provide the basis for a conceptual relocation of participation within a radical politics of development. This leads us to argue for relocating participation as an overtly political approach to development, which requires a re-engagement with ‘the political’ linked to an expanded and radicalised understanding of citizenship. Crucially, we argue that for such a politics to have purchase it cannot be attached to a free-floating set of values, but must be rooted in a normative and theoretical approach to development. This is in contrast to mainstream participatory approaches, which are overly voluntaristic in seeing any form of participation as necessarily an improvement on past practices (Chambers, 1997), and which, lacking a strong theoretical basis, have been easily co-opted within disempowering agendas (Rahman, 1995). We argue that the critical modernist approach
within development theory offers the best theoretical home for an understanding of participation that is at once political and radical.
Problematising participation
A common problem across both the uncritical promotion of ‘participatory’ approaches to development and the more recent critical backlash against participation is a failure to locate such contributions within broader theoretical debates on development. Table One provides an overview of the different approaches within development theory and practice over the past century that have taken participation as a key element of their overall project, and reveals that participation has been mobilised on behalf of a variety of different ideological and institutional perspectives on development. This table focuses in particular on drawing out the points of comparison in terms of citizenship and development theory, each of which we argue are at the heart of any attempt to reconstitute participation as a legitimate and transformative approach to development. Initially, it is instructive to frame the current disputes over participation within the context of wider debates concerning the distinction and links between ‘immanent’ and ‘imminent’ development.
Observers distinguish between ‘imminent’ and ‘immanent’ development, whereby the former is concerned with ‘willed’ development policy and action and the latter is concerned with underlying processes of development (Cowen and Shenton, 1996). Imminent development emerged over the past two centuries largely as a means of managing those ‘surplus populations’ that have either been excluded from or ‘adversely incorporated’ into processes of immanent capitalist development. For much of this time the “development doctrine purported to put this relative surplus population to work within the integument of the nation” (Cowen and Shenton, 1996: 153). Hence, the state provided development studies with its key agent of development, while the rationality that underpinned the modern project of development justified the top-down, expert-led character of its associated interventions. However, although the past three decades have seen this statist approach give way to a broader focus on how civic and market actors can contribute to development interventions, there has been an increasing tendency within contemporary development studies to focus on imminent rather than immanent processes of development, in ways that often obscure the underlying politics of development. The assertion that emancipatory forms of development can be wilfully
‘managed’ through ‘the right mixture’ of institutional responses (e.g. Brett, 2000) has effectively ‘depoliticised’ the notion and practice of development in poor countries (Ferguson, 1994), rather than seeing it as negotiated with and contested by its subjects. The underlying politics of underdevelopment and exclusion, and of development interventions themselves, are thus obscured from view.
Table 1	Participation in development theory and practice: a selective history
Era Approach
Institutionaland intellectual influences United Kingdom Colonial Office
1944 Report on Mass Education in Africa
Post-colonial governments (Social Welfare or specialised departments) North American political science
Radical ‘southern’ researchers / educationalists. Friere, Fals Borda, Rahman _______________ 2nd Vatican Council, Latin American Catholic priests. Guittierez, Sobrino Dag Hammarskjold
Developmenttheory:approachtoimmanentprocessesand Approachtocitizenship imminent interventions
Locus/levelof engagement
Community
Political system and constituent parts; citizens
Economic and civic spheres; communities; citizens
Initially focused
1940s- 1950s
1960s- 1970s
1960s
1960s- 1970s
1970s-
Community Development (colonial)
Community Development (post-colonial)
Political participation
Emancipatory participation
____________ Liberation theology
‘Alternative
Immanent
(Re)produce stable rural communities to counteract processes of urbanisation and socio-political change, including radical nationalist and leftist movements Imminent
Development requires participation and self-reliance; cost-sharing. Animation rurale, adult literacy and extension education, institution building, leadership training, local development projects Immanent
As above; also development of state hegemony, moral economy of state penetration Imminent As above; also health, education
Immanent
Political development dimension of modernisation theory. Participation as securing stability, legitimacy for new states and strengthening the political system Imminent
Voter education; support for political parties
Immanent
Analyse and confront ‘structures of oppression’ within existing forms of economic development, state formation, political rule and social differentiation Imminent EP: Participatory action research (PAR), conscientisation, popular education, support for popular organisations LT: Form base Christian communities, training for transformation, popular education
Immanent
Participation as an obligation of citizenship; citizenship formed in homogenous communities
Participation (e.g. voting, campaigning, political party membership) as a right and an obligation of citizenship
Participation as a right of citizenship; participatory citizenship as a means of challenging subordination and marginalisation
Participation as a right of
1990s
1980s- present
Mid- 1990s- present
Late 1990s- present
development’
Populist / Participation in development
Social capital
Participatory governance and citizenship participation
Conference 1974. Development Dialogue, IFAD Dossier
Nerfin, Friedmann
Development professionals, NGOs (e.g. MYRADA, IIED) World Bank Participation Learning Group, NGDOs, UN agencies Chambers World Bank Social Capital and Civil Society Working Group Putnam, Bourdieu, Narayan Participatory Research and Action (Delhi), Institute for Development Studies, Brighton (Participation Group).
Critique of ‘mainstream’ development as exclusionary, impoverishing and homogenising; proposal of alternatives based around territorialism, cultural pluralism and sustainability Imminent Popular education; strengthen social movements & self-help groups
Immanent
Little direct engagement; implicit critique of modernisation
Imminent
Failure of top-down projects and planning; participation required to empower people, capture indigenous people’s knowledge, ensure sustainability and efficiency of interventions Participatory: rural/urban appraisal, learning and action, monitoring and evaluation; NGO projects.
Immanent
Social capital promoted as a basis for economic growth
Imminent
Local institution building, support participation in networks & associations
Immanent
Development requires liberal or social democracy, with a responsive state and strong civil society. Some focus on social justice Imminent
Convergence of ‘social’ and ‘political’ participation, scaling-up of participatory methods, state-civic partnerships, decentralisation, participatory budgeting, citizens hearings, participatory poverty assessments, PRSP consultations
citizenship; citizenship as a key objective of alternative development, to be realised in multi- levelled political communities
Focus on participation in projects rather than in broader political communities
Participation as a right and obligation of citizenship
Participation as primarily a right of citizenship
on communities and civic society, latterly the state through ‘inclusive governance’
Development professionals and agencies; local participants
Civic associations
Citizens, civil society, state agencies and institutions
One of the challenges to this form of imminent development over the past two decades has come from the ‘participatory development’ approach. In its current, mainstreamed and ‘populist’ form (see Table One), the ‘participation in development’ approach asserts the importance of placing local realities at the heart of development interventions, and of the need to transform agents of development from being directive ‘experts’ to ‘facilitators’ of local knowledge and capabilities (e.g. Chambers, 1983). The ‘power’ transformations required between ‘uppers’ and ‘lowers’, it is argued, can be achieved through according participatory roles to the subjects of development at each stage of development interventions.
However, this mission has faced a series of critiques, particularly regarding the apparent failure of participatory approaches to engage with the issues of power and politics raised by its language of ‘empowerment’. The key arguments against participatory development include an obsession with the ‘local’ as opposed to wider structures of injustice and oppression (Mohan, 2001; Mohan and Stokke, 2000); an insufficiently sophisticated understanding of how power operates and is constituted and thus of how empowerment may occur (e.g. Mosse, 1994; Kothari, 2001); an inadequate understanding of the role of structure and agency in social change (Cleaver, 1999); and, partly as a result of the mainstreaming of participation, a tendency for certain agents of participatory development to treat participation as a technical method of project work rather than as a political methodology of empowerment (Carmen, 1996; Cleaver, 1999; Rahman, 1995).2 In particular, this approach tends towards a methodological individualism (Francis, 2001) that obscures the analysis of what makes participation difficult for marginal groups in the first place, particularly in relation to processes of state formation, social stratification and political economy.
As already noted, the intensification of this critique has not significantly affected the continued ubiquity of participation across development policy and practice. For us, this raises a key question: to what extent can current approaches to participation be directly associated with the transformations promised by the language of
8
empowerment, and thus constitute an adequate response to the critique that participatory approaches fail to deal with issues of power and politics?
Transformative participation: a review of contemporary development policy and practice This section reviews those fields of development policy and practice wherein participation constitutes a definitive element. Following Mohan and Stokke (2000), these are participatory governance and decentralisation; NGOs and participatory development; and social movements. We argue that initiatives within each arena have either gone or have the potential to go beyond the criticisms of participation and address broader issues of politics in ways that make change more embedded and thoroughgoing, thus retaining the potential of participation to be ‘transformative’ (White, 1996). In identifying the factors that have contributed to the relative successes of the approaches identified here, this section lays the foundation for reassembling these positive political lessons into a theoretical and analytical framework wherein participation as transformation can be located.
Participatory governance and democratic decentralisation Democratic decentralisation is a key aspect of the participatory governance agenda, and is associated with the institutionalisation of participation through regular elections, council hearings and, more recently, participatory budgeting (e.g. Blair, 2000). The devolution of power to local authorities is also alleged to create incentives for increased civil society activity. However, despite being lauded by development agencies and theorists across the political spectrum as the key to state reform, popular empowerment and, more recently, poverty reduction (e.g. World Bank, 2000), the track record of decentralisation in developing countries has come under increasing criticism (e.g. Crook and Sverrison, 2001). Key problems observed so far include the failure of decentralisation to overcome socio-economic disparities within local authority regions and the likelihood of elite capture; the tendency for the forms of participation introduced by decentralisation to be subsumed either within more informal modes of patronage in ways that nullify its transformative potential (Francis and James, 2003), or to be negated by over-riding socio-cultural norms, as with the
2 Postdevelopment critics (e.g. Rahnema, 1992) go further and argue that the very language of ‘participation in development’ implies a form of imperialist intervention and the illegitimate
9
quota representation for minority groups (e.g. Kapoor, 2000; Tripp 2000). More broadly, and to the extent that such reforms constitute part of the ‘good governance’ agenda, decentralisation has been promoted as a technocratic means of ‘reducing’ or ‘smartening’ the central state (Campbell, 2001), rather than as a political project aimed at transforming state legitimacy and forging a new contract between citizens and the local state.
However, there is also growing evidence that the transformative potential of participatory governance reforms remain (Gaventa, 2004). Fung and Wright (2001) review examples from ‘north’ and ‘south’ of what they term ‘Empowered Deliberative Democracy’, each with the potential to be “...radically democratic in their reliance on the participation and capacities of ordinary people” (ibid: 7) and tying of discussion to action. For example, certain cases of democratic decentralisation stand out as having achieved both greater participation of and social justice for marginal groups and localities, as with the Indian states of West Bengal and Kerala. In both cases, decentralisation has been credited with ensuring the participation of subordinate groups – such as women, landless groups, sharecroppers and small peasants – and being directly linked to the pursuit of redistributive policies that have had pro-poor outcomes (Harriss, 2000: 15; Heller, 2001: 142). The reforms helped reduce the (ab)use of political power by landed elites (Crook and Sverrisson, 2001: 14-5), while increasing the ‘political space’ within which poor groups could participate, both within and beyond the formal institutions of state power (Webster, 2002). Crucially, these projects of democratic decentralisation in certain states in India were located within wider political programmes of state reform. The ‘reinvention’ of leftist politics in light of the failures of centralised rule and planned economies, and the need for parties of the left to maintain and increase their electoral constituency, provided the context within which participatory forms of governance became integrated within wider projects of redistributive politics and social justice.
Similar findings also emerge from reviews of participatory budgeting in Brazil, with findings of increased popular participation (e.g. over 10 per cent of the electorate in the state of Rio Grande do Sul participate in budgeting); changed investment patterns
appropriation of agency.
10
in favour of progressive social sectors such as housing, education, sanitation and health; excluded slums and populations drawn into the political process; and also increased efficiency in terms of planning and implementation (Santos 1998, Schneider and Goldfrank, 2002; Souza, 2001). Patronage relations have been challenged (Heller, 2001: 140), with people now able to make claims according to their status as citizens rather than as clients (Abers, 1998; Souza, 2001).
Once again, the agency for the success of participatory budgeting can be located within a wider radical political project. The most successful cases of participatory budgeting have been in areas where the Worker’s Party (PT) has been in power, with higher levels of participation correlated most closely with membership of the PT rather than other factors such as literacy (Schneider and Goldfrank, 2002: 9). Similarly, Heller (2001: 139) argues that the defining feature of both democratic decentralisation in India and participatory budgeting in Brazil is that of “a political project in which an organised political force – and specifically non-Leninist left-of- center political parties that have strong social movement characteristics – champions decentralisation”. Hence, such successful democratic projects of local governance reform are closely linked to their adoption of a development paradigm that directly challenges structural inequalities.
NGOs and participatory development: a radical rediscovery and moving beyond the local The forms of participation promoted by non-governmental organisations (NGOs) through discrete project interventions have been subject to particularly vigorous critique. The key problems identified include, first, their confused status between civic, public and private institutional spheres, which may mean that they interact with people only as clients (Uphoff, 1996), or are complicit in the weakening of the ‘social contract’ between state and citizen. Second, that the ‘transnational community of development NGOs’ transmits what is essentially a neo-imperialist and disempowering project through concepts and strategies of how the ‘third world’ should be managed (Townsend et al, 2002). Moreover, the NGOs that tend to receive support under the ‘civil society’ agenda tend to accord with the tenets of the neoliberal development project (Howell and Pearce, 2001). Third, relationships that are forged within this transnational community – both between ‘northern’ and
11
‘southern’ NGOs (e.g. Fowler, 1998) and between NGOs and local communities (e.g. Hickey, 2002; Miraftab, 1997) – often disempower the ‘lower’ partner through establishing patron-client relationships. The fourth and related problem is the tendency amongst NGOs to eschew partnerships with more political elements within civil society in favour of capacity-building professionalised NGOs in their image. Fifth, the increasing dependency of NGOs on official sources of funding raise the dangers that the demands of upwards accountability effectively short-circuit the participatory mechanisms required to secure downward accountability (Edwards and Hulme, 1996).
To a large extent, this paper would concur that NGOs face severe limitations in seeking to be genuine agents of transformative development through participatory approaches. However, the vast range and diversity of agencies and activities within the transnational community of NGOs not only precludes sweeping judgements, but has also produced initiatives capable of promoting participatory development in ways that do involve transformation. From a wide field, two such examples can be expanded on here, namely the ‘REFLECT’ approach to literacy generation and the increasing role of NGOs in advocacy work. While acknowledging the brevity of this exposition we argue that the transformative potential of each is distinguished by multi-levelled engagements with issues of citizenship and political change.
Adult education, citizenship and radical politics: the case of REFLECT3 The capacity of adult literacy to transform power relations has become an increasing focus, with “...the themes of participation, empowerment and popular organisation very prominent within the theory and practice of adult education for development” (Youngman, 2000: 79). Of the many associated approaches (Mayo, 1999), the REFLECT approach to literacy generation offers one way forward here. Originally piloted by ActionAid in the mid-1990s, REFLECT is currently employed by 350 governmental and non-governmental agencies in 60 countries (ActionAid, 2003).
The key idea behind REFLECT is to merge the pedagogical and political philosophy of Paulo Freire (1972) with the techniques of participatory rural appraisal, thus re-
3 Regenerated Freirean Literacy through Empowering Community Techniques.
12
engaging the technocratic expression of participation with one of its more theoretical, political and radical antecedents (see Table One). It is also theoretically informed by ‘gender and development’ thinking, and seeks to develop women’s capacity to take on participatory roles at community level and beyond (Archer and Cottingham, 1996). REFLECT proceeds by engaging participants in dialogical discussions of their socio- economic problems, and uses visual graphics to structure and depict the discussion (ibid.). ‘Keywords’ emerge from these discussions, which then form the basis for literacy development. Participants are encouraged to devise means of solving the problems, beginning with ‘action-points’ to be addressed either by REFLECT groups or higher-level organisations. The results of REFLECT in many cases to date have been impressive, with genuine transformation taking place with regards to gender relations, community-state relations, and between age groups within communities. Participants report self-realisation, increased participation in community organisations (Waddington and Mohan, 2004), and increased community-level actions (Archer and Cottingham, 1997: 200-1); female participants and REFLECT facilitators in particular have become key resource people for the communities (Kanyesigye, 1998: 51-53).
REFLECT is inextricably linked to citizenship formation, in that it focuses on “people’s ability to participate in civil society, enabling them to effectively assert their rights and assume their responsibilities” (Archer, 1998: 101). It thus emphasises that participation needs to be practised in the broader spaces of the political community beyond the project level, and recognises the need to ‘reconnect’ populist methods of participation with more politicised understandings of social change. However, while REFLECT was constructed, and is currently promoted by northern NGDOs, there is evidence that, “radical adult education initiatives are unlikely to prove effective when carried out on their own. They must operate in relation to a social movement” (Mayo, 1999: 133), a challenge we return to below. 4
NGO Advocacy One of the key weaknesses of the project-based work traditionally favoured by NGOs is the inability to challenge wider structures of marginalisation. As Nyamugasira (1998: 297) observes NGOs “have come to the sad realization that although they have
4 For studies of the links between popular education and social movements, see Ghanem (1998) and Patel (1998).
13
achieved many micro-level successes, the systems and structures that determine power and resource allocations – locally, nationally, and globally – remain largely intact”. Increasingly NGOs and other development actors are realising that a useful contribution is not to take an atomistic view of local organisations, but to address political processes that shape and constrain the local. As such advocacy contains greater potential for transformation than project based work, in engaging with making claims for excluded people in ways that (should) increase their capacity to demand their rights of citizenship and help them participate in wider arenas of decision- making. Significantly, it can be seen as one of the mechanisms by which the links between participatory development and participatory governance might be forged (e.g. PLA Notes, 2002). For example, Harper (2001) argues for a participatory form of advocacy that both involves the grassroots in agenda setting through genuine partnerships and participatory methods, and opens up policy processes to a wider range of voices and stakeholders.
NGO advocacy, then, involves the alignment of participatory approaches with a rights-based agenda, and brings together the key elements of a citizenship-based approach that stresses political engagement at local, national and international levels. In global campaigns, the transmission of both progressive discourses and resources across these levels has offered rewards to the agency of local people in ways that were previously unattainable within local and national political communities. However, important dangers remain apparent. For example, much global citizen action by- passes national governments in favour of applying direct pressure to global institutions, and may thus undermine national citizenship in favour of a form of ‘global citizenship’ that remains unattainable to most people in poor countries (Edwards, 2001). Furthermore, some advocacy campaigns reflect the current inequalities between northern and southern NGOs within the ‘transnational community of NGOs’ (Townsend, 1999), and are particularly open to growing charges concerning the problems of representation and legitimacy. One potential solution to this problem is to focus on those examples of ‘horizontal solidarity’, whereby south-south relationships form the basis of empowering advances in both livelihood strategies and policy change (Patel and Mitlin, 2002).
14
This section has argued that some participatory approaches promoted by NGOs can enhance citizenship, but they must be embedded within more political forms of participatory thought and action than has been the case until recently. Much of this activity increasingly requires moving beyond the locality with empowerment involving multi-scaled strategies and networks. Clearly, engaging with a more politicised project will often entail heightened conflict with vested interests at multiple levels (e.g. Rafi and Chowdhury, 2000). Indeed, one observer argues that the role of ‘participation’ within successful advocacy campaigns is often as a form of popular protest rather than as a set of methods, and that NGOs who prioritise advocacy should become classified as social movements (Dechalert, 1999). Problems of representation – whether of ‘universalist’ ideals within different cultural contexts or of ‘southern’ NGOs by ‘northern’ NGOs in various policy arenas – still abound (e.g. Hudson, 2000). However, it might be that a focus on the political is once again the way forward here, with a shift in focus from issues of ‘representation’ and ‘legitimacy’ to one on ‘political responsibility’ (Jordan and van Tuijl, 2000). The key is for NGOs to conduct their work and relationships “with democratic principles foremost in the process” (ibid: 2053), with all actors having to respond to the demands of ‘political responsibility’ at each stage and at all levels. This involves dividing different political arenas between different actors and empowering them to act therein, while monitoring the (potentially negative) impact that actions in one political arena might have in another (ibid: 2063).
Social movements Development theory and practice has generally been wary of engaging directly with social movements as sites of popular participation and political projects, preferring the more orderly and ‘makeable’ world of NGOs.5	However, a number of theorists are realising the potential of the former for radical change. So, our discussion concerns ‘progressive’ social movements since it is clear that many social movements are not seeking the sorts of social transformations examined here. Rather they aim to protect privilege rather than promote rights, and at worst, are harbingers of discrimination,
5 Although we would agree with Howell and Pearce (2001) that this constitutes a worrying ideological bias within international development thinking and practice around civil society, there are dangers in calling for a closer engagement between official development agencies and social movements. Such movements can easily be disrupted by such engagements (particularly financial), and some might also be constituted in ways that legitimately deter development agencies seeking probity and democratic forms of governance in their partners.
15
intolerance and injustice. This move towards social movements was initially premised on a thoroughgoing critique of the dominant ‘left’ position on civil society (e.g. Laclau and Mouffe, 1985) but has more recently been influenced by post-modern interpretations of such developments (e.g. Escobar, 1995). This has tended to leave the debate around social movements polarised between cultural and political readings of their meaning and potential. In the developing world, social movements are frequently characterised as standing in resistance to development (e.g. Routledge, 2001), or depicted by postmodern theorists as bailing out of the "limping vessel of development (and) striking out for new horizons in smaller craft" (Esteva and Prakash, 1992: 51). The destination as yet has no name other than ‘cultural autonomy’ and an escape from ‘mainstream’ development.
However, we would argue that the importance of social movements in relation to participation and development cannot be captured in such terms, particularly in relation	to	the	oppositions	between	‘culture’/’politics’,	and ‘development’/‘resistance’. Rather, the historical and contemporary role of social movements in using identity-based forms of participatory politics to extend the boundaries of citizenship to marginal groups (Scott, 1990; Foweraker and Landman, 1997), suggests that the cultural and the political are closely entwined (Castells, 1997). Furthermore, we would argue that some movements are better understood as being located within a critical position vis-à-vis the ongoing project of modernity rather than being ‘postmodern’ alternatives to development.
The starting point for many contemporary social movements is a critical resistance to the forms of exclusion and exploitation that have resulted from broad processes of neoliberal capitalist penetration and historical and contemporary forms of state formation, and more specific forms of statist and corporate development. Anti-dam movements such as the Narmada Bachoa Andolan (NBA) in India have opposed both the material project of development undertaken by the Indian state and the ideological representation of ‘development’ that underpins it, through action at multiple scales (Routledge, 2003). The movement’s opposition, in both material (e.g. developing alternative energy projects, threatening to drown themselves if the dam goes ahead) and discursive (e.g. peasant testimonials) forms, thus challenges the moral legitimacy of the state regarding its contract to protect and develop its citizens (ibid: 259).
16
In Mexico, the Zapatista’s have raged against free trade agreements and the patronage-mode of politics, as well as the State’s relegation of Indians to “a very inferior category of ‘citizens in formation’”, forced to occupy “the basement of the Mexican nation” (Marcos, 1994). As the most powerful of many peasant movements to (re)emerge in Latin America over the past two decades, the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra/Landless Rural Worker’s Movement (MST) argues that “democratic transition has not led to democratic transformation; that is, it has not led to the emergence of substantive forms of citizenship” (Robles, 2001: 147). As a movement, it advocates for and works towards not simply the gain of its share of both land and political power within Brazilian society, but “the fundamental transformation of the structures of power” within Brazil (op cit.). Each movement has impacted significantly on their respective terrain of struggle, as with the MST’s attainment of land for more than 400,000 landless workers.
The forms of participatory citizenship advocated and (in some cases) practiced by the movements noted here, resonate beyond the narrower concerns of regional and ethnic identity that limit some movements to a position of narrow defence rather than progress (Castells, 1997). For example, the Zapatistas have campaigned actively since 1994 to not only attain full citizenship for the Indians of the Chiapas region of Mexico, but also for wider political reforms, particularly to the patronage mode of politics. In demanding that the government amend the constitution so as to “recognise the indigenous as indigenous and as Mexicans” (Marcos, 2001), there is no renouncement of the notion of Mexican citizenship, but of the exclusive way in which it has been forged. Movements in Ecuador have similarly sought to make claims for both ‘ethnic’ and ‘national’ citizenship (Bebbington, 1996), and frequently link to broad global campaigns and networks regarding the environment and human rights. As such, they appear to have found a way of “relating the universal and the particular in the drive to define social justice from the standpoint of the oppressed" (Harvey, 1993: 116). In so doing, they have articulated a mode of political action capable of imagining and generating alternative development futures not only for its immediate
17
constituency, but also for a broader community of dispossessed and marginalised peoples.6
In terms of development more broadly, what is arguably most significant about such movements is the ways in which their claims are woven within a broader discourse of what are the familiar demands of modernity. This notion of social movements being transformative and radical within rather than in opposition to the modern is further supported by research with popular organisations in Andean regions of Latin America (Bebbington and Bebbington, 2001). Land, democracy, citizenship and development – all totems of the modern project – remain the key concerns of a number of ‘new’ social movements (Robles, 2001; Veltmeyer, 1997). This suggests that the participatory politics of cultural identity, material redistribution and social justice are not alternatives, but can be part of a single political project, a possibility we return to below.
Identifying the politics of participation as transformation
This (selective) sampling of political and policy arenas demonstrates that participatory approaches to development and governance have – to some extent and in some ways – gone beyond the critique mounted against them, particularly regarding the failure to engage with issues of politics and power. Although we cannot claim that these developments are conclusive or will go onto fully achieve their ends, they have transcended the search for simple technical fixes and are demonstrably moving towards the more structural transformations suggested by the language of ‘participation for empowerment’. Moreover, we argue that there are at least four threads of continuity that run throughout these initiatives, which can be drawn out as the key dimensions that underlie successful approaches to participation as transformation.
First, the successes of participation within contemporary development policy and practice have depended upon them being part of a broader project that is at once political and radical. By this we mean a project that seeks to directly challenge
6 Citizenship’ has formed the basis of demands made by movements of subordinate classes and excluded groups across time and space (e.g. from workers in 19th century Britain to the youth in late 20th Century Brazil), offering them a vocabulary that both demands rights and binds classes and groups
18
existing power relations rather than simply work around them for more technically efficient service delivery. The roots of this political radicalism varies. In the case of decentralisation, the stage has recently been set in some contexts by a convergence between the growth of populist approaches to governance and development, and the need for leftist political organisations to find a means of both institutionalising a politics of social justice in the post-welfarist, post centralist era of governance and (re)connect with an electoral base. With NGOs, it has formed around a rediscovery of the radical within participatory development history (REFLECT) and/or efforts to transform the policy process and development discourse itself through advocacy work. What is key here is that there is an explicit articulation of a radical project that focuses primarily on issues of power and politics.
Second, each approach that has achieved transformations has sought to direct participatory approaches towards a close engagement with underlying processes of development, rather than remain constrained within the frame of specific policy processes or interventions. In terms of NGOs, the REFLECT approach addresses itself to the patterns of domination and subordination within developing countries, rather than those between development professionals and project participants. The political parties that have attained the greatest success with participatory governance reforms have directly sought to alter patterns of inequality created by uneven processes of development. New social movements form the clearest example of a close and critical engagement with efforts to reshape development – and the project of modernity itself.
Third, each approach is characterised by an explicit focus on and pursuit of participation as citizenship. Each of the initiatives reviewed here seek in different ways not only to bring people into the political process, but also to transform and democratise the political process in ways that progressively alter the ‘immanent’ processes of inclusion and exclusion that operate within particular political communities, and which govern the opportunities for individuals and groups to claim their rights to participation and resources. This approach can be distinguished from earlier approaches to participation, such as the colonial project of community
to the state (Tilly, 1995), that can overcome divisions within heterogeneous movements and offers a basis of resistance accessible to all marginal groups.
19
development, which promoted a narrow form of citizenship designed to reduce claims on the centre (see Table One). Amongst the key exemplars here are the Zapatista’s campaign for constitutional change in Mexico and the success of some participatory governance reforms in securing citizenship participation as an alternative form of inclusion to patron-client relations. In such instances, citizenship here is often not being requested from a proscribed menu of rights and obligations, but actively defined and claimed ‘from below’.
The fourth commonality appears to be that, for participatory approaches to be successful in achieving transformation, a precondition is that the modes of accumulating political and economic power in the given context are (to a significant degree) structurally disentwined from each other. For example, the success of decentralisation in the Indian states of West Bengal and Kerala relied on the capacity of the new political elite being able to protect state resources and decision-making from the economic (landed) elite. To the extent that we focus on participation as a political project here, then, there is a need to examine the political economy of participation, particularly in contexts where the accumulation of political power and economic wealth are entwined, and where a focus on ‘participation’ may simply be a means of concealing ongoing patronage. However, new forms of citizenship participation can arguably play a key role in challenging and reforming such ‘dysfunctional’ forms of rule (Mamdani, 1996).
However, our argument that participation can only be considered transformative if these rigorous criteria are met needs to be qualified. We do not imply that there is little point in using participatory methods by agents and in contexts where these criteria are not met. It would be misleading to dismiss all ‘formal’ participation as disempowering simply because they are touched by the ‘development machine’. To see them as inevitably disempowering denies the less powerful any agency and treats political spaces as discrete when, in fact, a form of political learning can take place where experiences from one space are transported and transformed consciously or unconsciously in different and new spaces. What is required is a more realistic set of claims and criteria by which to characterise and evaluate those forms of participation
20
that seek merely to transform practice of development agencies and professionals rather than transformations to underlying forms of exclusion (Kumar and Corbridge, 2002; Williams, 2004 forthcoming). Such ‘imminent’ forms of participation can then be properly judged on their own merits, rather than being conflated with broader projects of transformation.7
However, having identified the forms of politics that underlie transformative approaches to participation, the key challenge is to try and relate these findings to broader conceptual and theoretical trends within development studies. As has been noted, ‘...thinking about participation (in development)...has lacked the analytical tools...and an adequate theoretical framework’ (Shepherd, 1998: 179), a failing that we argued has helped lead to its mainstream co-option and depoliticisation. In the following section we draw on two of the key findings here – concerning citizenship and a radical form of political project – to develop a more systematic conceptual and theoretical framework within which debates on transformative forms of participation can be located.
Relocating participation within a radical politics of development
‘...much of the theory construction in development studies has been introduced with no explicit considerations concerning basic ontological, epistemological, and methodological positions...Further, it is required of a theory that the normative premises and political priorities it embodies are thoroughly exposed’ (Martinussen, 1997: 345-6).
The notion of ‘citizenship participation’ has recently emerged as a means by which the convergence of people's agency and their participation in specific interventions might be understood, while also capturing the broadening of the participation agenda whereby the social and political agendas of ‘participation’ and ‘good governance’
7 See White (1996) for a typology of participation, ranging from the ‘nominal’ through to the ‘transformative’.
21
have increasingly converged (Gaventa, 2002).8 The links between ‘citizenship’ and ‘participatory development’ can be conceptualised in terms of the interaction between a series of institutional norms and agency-led practices, whereby,
‘Citizenship can be defined as that set of practices (juridical, political, economic or cultural) which define a person as a competent member of society, and which as a consequence shape the flow of resources to persons and social groups’ (Turner, 1993: 2).
Relocating ‘participation’ within citizenship situates it in a broader range of sociopolitical practices, or expressions of agency, through which people extend their status and rights as members of particular political communities, thereby increasing their control over socioeconomic resources. The question for participatory interventions becomes how they can enhance the capabilities of participants to project their agency beyond specific interventions into broader arenas, thereby progressively altering the ‘immanent’ processes of inclusion and exclusion. However, we want to move beyond an exhortation that ‘citizenship matters’ for participation towards a more thorough analysis of the specific form/s of citizenship that are likely to underpin the transformative potential of participation, and of the theoretical underpinnings that this requires.
Towards a radical theory of citizenship The links between participation and citizenship are most clearly expressed within ‘civic republican’ theories of citizenship. Civic republicanism is founded on ‘the collective and participatory engagement of citizens in the determination of the affairs of their community’ (Dietz, 1987: 13-15, in Lister, 1997: 24), whereby citizens as members of a political community are actively in ‘political debate and decision- making’ (Miller, 1995: 443). While liberal conceptions tend to rely on legal definitions concerning the formal status of citizens,9 and focus on narrow forms of ‘political participation’ (e.g. voting), ‘membership in a community can be a broader,
8 Citizenship lies alongside other conceptual advances that have sought to confront both the critique ranged against participation and the broadening of the participation agenda. These include ‘political capital’ (e.g. Baumann, 2000), ‘political space’ (Webster and Engberg-Pedersen, 2002), and ‘political capabilities’ (Whitehead and Gray-Molina, 2003; Williams, 2004).
9 This juridical focus tends to mask the fact that the ‘sociological realities are those of subjects, clients and consumers, not those of citizens of equal worth and decision-making capacity’ (Stewart, 1995: 74).
22
more inclusive category’ (Silver, 1997: 79). Here, ‘citizenship’ constitutes not only a set of legal obligations and entitlements ‘but also the practices through which individuals and groups formulate and claim new rights or struggle to expand and maintain existing rights’ (Isin and Wood, 1999: 4). This participatory notion of citizenship is particularly ‘attractive to women and other marginalised groups’ (Lister, 1997: 28), as it offers the prospect that citizenship can be claimed ‘from below’ through their own efforts in organised struggles (e.g. the MST’s notion of ‘substantive’ citizenship), rather than waiting for it to be conferred ‘from above’. Moreover, the grounding of citizenship in actual political communities also helps avoid the risk of imputing a specifically Western conception of citizenship into different contexts (Tilly, 1995).
Two further moves are required for a notion of participatory citizenship linked to transformative forms of politics. The first is to overcome the ‘public/private’ problem whereby dominant forms of citizenship have tended to exclude ‘many classes of potential citizens’ (Werbner and Yuval Davis, 1999: 7), including women, minorities, colonial subjects and the working classes. This requires a broader concept of the ‘public’, and a recognition of those participatory arenas relied upon by subordinate or excluded social groups who are denied access to more public forms of participation (Lister, 1997: 24-9; Young, 1990: 118-120). In some cases, this marginality may ‘allow those who have systematically been disprivileged a ‘central space’ of their own in which to organise the expression of their needs’ (Fardon, 1988: 774), and lead to the development of alternative forms of citizenship. The second (and related) move is to recognise the political character of group-based citizenship claims as well as those tied directly to the nation state. As such, ‘rather than regarding citizenship and identity as antinomic principles’ it might be necessary to ‘recognize the rise of new identities and claims for group rights as a challenge to the modern interpretation of universal citizenship’ (Isin and Wood, 1999: 4). Here, the particularist claims of identity are gradually transformed into more universalist democratic gains through claim-making and pursuing the political process (Foweraker and Landman, 1997).
From this conception of citizenship, it is important to explore the extent to which this ‘recognition politics’ develops into what Iris Young termed an ‘emancipatory politics of difference’ (Young, 1990: 163), a project that requires engaging with questions of
23
difference, multiple standpoints, and a politics of justice. In terms of difference, Young (1993) sees groups as relational, meaning that “Groups should be understood not as entirely other, but as overlapping, as constituted in relation to one another and thus as shifting their attributes and needs in accordance with what relations are salient” (1993: 123-4). While differences exist this recognition of groups as relational means that each group must engage with the other, rather than simply dismiss it, since groups have a mutual stake in one another’s existence. This also opens up the possibility that alliances exist since only some differences are intractable.
The key to this politics of difference is that it ‘requires not the melting away of differences, but institutions that promote reproduction of and respect for group differences without oppression’ (1990: 47, cited in Harvey, 1993: 105). If development is committed to a politics of social justice, how can it resolve the problem of which or whose difference claims are valid and which are not? For Harvey this epistemological task requires a renewed engagement with political economy; what we later develop as critical modernism. Understanding the political economy of the processes shifts the focus in two ways. First, political economy alerts us to the similarities as much as the differences, which then provides a basis for alliances and connections between different groups. Second, by understanding the relational formation of group identities we do not ignore claims by groups which we find oppressive, but look at how their presence shapes and is shaped by those groups seeking emancipation. Therefore, rather than get mired in an impasse over universalism and anti-universalism we locate our epistemology within a socialist political economy, which seeks social justice through a transformation away from capitalism as currently expressed.
Development from the left: critical modernism In this section we elaborate on critical modernism as a socialist-inspired framework that seeks to balance a normative vision with a political praxis that is sensitive to different rationalities and modernities. Critical modernism emerged as a response to the failure of either populism, postmodernism or political economy approaches to adequately capture the complex positioning of structure and agency within contemporary development arenas. As an approach, it is primarily distinguishable from the postmodern/postdevelopment rejection of development, in part to stress that
24
most countries of the South have never been ‘modern’ in the sense understood by postmodernists (Schuurman, 1993; Peet, 1997). Rather, critical modernism begins from the premise that rather than reject development tout court we need to ‘rethink’ it (Peet and Hartwick, 1997). It retains a belief in the central tenets of modernism – democracy, emancipation, development and progress – but, theoretically rooted in Post-Marxism, feminism and post-structuralism – it begins from a critique of existing material power relations, particularly a critique of capitalism ‘as the social form taken by the modern world, rather than on a critique of modernism as an overgeneralized discursive phenomenon’ (Peet and Hartwick, 1997: 200). This faith in modernism is also ‘scientific’ in that it requires evidence for analysis and action, rather than faith. This avoids romanticising the capacity of the poor and treating all ‘local knowledge’ as pure and incontrovertible. As Peet and Watts (1996: 38) argue within critical modernism ‘rationality is contended rather than abandoned’.
This assertion rests on the belief that modernity is not a singular entity that unfolds in a linear fashion. Rather, the ‘ideas and practices of modernity are themselves appropriated and re-embedded in locally situated practices, thus accelerating the fragmentation and dispersal of modernity into constantly proliferating modernities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 1). These ‘multiple modernities’ (Comaroff and Comaroff, 1993) destabilise and provincialise the notion of an ideal European modernity and replace it with one that seeks to understand ‘the encounters between multiple and divergent modernities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 159) in societies containing a ‘multiplicity of rationalities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 160). Seen thus development is a ‘resolutely dialectical process..(which is)..a sort of mixing, syncretism and cross- fertilization rather than a crude mimicry or replication’ (Watts, 2003: 23).
The pressing question in terms of realising the critical modernist project of development is what or who will be the key agents and in which institutional arenas? According to Heller’s review of participatory governance reforms, neither the state nor the party can be agents of ‘sustained transformative projects’; rather what is required is an ‘ecology of agents’ which blends ‘the institutional capacities of the state and the associational resources of civil society’ (2001: 152, 158). This is not in the sanitised and simplistic sense of state-civic synergies as promoted under the rubric of partnership (Evans, 1997), but in the more political sense of party-social movement
25
dynamics and within the context of a shared political project. What we get is a form of radical democracy that transcends the local and forges alliances with a range of regional, national and globalised movements. Alliances as we noted earlier can come from a revivified political economy that, rather than posit endless differences (as with post-structuralism) or seek totalising sameness (as in some modernisms) finds similarities of experience around which to coalesce and campaign. Hence, coalitions around certain forms of exclusion and subordination emerge.
However, these strategic questions are difficult to answer unreservedly since it is neither possible nor proper to think of strategy in the abstract. The nature of strategy is such that it depends upon concrete openings and possibilities found in ‘real’ places so we cannot specify a priori by whom and in what ways such a politics will be realised. The examples of participatory transformation analysed in the earlier sections offer crucial clues to the types of agency, strategic approach and context that we would argue are associated with a broader project of critical modernism.
Conclusion
The critical backlash against participatory approaches to development and governance has quite rightly raised a number of important concerns regarding problems within such approaches and of their uncritical promotion. However, there is a real danger of throwing the baby out with the bathwater, and losing those elements of participation that retain the potential to catalyse and underpin genuine processes of transformation. This paper has argued that recent advances within and across the several fields of development and governance where participation plays a major role have re-affirmed the empowering potential of participation. However, the conditions within which participation can be transformative, and the forms of politics that underpins such approaches, need to be closely delineated and analysed. The corollary is that not all criteria for transformative participation need to be in place for participatory processes to be enacted since politics rarely unfolds in such programmatic ways. This work has been started here, but requires further elaboration from both empirical and theoretical perspectives.
The intention here has been to locate a radical home for the participatory project that secures its autonomy, room for innovation and links to a transformative project.	We
26
develop the notion of citizenship as a meso-level concept linking popular agency with politics, culture and place. Citizenship analysis arguably has a significant contribution to make towards development theory and practice. As befits development theory, it is an inherently multidisciplinary concept, relating to socioeconomic, political, legal and cultural practices and spheres. Operating at the meso level of social theorising, citizenship represents the type of ‘conceptual innovation’ demanded by this post- impasse discipline (Booth, 1994), with its need to find a path between the failure of metanarratives and the methodological individualism of the more voluntaristic actor- oriented approaches, and also between the political and the cultural. Furthermore, the notion of citizenship maintains a ‘universalist’ normative appeal, while maintaining a capacity to be operationalised within particular contexts.
More specifically, citizenship represents a significant conceptual advance within understandings of participatory governance and development for several reasons. First, it offers a means of covering the convergence between participatory development and participatory governance (Gaventa, 2002). Second, citizenship links to rights-based approaches since it helps to establish participation as a political right that can be claimed by excluded or marginal peoples, and thus provides a stronger political, legal and moral imperative for focusing on people’s agency within development than is currently the case. Moreover, citizenship analysis may also provide a means of transcending the distinction between imminent and immanent forms of participatory development, particularly as it seeks to situate participation within a broader political, social and historical perspective that draws attention to the politics of inclusion and exclusion that shape popular agency beyond particular interventions. The notion of citizenship thus offers a useful political, social and historical form of analysis within which to situate understandings of participation, as located within the formation of a social contract between citizenry and authority in particular political communities. Importantly, and although used across ideological divides, citizenship has a radical political trajectory that can be read most clearly off the claims and programmes of both old and new social movements over the past two centuries (Tilly, 1995). More broadly, then, citizenship is an inherently political perspective on participation, arguably the chief requirement of transformative approaches to participation.
27
Finally, we argued that such a politics of citizenship must be tied to a project that is radical but which does not reject modernity tout court since modernity has never been a coherent and teleological process, but one fractured and multiply realised. This ontological reasoning allows for a view of development such that political communities can pursue their different experiences of and desires for modernity. Having said this, we would argue that capitalist modernity cannot easily be relativised away as one among many modernities, but must be critically engaged with as the pre- eminent force shaping contemporary and future development processes and the role of popular agency therein.
28
References
Abers, R. (1998) ‘From clientelism to cooperation: local government, participatory policy and civic organising in Porto Alegre, Brazil’, Politics and Society, 26(4): 511-523.
ActionAid. (2003) ‘Our priorities: education: REFLECT’. At http://www.actionaid.org
Arce, A. and Long, N. (2000) ‘Reconfiguring modernity and development from an anthropological perspective’, in Arce, A. and N. Long (eds) Anthropology, Development and Modernities, pp1-31. London: Routledge.
Archer, D. (1998) ‘The evolving conception of literacy in REFLECT’, PLA Notes, 32, 100-108.
Archer, D. and S. Cottingham. (1996) The REFLECT Mother Manual: a new approach to adult literacy. London: ACTIONAID.
Barten, F., R.P. Montiel, E. Espinoza, C.M. Carbonell. (2002) ‘Democratic governance – fairytale or real perspective? Lessons from Central America’, Environment and urbanization, 14(1): 129-144.
Bebbington, A. (1996) ‘Movements, Modernizations and Markets: Indigenous organizations and agrarian strategies in Ecuador’, in Peet and Watts (eds), op. cit, pp 86-109.
Bebbington, A.J. and D.H. Bebbington. (2001) ‘Development alternatives: practice, dilemmas and theory’. Area, 33(1): 7-17.
Blair. H. (2000) ‘Participation and accountability at the periphery: democratic local governance in six countries’, World Development, 28(1): 21-39.
Booth, D. (1994) ‘Rethinking social development: an overview’, in Booth (ed) Rethinking Social Development: theory, research and practice, pp 3-41. Harlow: Longman.
Brett, E.A. (2000) ‘Development theory in a post-socialist era: competing capitalisms and emancipatory alternatives’, Journal of International Development, 12: 789-802.
Campbell, B. (2001) ‘Governance, Institutional Reform and the State: International Financial Institutions and Political Transition in Africa’, Review of African Political Economy, 88: 155-176.
Carmen, R. (1996) Autonomous Development. London: Zed Books. Castells, M. (1997) The Power of Identity. London: Blackwell.
29
Chambers, R. (1983) Rural Development: Putting the Last First. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Chambers, R. (1997) Whose Reality Counts? Putting the first last. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Cleaver, F. (1999) ‘Paradoxes of Participation: Questioning Participatory Approaches to Development’, Journal of International Development, 11: 597-612.
Comaroff, J. and J. Comaroff (1993) ‘Introduction’, in Comaroff, J. and J. Comaroff (eds) Modernity and its Malcontents: Ritual Power in Postcolonial Africa, pp xi-xxxvii. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cooke, W. and U. Kothari (2001) Participation: the New Tyranny? London: Zed. Cowen, M. and Shenton, R. (1996) Doctrines of Development. Routledge, London. Crook, R.C. and A.S. Sverrisson. (2001) Decentralisation and Poverty-Alleviation in
Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis or, is West Bengal Unique?
IDS Working Paper No.130. Brighton: Institute of Development Studies. Dechalert, P. (1999) ‘NGOs, Advocacy and Popular Protest: A Case Study of
Thailand’, C.V.O. International Working Paper no.6. LSE.
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/CCS/publications/iwp/int-work-papers.htm Edwards, M. (2001) ‘Global civil society and community exchanges: a different form
of movement’, Environment and Urbanization, 13(2): 145-149. Escobar, A. (1995) Encountering Development: the making and unmaking of the
Third World. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Esteva, G. and Prakash. M.S. (1992) 'Grassroots Resistance to Sustainable
Development: Lessons from the Banks of the Narmada'. The Ecologist, 22(2):
45-51. Evans, P. (1997). ‘Introduction: Development Strategies Across the Public-Private
Divide’, in Evans, P. (ed) State-Society Synergy: government and social capital in development, IAS Research Series 94, pp 1-10. Berkeley: University of California.
Fardon, R. (1988) ‘Centre, periphery, boundary: some problems with spatialising problems’, in Geschiere, P. and P. Konings (eds.) Proceedings/Contributions, Conference on the Political Economy of Cameroon: Historical Perspectives, pp757-775. Leiden: African Studies Centre.
Ferguson, J. (1994) The Anti-Politics Machine: 'Development', Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press.
30
Foweraker, J. and T. Landman. (1997) Citizenship Rights and Social Movements: a comparative and statistical analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Francis, P. (2001) ‘Participatory Development at the World Bank: The Primacy of Process‘. In Cooke and Kothari, op cit., pp,72-87.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Penguin. Fung, A. and E. O. Wright (2001) ‘Deepening Democracy: Innovations in
Empowered Participatory Governance’, Politics and Society 29(1): 5-41. Gaventa, J. (2002) ‘Exploring Citizenship, Participation and Accountability’, IDS
Bulletin, 33(2): 1-11. Gaventa, J. (2004)	‘Towards Transformative Governance: Exploring the
Transformative Possibilities’. In Hickey and Mohan (eds.), op cit. London:
Zed Books. Ghanem, E. 1998. Social movements in Brazil and their educational work’,
International Review of Education, 44(2-3), 177-189. Harper, C. (2001) ‘Do the facts matter: NGOs, advocacy and research?’, in M.
Edwards and J. Gaventa. (eds.) (2001). Global Citizen Action. 247-258.
London: Earthscan. Harriss, J. (2000) ‘How much difference does politics make? Regime differences
across Indian states and rural poverty reduction’. LSE Working Paper Series 1,
No.1. http://www.lse.ac.uk/ Harvey, D. (1993) ‘Class relations, social justice and the politics of difference’, in
Squires, J. (ed.) Principled Positions: Postmodernism and the rediscovery of
value, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 85-120. Heller P. (2001) ‘Moving the State: The Politics of Democratic Decentralization in
Kerala, South Africa, and Porto Alegre’, Politics & Society, 29(1): 1-28. Hickey, S. (2002) ‘Transnational NGDOs and Participatory forms of Rights-based
development: Converging with the local politics of citizenship in Cameroon’,
Journal of International Development, 14(6): 841-857. Hickey, S. and G. Mohan (eds) (2004, forthcoming) Participation: From Tyranny to
Transformation? Exploring New Approaches to Participation. London: Zed
Books. Hudson, A. (2000) ‘Making the connection: Legitimacy claims, legitimacy chains and
northern NGOs’ international advocacy’, in Lewis, D and Wallace, T. (eds)
31
(2000) New Roles and Relevance: Development NGOs and the Challenge of
Change. Kumarian Press. Isin, E.F. and P.K. Wood. (1999) Citizenship and Identity. London: Sage. James, R. and P. Francis. (2003) ‘Balancing Rural Poverty Reduction and Citizen
Participation: The Contradictions of Uganda’s Decentralization Program’,
World Development, 31(2): 325-337. Jordan, L. and P. van Tuijl. (2000) ‘Political Responsibility in Transnational NGO
Advocacy’, World Development, 28(12): 2051-2065. Kapoor, I. (2002) ‘The devil’s in the theory: a critical assessment of Robert
Chambers’ work on participatory development’, Third World Quarterly,
23(1): 101-117. Kapoor, N. (2000) ‘Women and Governance’, Participation and Governance,
November Issue. New Delhi: PRIA. Kothari, U. (2001) ‘Power, knowledge and social control in participatory
development’, in Cooke and Kothari, op cit., 139-152. Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: towards a radical
democratic politics. London: Verso. Lister, R. (1997) Citizenship: Feminist Perspectives. Hampshire: MacMillan. Mamdani, M. (1996) Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of
Late Colonialism. Oxford: James Currey. Marcos. (1994) ‘The long journey from despair to hope’. ZALN Communique,
Supplement for the Anniversary of "La Jornada". 22nd September.
http://struggle.ws/zapatista.html Marcos. (2001) ‘7 years from what we call "the other uprising’, ZALN Communique.
http://struggle.ws/zapatista.html Martinussen (1997) State, Society and Market. London: Zed Books. Mayo, P. (1999) Gramsci, Freire and Adult Education: possibilities for
transformative action. London: Zed. McGee, R. (2001). ‘Participation in Development’, in Kothari, U. and M. Minogue
(eds), Development theory and practice: critical perspectives, pp.92-116.
London: Palgrave. Metcalf, K. and G. Gomez. (1998) ‘Gender and REFLECT’, PLA Notes, 32: 95-99. Miller, D. (1995) ‘Citizenship and Pluralism’, Political Studies, 43: 432-450. Miraftab, F. (1997) ‘Flirting with the enemy’, Habitat International, 21(4): 361-375.
32
Mohan, G. (2001) ‘Beyond Participation: Strategies for Deeper Empowerment’. In Cooke and Kothari, op cit., 153-167.
Mohan, G. and K. Stokke. (2000) ‘Participatory Development and Empowerment’, Third World Quarterly, 21(2): 266-280.
Mosse, D. (1994) ‘Authority, Gender and Knowledge: Theoretical Reflections on PRA’, Development and Change, 25(3): 497-526.
Nyamugasira, W. (1998) 'NGOs and advocacy: how well are the poor represented?', Development in Practice, 8, 3, 297-308.
Patel, I. (1998) ‘The contemporary women’s movement and women’s education in India’, International Review of Education, 44 (2-3): 155-175.
Patel, S. and D. Mitlin. (2002) ‘Sharing experiences and changing lives’, Community Development Journal, 37(2): 125-136.
Peet, R. and E. Hartwick (1997) Theories of Development. New York: Guilford. Peet, R. and M. Watts (1996) 'Liberation Ecology: Development, sustainability, and
environment in an age of market triumphalism', in Peet and Watts (eds.) Liberation Ecologies: Environment, development and social movements, pp.1- 45. London: Routledge.
Peet. R. (1997) ‘Social theory, postmodernism and the critique of development’, in Benko, G. and U. Strohmayer (eds) Space and Social Theory: Interpreting modernity and postmodernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
PLA Notes No.43, (2002) Advocacy and Citizen Participation. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
Rafi, M. and A.M.R. Chowdhury. (2000) ‘Human rights and religious backlash: the experience of a Bangladeshi NGO’, Development in Practice, 10(1): 19-30. Rahman, M.D.A. (1995) 'Participatory Development: Towards Liberation and Co-
optation?', in G. Craig and M. Mayo (eds.) Community Empowerment: a
reader in participation and development, pp.24-32. London: Zed Books. Rahnema, M. (1992) 'Participation', in W. Sachs (ed.) The Development Dictionary:
A Guide to Knowledge as Power, pp.116-131. London: Zed. Robles, W. (2001) ‘The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) in Brazil’,
Journal of Peasant Studies, 29(2): 146-161. Routledge, P. (2001) ‘‘Our resistance will be as transnational as capital’:
Convergence space and strategy in globalising resistance’, Geojournal, 52: 25- 33.
33
Routledge, P. (2003) ‘Voices of the damned: discursive resistance amidst erasure in the Narmada valley’, Political Geography, 22: 243-270.
Santos, B.S. (1998) ‘Participatory budgeting in Porto Alegre, Brazil: towards a redistributive democracy’, Politics and Society, 26(4): 461-510.
Schneider, A. and B. Goldfrank. (2002) ‘Budgets and ballots in Brazil: participatory budgeting from the city to the state’, IDS Working Paper 149. Brighton: IDS. Schuurman, F. (1993) ‘Modernity, postmodernity and the new social movements’, in
Schuurman, F. (ed.) Beyond the impasse, Zed Press, London. Scott, A. (1990) Ideology and the New Social Movements. London: Unwin/Hyman. Shepherd, A. (1998) Sustainable Rural Development. Hampshire: Macmillan. Silver, H. (1997) ‘Poverty, exclusion and citizenship rights’, in C. Gore and J. B.
Figueiredo (eds.) Social Exclusion and the anti-poverty policy: A debate. Research Series 110, pp.78-82. Geneva: International Institute of Labour Studies/UN Development Programme.
Souza, C. (2001) ‘Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities in building democratic institutions’, Environment and Urbanization, 13(1): 159-184.
Stewart, A. (1995) ‘Two conceptions of citizenship’, British Journal of Sociology, 46(1): 63-78.
Tilly, C. (1995) (ed.) Citizenship, Identity and Social History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Townsend, J. (1999) ‘Are Non-governmental Organizations Working in Development a Transnational Community?’, Journal of International Development, 11: 613-623.
Townsend, J. et al (2002). ‘The Role of the Transnational Community of Nongovernment Organisations: Governance or Poverty Reduction?’, Journal of International Development, 14(6): 829-839.
Tripp, A.M. (2000) Women and politics in Uganda. Oxford: James Currey/Kampala: Fountain Publishers.
Turner, B.S. (1993) ‘Contemporary Problems in the Theory of Citizenship’, in Turner (ed.) Citizenship and Social Theory, pp1-18. London: Sage.
Uphoff, N. (1996) 'Why NGOs are Not a Third Sector: a Sectoral Analysis with Some Thoughts on Accountability, Sustainability and Accountability', in Edwards
34
and Hulme (eds.), NGOs: Performance and Accountability, pp.17-30. London:
Earthscan. Veltmeyer, H. (1997) ‘New Social Movements in Latin America: The Dynamics of
Class and Identity'’ Journal of Peasant Studies, 25(1): 139-169. Waddington, M and Mohan, G. (2004), ‘Failing Forward: going beyond imposed
forms of participation’, in Hickey, S. and Mohan, G. (eds) Participation:
From tyranny to transformation? Zed Books, London. Watts, M (2003) ‘Development and Governmentality’, Singapore Journal of Tropical
Geography,24, 1, 6-34. Webster, N. (2002) ‘Local organizations and political space in the forests of West
Bengal’, in N. Webster and L. Engberg-Pedersen (eds.). In the Name of the Poor: Contesting Political Space for Poverty Reduction, pp 233-254. London: Zed Books.
Webster, N. and L. Engberg-Pedersen. (eds.) (2002) In the Name of the Poor: Contesting Political Space for Poverty Reduction. London: Zed Books.
Werbner, P. and N. Yuval-Davis. (1999) ‘Women and the New Discourse of Citizenship’, in Yuval-Davis and Werbner (eds.), Women, Citizenship and Difference, pp.1-38. London: Zed.
White, S. (1996) ‘Depoliticizing Development: The Uses and Abuses of Participation’, Development in Practice, 6(1): 6-15.
Whitehead, L. and G. Gray-Molina. (2003) ‘The long term politics of pro-poor policies’, in M. Moore and J. Putzel (eds.) Changing Paths: International Development and the New Politics of Inclusion. Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
World Bank. (2000) World Development Report 2000/01: Attacking Poverty. Washington DC: World Bank.
Young, I. (1990) ‘The ideal of community and the politics of difference’, in Nicholson, L. (ed.) Feminism/Postmodernism. London: Routledge.
Young, I. (1993) ‘Together in difference: Transforming the logic of group political conflict’, in Squires, J. (ed.) Principled Positions: Postmodernism and the rediscovery of value, pp121-150. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Youngman, F. (2000) The Political Economy of Adult Education and Development. Leicester: NIACE/London: Zed.
35

2010
Geography
World Development
Doing it for Themselves: Direct Action Land Reform in the Brazilian Amazon
CYNTHIA SIMMONS, ROBERT WALKER
Michigan State University, USA
STEPHEN PERZ
University of Florida, USA
STEPHEN ALDRICH
Indiana State University, USA
MARCELLUS CALDAS
Kansas State University, USA
RITAUMARIA PEREIRA
Michigan State University, USA
FLAVIA LEITE
University of Florida, USA
LUIZ CLAUDIO FERNANDES
SEDAM, Porto Velho, Rondoˆnia, Brazil
and
EUGENIO ARIMA *
Hobart and William Smith Colleges, NY, USA
Summary. — The present paper considers a sometimes contentious process of land reform presently occurring in Brazil. This process, referred to in the paper as Direct Action Land Reform (DALR), involves organizations such as the Landless Rural Workers Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, or MST) and more spontaneous actions of individuals desiring a piece of land for their own. Results of a survey covering 751 households engaged in such land reform actions in the Brazilian Amazon are presented, in order to describe participants and land reform processes. Evidently, social movement organizations provide for a modest degree of wealth accumulation, a welfare improvement that must be set against potential environmental costs. The paper concludes by calling attention to the challenge DALR may ultimately pose to the Brazilian state.
Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Key words — Latin America, Brazil, direct action land reform, environment, Amazon
1. INTRODUCTION
Land reform has long been advanced as a way to correct so- cial inequities in countries with large rural populations. Fol- lowing WW II and the collapse of longstanding colonial relations between the global north and south, a number of newly independent governments promoted programs of land redistribution in order to support democratic forms of gover- nance and to eradicate vestiges of imperial domination. The United States and its allies assisted in such efforts as part of a strategic investment in less-developed countries to thwart communist insurgencies rising with the tides of populist dis- content (Esteva, 1992). Governments across the Americas, Africa, and Asia hoped that the land reform agenda would re-
*The research presented in this article was supported by the National Science Foundation (Geography and Regional Science) under the project (0522062) ‘‘Brazil’s Direct Action Land Reform Movement: Environmen- tal Impacts and Socio-Spatial Dynamics.’’ Certain data were provided by NASA project (NNGO6GD96A) ‘‘Spatially Explicit Land Cover Econo- metrics and Integration with Climate Prediction: Scenarios of Future Landscapes and Land-Climate Interactions.” Generous support was also provided through the Brazil Initiative in the Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies, International Studies Program at Michigan State University. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations ex- pressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and editor for their many useful comments made on an earlier version of this article. Final revision accepted: June 17, 2009.
429
World Development Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 429–444, 2010 Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 0305-750X/$ - see front matter
430	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
solve persistent problems of rural poverty that were explained as symptomatic of land scarcity given the concentration of holdings in the hands of the few.
Reactions by the landed elite to these initiatives were often sharp, and in many cases led to violent rebukes of government policy (De Janvry, 1981; De Janvry & Sadoulet, 1989; Rei- dinger, 1995). Perhaps as a consequence, the fortunes of land reform as part and parcel of development strategy have waxed and waned in many places in the postwar years. During what has been referred to as the era of agricultural modernization, the paradigm of productive efficiency largely replaced the con- cept of rural justice, and efforts to resolve the issue of rural poverty were tied to technologies that would raise incomes through improved production techniques rather than access to land. Agricultural modernization was heartily embraced by rural elites, given its twofold promise of higher profits and reduced pressure for land appropriations. So long as out- side interests and institutions such as the World Bank paid the bill, the proffering of new technologies was a win-win situation for those who sat on the upper end of the distribution of land holdings. With the waning of the cold war in the 1980s, and the dominance of neoliberal policies, agrarian reform was marginalized as a policy concept, and policies advocating such change were disregarded.
Today, the call for agrarian reform has once again become an integral component of development discourse, from both the neoliberal camp advocating market-based land reform (i.e., the World Bank) and the growing populist movements demanding land redistribution as a fundamental human right, and essential to food sovereignty (i.e., La Via Campesina). Land reform has likewise returned with force to the social agenda of many countries. Brazil, the focus of the paper, is one of the four important industrializing nations referred to as the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China). As such, it possesses one of the largest economies in the world, with per capita incomes that place it squarely in the upper quartile of developing countries when measured by conven- tional indices.
Nevertheless, Brazil also ranks amongst the worst with re- gard to both income and land distribution, providing fuel for a particularly vociferous land reform movement. The con- temporary struggle for land has frequently turned violent, resulting in a reported 1,547 agrarian activists killed nation- wide during 1988–2008, nearly half of those deaths occurring in Amazonia (Almedia, 1994; CPT, 1991–2008) (CPT, 1988– 2008). Although the vast majority of victims were men, wo- men, and children who comprise the rank and file landless and their advocates, there has been a rise in fatalities since the mid-1980s of large-landowners, their gunmen, and often their families, earning Amazonia its reputation as Brazil’s notorious badland (Simmons, 2004; Simmons, Walker, Arima, Aldrich, & Caldas, 2007a).
Efforts to bring peace to Brazil’s landless and alter the distri- bution of land holdings represent a tide of populist sentiment now gripping the South American continent, with similar cries for rural justice sounding in Bolivia, Venezuela, and Ecuador (Moyo & Yeros, 2005; Petras, 1998; Rosset, Patel, & Courville, 2006). Movement activists frequently communicate and inter- act across national boundaries, and share both information and resources in what is emerging as a transnational resistance project complementing the progressive regimes of the countries in which they are occurring. It is within this continental context that the paper focuses on Brazil, where land reform and violent land conflict have ‘‘broken out” in spite of industrial growth, urbanization, demographic transition, and what has all the appearances of a boom economy.
This land reform process manifests itself in the formation of settlements, or Projetos de Assentamento (PAs), through aggressive and sometimes contentious ‘‘occupations” of private and public lands by individuals and social movement organi- zations (SMOs). Since we focus the paper on the actions of the landless, we use the term occupation, a political distinction preferred by movement activists who maintain they ‘‘occupy” land, not invade, because they have the ‘‘moral” authority and constitutional right (Stedile, 1997; Wolford, 2004). Such settle- ment processes constitute what has been referred to as Direct Action Land Reform (DALR), in populist counterpoint to the top-down ventures of state-led programs of several decades ago (Sigaud, Rosa, & Macedo, 2008; Simmons et al., 2007a).
Present-day DALR in Brazil is often thought of in conjunc- tion with its most famous SMO, the Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST), which has spawned a movement represent- ing more than 1.5 million members (Fernandes, 2000; Stedile, 1997; Welch, 2006; Wolford, 2004). But other organizations crossing a rather broad political spectrum are also involved, including the Pastoral land Commission (CPT), the Movement for the Struggle for Land (MLT), the Syndicate of Small and Medium Rural Producers (SINPRA), the Organization of Workers in the Country (OTC), and the local rural workers un- ions (STRs) that are corporatist vestiges of the military gov- ernment but remain active proponents of the rural poor (He ́bette, 2004, p. 197; Martins, 1989, p. 67; Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons, Perz, Pedlowski, & Silva, 2002b; Simmons, Walker, & Wood, 2002; Toni, 1999). DALR represents a form of what has been referred to as grass-roots political mobilization. We resist this botanical metaphor, and opt for a labeling convention that links to a long history of left politics, particularly the anarchist resistance to com- munist discipline, and the philosophy that revolution can only be made through the concrete insurrectionary actions of the masses. The contentious nature of land occupation pursuant to DALR reflects a politics of direct action outside the organizational politics of leftist parties, not to mention the normal grievance channels of elected governments.
The prime motivation of the present paper is to provide an empirical account of Brazilian DALR, a relatively recent phe- nomenon in the region of study, Amazonia. Thus, land reform in Brazil currently possesses a critical environmental conse- quence, because the lion’s share of current DALR activity in the country is in fact occurring here. Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, the two Amazonian States that form the empirical basis of the research to be presented, accounted for almost a third of all families participating in land reform actions in Brazil dur- ing 1979–2007 (Table 1). These actions translated into the set- tlement of 5,072 km2 annually, a sizeable fraction of the land being deforested yearly throughout the entire Brazilian por- tion of the basin over the period (10,000–20,000 square kilo- meters deforested per year). A growing number of researchers have expressed concern about this new threat to the forest posed by social justice movements dedicated to re- solve the land issue, despite the avowed ‘‘greenness” of their often progressive ideologies (e.g., Fearnside, 2001; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a; Simmons; Caldas, Aldrich, Walker, & Perl, 2007b). Indeed, individual DALR actions involve coordinated efforts of 100s to 1000s of small farmers, who have already been implicated as agents of deforestation, and little consider- ation has been given to their cumulative impact on the land- scape (see Simmons et al., 2007a,b). Nevertheless, the paper emphasizes that large ranchers and agro-industry must be re- garded as the greatest perpetrators of land cover change. Although these enterprises represent less than 4% of establish- ments clearing land in Amazonia, they accounted for more
Region
North Para ́ Rondoˆ nia Brazil
# Settlements	%
1,617	21 824	11 133	2 7841	100
# Families	%
355,896	40 207,202	23 33,414	4
902,078	100
Area km2
471,742 128,349 18,743 660,863
%
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON Table 1. Rural land settlements in Brazil: 1979–2007
431
Source: DATALUTA—Banco de Dados de Luta pela Terra, 2008. www.fct.unesp.br/nera.
than 50% of deforestation during 2001–05, and their future contribution is likely to become more pronounced as soy pro- duction for biofuel pushes further into the region (Alves, 2002; Walker et al., 2000; Walker, 2003; Walker et al., 2009).
Although the paper considers aspects of the environmental impact of DALR, its main goals are to (1) provide an intro- duction to Brazilian DALR through field-based description, and (2) examine the impact DALR has on the livelihoods of its participants. To accomplish this, the paper first considers how	the	Brazilian	government	has	addressed	A	Questa ̃ o Fundiaria, the issue of land, and social concerns that its mal- distribution presents an enduring injustice and potential economic inefficiency. This section is essential to understanding contemporary DALR because state action has laid the legal foundation that justifies DALR, and state inaction provides the motivation (Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons et al., 2007a). After this comes a review of what is currently known about Brazilian DALR, which covers a gamut from intensely political processes prosecuted under the banner of various left-leaning movements, to less organized expressions of individuals uniting to achieve the personalized quest of land acquisition for family production. A presentation of results from field surveys of representative DALR settlements in the Amazon basin follows. Here, the paper’s main contribution is made, a description of participants and settlements that provides insight into conditions enabling DALR, as well as DALR demography, farming system sustainability, and formation processes. Specifically, the analysis examines the efficacy of DALR actions to improve the livelihoods of its par- ticipants and the potential for land conflict and environmental degradation in the process. This description leads to a discus- sion of Brazilian DALR, and the introduction of ethnographic information that allows for a nuanced interpretation of survey results. The paper concludes by embedding DALR within the broader societal context of neoliberal Brazil, and the developmental prospects of this powerful movement.
2. BRAZILIAN APPROACHES TO A QUESTA ̃ O FUNDIARIA, THE LAND ISSUE
Brazil, motivated by wide concern for rural poverty and jus- tice, has a long historical record of legislation and policies with implications for land distribution dating from the first Land Statute of 1850. These actions, typically prosecuted by the fed- eral government in a centralized manner, we refer to broadly as state-led agrarian reform, or SLAR, which can be grouped within agrarian reform legislation, colonization, and current policies that outline Projetos de Assentamentos (PAs). An extensive literature addresses the history of agrarian reform and colonization efforts (Medeiros, 2002; Santos, 1984; Sim- mons et al., 2007); here we limit discussion to an emphasis on the manner in which these actions influence contemporary DALR. In particular, agrarian reform legislation provides the institutional incentive for DALR action, while colonization supplies the demographic impetus. The remainder of this sec-
tion considers contemporary policy that promotes the creation of PAs.
In terms of legislation, Direito de posse, first outlined in the Land Statute of 1850, recognized right of land possession if it was put to productive use, and sanctioned expropriation and redistribution of unutilized holdings by the state (Fernandes, 2000; Foweraker, 1981; Medeiros, 2002; Santos, 1984, 2001).1 Since then, a series of constitutional amend- ments and laws have created ambiguity regarding these rights (Simmons et al., 2007a). Of considerable significance to the emergence of DALR is the constitutional stipulation that all private holdings fulfill their ‘‘social function,” a principle that has diluted the inviolability of private property and allowed for state expropriation of properties for non-compliance. It should come as no surprise that adversaries of present-day DALR narrowly define social function as economic productiv- ity measured by an index limited to crop yields and stocking density, in sharp contrast to proponents of DALR who advance a multidimensional assessment that also includes items such as job creation and local staple food production. For DALR SMOs and the rural poor generally, social func- tion has become convoluted with environmental quality and a just work environment, given newly drafted environmental and labor laws as stipulated in the Land Statute of 1964 and article 186 of the 1988 Brazilian Constitution (Fernandes, 2000; Medeiros, 2002; Simmons, et al., 2002b; Simmons, Walker, & Wood 2002a; Treccani, 2001). The ambiguity in the law and the manner in which it is interpreted by the judiciary has pitted the landless and landowners in a fight that plays out in the courts, as well as on the landscape.
Although Brazil has elaborate legislation enabling the State to expropriate and redistribute land in the name of agrarian reform, it has never chosen to do so through sustained govern- ment intervention. Instead, it has substituted policies of colo- nization to address rural poverty by making unclaimed lands available for settlement and possession. This was especially significant in Amazonia during the early years of the military regime (1964–85), justifying the creation of the Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (or INCRA) charged with organizing and prosecuting these policies, an agency that stands today. INCRA, which possesses the term agrarian re- form in its very name, has gone through a series of metamor- phoses, although most of its institutional history has been devoted to colonization. Colonization efforts were concen- trated in the States of Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, and involved plans that provided a variety of fiscal incentives to attract agro- industry, the construction of a vast highway network to inte- grate the region with the economic core of the country, the provision of land for small holder colonization, and the crea- tion of a system of central places providing services to the new settlers (Browder, 1988; Browder & Godfrey, 1997; Hall, 1989; Ianni, 1979; Mahar, 1979; Velho, 1972). By the end of the 1970s, however, federal interest in the colonization of Amazo- nia declined, and efforts shifted to resource extraction, especially mining and timber. That said, the construction of highways and the development of mineral resource extraction,
71 19 3 100
432	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
especially the discoveries of gold deposits, unleashed waves of spontaneous in-migration providing the demographic impetus for DALR to this day.
Democratic change in Brazil restored interest in land re- form, which quickly became a top priority for the new govern- ment. Economic malaise stymied concerted efforts, however, despite mounting populist pressures on federal government to fulfill longstanding promises about providing land for the poor. In parts of Amazoˆnia, particularly southern Para ́ State, a low-intensity civil conflict simmered (Schmink & Wood, 1992; Simmons, 2004; Simmons et al., 2007a,b). Perhaps in re- sponse to such incidents, which brought Brazil much un- wanted international publicity, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso called for the creation of the Novo Mundo Rural, a new rural world, through the development of Projetos de Assentamentos (PAs), or settlement projects, to be populated by competitive small holders. To bring this about, the landless poor are to first organize themselves in associations and invest their labor power, with government subsequently supporting their efforts through the provision of resources and infrastruc- ture (INCRA, 2000). In effect, this new PA program repre- sented an important shift in agrarian reform efforts from state directed efforts during colonization, to state sanctioned PAs that necessitate and legitimate pre-emptive occupation of land by the landless and their movements (Sigaud, 2005, p. 256).
Cardoso also attempted to introduce a World Bank pro- gram for market-led agrarian reform, or MLAR, as an alter- native to the inefficient efforts of the State, and as a means to moderate civil conflict (Deininger, 1999; Deininger & Binswanger, 1999; Riedinger, Wang, & Brook, 2001). MLAR is founded on the creation of a Land Bank capable of distrib- uting loans to farmers and necessary mechanisms to support land markets between buyers and sellers with minimal govern- ment intervention. Many neoliberal theoreticians, however, criticize the efficacy of such efforts, with some labeling these policies neoliberal populism constituting nothing more than the re-packaging of ineffective programs of the past (Bernstein, 2002). From the left, critics maintain that MLAR amounts to a land giveaway to wealthy land owners, which also increases debt loads on the landless poor who were meant to be the pri- mary beneficiary (Borras, 2003; Wolford, 2003). Despite lim- ited claims of success in pilot projects in the South and Northeast of Brazil, MLAR has been eclipsed by DALR in the Amazon. Indeed, agrarian reform following the initial col- onization phase is exclusively a direct action phenomenon leading to the creation of PAs.
3. DALR IN BRAZIL AND THE AMAZON
PA formation represents a considerable administrative com- mitment on part of the Brazilian state. Nevertheless, proactive, state-led programs have been few and far between, and the Brazilian government has largely passed the baton to civil society, thereby creating a momentous opening that SMOs and motivated individuals have exploited to create their own PAs (De Janvry, Sadoulet, & Wolford, 2001; Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons et al., 2002b; Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2007a,b). In essence, the rural poor have taken agrarian reform into their own hands by exploiting the land law and the institutional resources made available by legisla- tion. These actions constitute what we refer to as DALR, which to date has created over 7,000 PAs, and homes for about 800,000 families throughout Brazil (MDA/INCRA, 2007). As disclosed at the outset of the paper, Amazoˆnia is
increasingly a target for PA formation, presumably given the perceived abundance of land, and the ever-increasing accessi- bility of its most remote places. Nevertheless, DALR emerged as a notable movement in the southern part of the country in the mid-1980s, as part and parcel of the MST, its largest, most vocal, and most successful advocate to date (Stedile, 1997; Welch, 2006; Wolford, 2003a, 2003b, 2004).
Although MST is surely a notable exemplar of a DALR SMO, it is important to recognize that many other SMOs par- ticipate in DALR actions, and that many land reform actions occur with little or no SMO involvement whatsoever. As dis- cussed at the outset, this observation provides an important empirical motivation for the paper, which seeks to describe the forms of DALR presently occurring in Brazil, and partic- ularly in Amazonia. This task first involves an overview of PA creation processes, distinguished by type of DALR as best can be determined from the literature. We then move on to a pre- sentation of survey results, and a description of DALR house- holds, differentiated by the PA creation process. Finally, the results from our analyses, combined with insight gathered from key informant interviews, allow us to elaborate on some important complexities of DALR in Amazonia.
There is much precedence for creating a typology to describe and compare settlement efforts in Amazonia. For our study, we build on the notion outlined by He ́bette (2004) that distin- guishes processes and characteristics of farmers that settled as part of directed colonization schemes from those that moved into the region later as part of ‘‘spontaneous” colonization. However, we limit our focus to strictly those engaged in spon- taneous colonization as opposed to state-led efforts. Based on the literature, we further delineate two fundamental forms of DALR in Brazil today, one involving SMO leadership, and the other emerging spontaneously, with little attention to pol- itics or ideology. Thus, the discussion now moves to address each of these, with particular attention to the PA formation process.
(a) SMO-led DALR
DALR as a journalistic phenomenon appears mainly to implicate SMOs and their ideological quests. Perhaps for this reason much has been written about SMO-led DALR (e.g., Branford & Rocha, 2002; Fernandes, 2000; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a,b; Stedile, 1997; Wright & Wolford, 2003). A commonly portrayed case is the MST-style SMO, with a polit- ical agenda that goes beyond obtaining land. DALR under SMO leadership involves a coordinated set of actions designed to advance the political agenda as well as to obtain land for the creation of a PA. Mobilization, perhaps ironically, typi- cally occurs in towns and cities, although a significant propor- tion of participants have migrated from rural locations where they were displaced prior to moving to the numerous frontier towns (Fanelli, 2001; Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a,b; Stedile, 1997; Veiga, 1990). To organize them, militants establish a contact center in the municipal seat, and initiate advertising campaigns via posted fliers, radio announcements, and even by loud speakers atop cars, cruising targeted neighborhoods. This organizational phase can last for several months to over a year, during which community lead- ership emerges and committees essential to PA implementa- tion and governance are formed.
Following this, DALR selects its target property. For MST actions, the frente de massa is a key committee including local day labor and farm hands aware of the lay of the land. Often, sympathizers from government agencies such as INCRA provide intelligence about local properties vulnerable to
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	433
constitutionally stipulated expropriation. A prime objective of SMO-led DALR is to attack latifundios. Thus, the SMOs plan- ning an occupation typically select large private holdings, and accuse owners of failure to comply with the constitutionally mandated social function, and, more recently, violations of environmental and/or labor laws as a legal strategy that opens the door to state intervention and expropriation (Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2007a,b; Treccani, 2001). With the target selected, the ‘‘occupation” takes place, often in the early morning to avoid detection until such time as a large enough group has assembled on the target. 2 For security reasons, only a few individuals know the location and time of the planned occupation until the last minute when they are called to orga- nize at a pre-determined rendezvous site, and the press is con- tacted in advance to ensure coverage as a way to avoid violent reprisals by landowners. INCRA, as the agency responsible for adjudicating land claims and conflicts, is also notified.
The final and most frustrating phase involves formal recog- nition of the PA. Although an SMO can organize and achieve an occupation relatively quickly, formal recognition is another matter given the checks and balances of the legal framework for adjudicating contentious land claims. Recent legislation has complicated the process, and delayed property expropria- tion and PA approval by years. Specifically, decree MP 2.183- 56 enacted by President Cardoso and upheld by President Lula puts a moratorium of two years on INCRA investigations of DALR land claims, when such claims involve the mobilization and mass action as described. Since it is not unusual for DALR actions to involve multiple occupations before an IN- CRA investigation is even started, PA formalization can easily take over five years, during which the rank and file build a make-shift community, or acampamento. These have become familiar architectural features of many Brazilian landscapes, with their iconic black tarp roofs, and their colorful movement flags, whatever the SMO may be. Ideally, the acampamento is located on the actual land targeted for DALR appropriation. If physical occupation of the property proves daunting, the SMO may choose a strategic site, such as a roadside visible to passers-by and the media, or even the INCRA compound itself, which gives government workers strong incentives to re- solve the claim. All the while, INCRA provides acampamento residents with subsistence foodstuffs in a monthly allotment referred to as the cesta basica.
INCRA’s investigation is based on a vistoria, basically an appraisal of property investment and productivity. Herein lies an additional complication in the formalization process—spe- cifically, the way in which productivity is defined. Landowners prefer the estate productivity index that was last updated in 1975, which uses explicit measures of crop yield and animal to pasture ratios to indicate a productive property. The DALR advocates, on the other hand, argue that such an accounting method must consider how the property and its productivity benefit the local population in terms of job creation and staple food provisions, which is mandated in the ‘‘social function” clause of the constitution. Regardless of INCRA’s results, either side can bring the case before the courts to determine the fate of the land, which draws out the formalization process for many more years. Once this phase of the process con- cludes, and in the event the outcome favors DALR partisans, the property, if private, is expropriated in the state of interest, with compensation for the owner. Now, the actual develop- ment of the settlement begins in earnest. Administrative law of INCRA requires that DALR participants form an associa- tion and draft a Plan for the Development of the Settlement, or a PDA. This plan outlines a strategy for economic growth, typically based on agriculture but also possibly involving
small-scale industrial activities, particularly in the food-pro- cessing sector. Once the PDA has been approved, INCRA must provide infrastructure, including roads, housing, schools, and health facilities, in addition to food subsistence with the cesta basica. The vistoria, development of a PDA, and final ap- proval of the PA draws out the overall DALR process to over ten years in some cases.
SMO-led DALR possesses a significant ideological compo- nent. The MST, in particular, pursues a socialist platform, and views the PA as embryonic to the creation of a new, more humane, society. This society, to emerge from the rural areas, is to be based on family farms and cooperatives, meant to pave the way to an equitable industrialization that never loses sight of rural socialist enterprise. The MST organizes revolutionary instruction as part and parcel of its PA formation strategy, and maintains a free ‘‘school of political formation” in the state of Sa ̃o Paulo for training militants in movement ideology and rural strategy, in addition to linkages with Brazilian uni- versities that provide participant education in agronomy. A key element of the MST agenda—and that of many other SMOs—involves the promotion of environmental sustainabil- ity (MST, 2007). This is to be based on appropriate farming systems, informed by ecology, and concerted efforts to hus- band environmental resources for future generations of DALR activists who will continue pursuing the various left- leaning SMO agendas. As a mirror to World Bank discourse, DALR SMOs promote the idea that long-run development must depend on sustainable relations with the environment. Whether rhetoric from either camp turns into action with the promotion of more sustainable practices is a topic open to great debate, both within Brazil and the International com- munity.
(b) Spontaneous DALR
Although SMOs are very active in Brazilian land reform ef- forts, other modes of DALR take place without the significant influence of politics, ideology, and organizational forethought. Evidence has accumulated about efforts to spontaneously form PAs as a way to obtain land, a phenomenon of particular import in Amazonia given its land abundance, and the waves of directed and spontaneous migrants who have flocked to the region over the past several decades (He ́bette, 2004). Of course, land ‘‘squatting” has a long history in Brazil, and in many other parts of the world where the rural poor have lim- ited options (He ́bette, 2004). The DALR actions we consider in this section focus on the acquisition of land and creation of a PA as a community venture that conforms to the admin- istrative requirements of INCRA. As such, it becomes eligible for state investments in social overhead capital described in the previous section (Sigaud, 2005).
Research on small holder livelihoods (Caldas et al., 2007; He ́bette, 2004; Walker, 2003; Wood, 1983) and private interest road-building (Arima, Barreto, & Brito, 2005; Perz et al., 2008) calls attention to spontaneous colonization with the for- mation of PAs as a practical afterthought. Spontaneous DALR—to be distinguished from the spontaneous processes considered by He ́bette (2004) in its quest to form a state-sanc- tioned settlement—emerges from the gradual occupation of empty public lands—so-called terras devolutas—by on-site res- idents, without much political forethought or organization. 3 Factors enabling the onset of spontaneous DALR include (1) a prior history of government colonization in the area and (2) the condition of parentesco, or the availability of dense familial networks providing organizational and human re- sources for political struggle (Caldas, 2008; He ́bette, 2004).
434	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Thus, spontaneous DALR does not represent the outcome of the quest for a political objective, as shaped by an SMO, but a process of agricultural expansion initiated by prior, state-sanc- tioned colonization stemming from the 1970s. In contrast to the original colonists, however, spontaneous DALR partici- pants receive little or no government assistance until a PA has been formed, at which time they become eligible for sup- port from INCRA, just as in the case of SMO-led actions. Spontaneous DALR does benefit from local family networks, a source of encouragement, labor power, and human capital for confronting difficulties encountered along the way (He ́b- ette, 2004; Caldas, 2008). 4
In one stylized description of spontaneous DALR, partici- pants reproduce the original settlement pattern of the govern- ment’s initial colonization site, by extending the original roads (Perz et al., 2008). This facilitates forest penetration, the demar- cation of properties, and recognition of property holdings by INCRA, given the extra-legal occupation has the appearance of an extension of the original, INCRA-sanctioned develop- ment. The process begins with a search for land by individuals unknown to each other but with relatives living in the old colo- nization areas. Once he, or she, has identified a plot, an informal demarcation (marcaßca ̃o) of the land is made, reproducing the dimensions of the old colonization areas. Deforestation follows in order to demonstrate ‘‘productive” use, a legal precondition for gaining title by the principle of usocapia ̃o.
With the passage of time, the settlers acting individually form a small community. Once a critical mass has assembled, and developed collective awareness about the institutional oppor- tunities afforded by the land statute, they petition INCRA in order to formalize their settlement, and to take advantage of the legally prescribed investments that follow the declaration of a PA (Caldas, 2008). In many cases the local rural syndicates intervene at this point, acting as intermediaries between the State and the landless (He ́bette, 2002; Sigaud, 2005). From this point forward, spontaneous DALR must follow the same procedures as its SMO-led variant, with the development of a PDA, and a legal process alienating the land from public holdings into private ownership. The households also become eligible for the cesta basica once INCRA has taken up their case.
As described, spontaneous DALR is non-ideological, and treats the PA formation process in a somewhat opportunistic sense, as a way for individuals to gain access to land. Of course, this is largely the intention of the administrative rulings of Presidents Cardoso and Lula, and the agenda of INCRA, so the participants of spontaneous DALR can hardly be criticized. The lack of ideology stands in sharp contrast to SMO-led DALR, whose organizations may be more interested in the creation of an egalitarian society. Although the forma- tion of spontaneous PAs typically does not involve an explicit ideological component, individual participants of course possess their own political notions and agendas, which can in- clude concern for environmental sustainability. PDAs, in turn, are likely to reflect developmentalist rhetoric, which has grown increasingly green since the Rio Summit of 1992. That said, politics, environmental or otherwise, are not so pronounced and evolved as with SMO-led DALR.
In sum, both SMO and spontaneous DALR involve individ- uals acting to force the government to follow through on its promise of agrarian reform, both have among their primary objectives the acquisition of land and title for participants, and both require some degree of organization in order to meet these objectives. The key distinguishing feature between the two is the manner in which the initial occupation takes place and the point at which the participants organize. Specifically,
SMO-led DALR settlements are initiated with a premeditated ‘‘occupation”—the almost overnight settlement of land, or invasion as the landowner might see it—necessitating an orga- nized front. In contrast, spontaneous DALR is initiated only after a gradual and sporadic occupation has achieved a critical mass of settlers, capable of asserting social force.
4. THE EMPIRICS OF DALR
The discussion to this point has provided an overview of DALR processes, and suggests two basic modes, SMO-led and spontaneous. The paper now moves to field-based descrip- tion, and presents results from survey research undertaken in the summer and fall of 2006. This research, motivated in part by the snapshot of DALR just presented, elaborates a set of hypotheses about distinctions between the SMO-led and spon- taneous DALR. Hypotheses are now stated, and tested using survey-based field data and inferential statistics. The results are followed by a brief presentation of key informant ethnog- raphy. As will become apparent, DALR must be elaborated beyond the two types presented to this point in order to ulti- mately provide a comprehensive description.
(a) Survey of DALR participants
The literature suggests several key distinctions between SMO-led and spontaneous DALR that are now subjected to statistical investigation. Specifically, these modes of land re- form differ in terms of (1) origins of participants, (2) proce- dures implemented for the selection of target properties, with implications for land conflict and deforestation, (3) access to capital and economic resources more generally, and (4) engagement with environmental sustainability concerns. With these differences in mind, we specify the following hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1 (Hyp-1) is that SMO-DALR involves mobili- zation of urban residents, unlike spontaneous DALR parti- sans, who are primarily rural.
Hypothesis 2 (Hyp-2a) states that SMO-DALR targets pri- vate holdings, and spontaneous DALR, unoccupied public lands, so-called terras devolutas. Property selection has serious implications for both land conflict and deforestation. Thus, hypothesis 2b (Hyp-2b) asserts that SMO-DALR is more likely to result in violence than spontaneous DALR for the simple fact that proprietors have strong incentives to defend their properties, and a constitutional right to do so. Hypothe- sis 2c (Hyp-2c) anticipates more deforestation in the aftermath of spontaneous DALR given the land targeted for occupation is likely to be forested.
Hypothesis 3 states that PAs formed by SMO-DALR will have developmental advantages due to deeper veins of social capital, and leaders savvy about pressuring INCRA to fulfill administrative obligations prescribed by law. Thus, we anticipate that participants in SMO-DALR, relative to their counterparts in spontaneously formed PAs, will experience livelihood improvements (Hyp-3a), quicker land titling (Hyp-3b), and superior access to credit (Hyp-3c) and agricultural extension assistance (Hyp-3d), all of which have been identified as essential ingredients for ‘‘development” success.
Hypothesis 4 claims that settlers in SMO-DALR settlements implement more highly productive agricultural practices given increased access to technology and inputs either directly from the SMO, or as a result of their ability to pressure the govern- ment for assistance. This will hypothetically manifest in pro- nounced usage of agricultural inputs including fertilizers,
Settlement
Para ́
Transamazon: Rio do Peixe Surubim Rio Traira ̃o Tutu ́ı Norte Uirapuru ́
Southern Para ́
17 de Abril 1 de Marßco Alegria Castanhal Araras Canudos Cabanos Palmares II Santa Maria do Pontal
Rondonia
Asa de Avia ̃o Cautarinho Chico Mendes I Guarajus
Joana D’Arc I Joana D’Arc III Jose Carlos Marechal Rondon Oriente
Pedra Redonda Primavera Rosana Lecy Serra Grande
Municipality
Uruara ́ Me ́ dicilaˆ ndia Uruara ́ Uruara ́ Uruara ́
Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Sa ̃o Joa ̃o do Araguaia Maraba ́ Sa ̃o Joa ̃o do Araguaia Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Parauapebas Eldorado dos Caraja ́s
Machadinho D’Oeste Sa ̃o Francisco do Guapore Presidente Medici Corumbiara Porto Velho Porto Velho Vale do Anari Nova Mamore Buritis Machadinho D’Oeste Theobroma Nova Mamore Costa Marques
Type of DALR Tactic
Spontaneous Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led Spontaneous
SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led
SMO-led Spontaneous SMO-led SMO-led Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led Spontaneous Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led
Year INCRA recognized
10/25/1995 5/18/1988 10/7/1997 10/29/1999 6/10/1997
6/19/1997 6/15/1998 12/9/1999 8/4/1987 8/16/2004 3/7/2003 12/13/2001 7/14/1997
7/28/1999 8/30/2002 5/30/1997 12/29/1995 6/9/2000 6/9/2000 5/5/1998 12/5/2002 11/20/2000 12/29/1995 9/18/1997 11/28/2001 8/14/2001
Families settled
241 1344 160 341 252
688 349 95 83 56 81 286 67
69 213 67 124 289 495 47 64 93 145 262 81 120
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	435
pesticides, and herbicides (Hyp-4a); although not environmen- tally advantageous, such agronomic inputs would allow for higher yields. We also anticipate greater exposure to sustain- able farm management techniques given greater environmental emphasis of many SMOs and increased access to extension, such as fallow management (Hyp-4b), contour farming, (Hyp-4c), green manuring, (Hyp-4d), terracing, (Hyp-4e), crop rotation (Hyp-4f), and mulching (Hyp-4g). These practices, shaped by the ideological drivers of movement rhetoric and programs, should reduce rates of fertility decline on SMO-led PAs (Hyp-4h) and reduce the incidence of wildfire contagion relative to the spontaneous case (Hyp-4i).
(b) The survey and study areas
The data used to consider the above-mentioned hypotheses were collected by field surveys conducted in the summer and fall of 2006. The survey, which assembled information for 751 DALR families, was administered in 26 settlements in Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, two states with extensive development histo- ries, and extremely active contemporary land reform move- ments (Table 2). The Para ́ sites focused on the so-called South of Para ́, an area long notorious for contention over land, and the Transamazon Highway (BR-230) in the central part of the state, the region of the first PIC implemented in the early 1970s. The PAs visited in Rondoˆnia came from all over the state, given its relatively small size and the quality of its high- way system as compared to Para ́. Of the 26 settlements visited in both states, 14 were SMO-DALR PAs, and 12 of them were spontaneous PAs (Figure 1 and Table 2). Classification by type of PA was made on the basis of key informants from INCRA,
other government workers, and settlement residents. The main distinguishing characteristic, as stated above, was the way land was settled, either through planned SMO occupation in the case of SMO-DALR, or gradual and spontaneous small farmer set- tlement as we see in spontaneous DALR. Survey participants were identified by the opportunistic methods described in Cal- das et al. (2007), which seeks geographic coverage and repre- sentativeness.5 Representativeness of the survey sample is probably also guaranteed by sample size, given over 700 of the target population of about 4000 DALR households (Table 2) provided responses.
(c) Methodology
The survey instrument gathered household-level information on demographic history, farming system and agricultural prac- tices, durable goods possession, and DALR experience. With respect to demographic and personal data, the instrument que- ried respondents about household structure, migration history, social and political networks, and personal background in DALR and land conflicts. Although settlement histories for each site enabled classification into the two categories identifi- able in the literature, contemporary DALR in the Amazon, and Brazil more generally, is a process whose complexity is concealed by a simple, binary typology. Despite complexity within DALR types, this classification still holds for the pur- pose of analysis. A closer examination of DALR processes is aided by our subsequent key informant interviews that detailed settlement histories, to be discussed in the section that follows.
For Hyp-1, we use data derived from a question in the migration history component of the survey that explicitly
Table 2. Study sites, settlements name, and DALR type
436	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Figure 1. (a) Assentamento study sites in Para ́. (b) Assentamento study sites in Rondoˆnia.
asked whether the respondent lived in an urban or a rural site	and 2b, we use data derived from questions that asked the prior to moving to their current residence. To address Hyp 2a	respondent to identify if the land they occupy was previously
Wealth category at arrival
1 2 3 4 Total
Spontaneous DALR
187 (48) 73 (47) 57 (41) 21 (57) 338 (47)
SMO-DALR
203 (52) 84 (54) 82 (59) 16 (43) 385 (53)
Total
390 157 139 37 723
terms of age (􏳵45 years) and education level of household head (􏳵3 years), number of co-resident family members (4.5), extent of market engagement, and consumption depen- dence on the production of annuals. Length of occupation of rural property is statistically different between the DALR types, although not substantial, and close to 8 years in both cases. The size of holding does differ meaningfully, with aver- age properties on spontaneous PAs at 77 ha, almost twice as large as those found on the SMO-led settlements (41 ha). In terms of farming systems, the data show comparability, with diversification across annual crops (corn, rice, manioc, and beans) and perennials (coffee, cocoa, pepper, and banana). Nevertheless, households in spontaneous DALR settlements are more heavily engaged in perennials, particularly cocoa. They also have more cattle, 35 compared to 21 head in SMO-led settlements, although the difference is not significant and pastures are about the same in both cases.
Testing the hypotheses on key distinctions between SMO- led and spontaneous DALR involved inferential statistics (i.e., chi square and t-tests), with results given in Table 5. As for Hyp-1, findings confirm that participants in SMO-DALR are more likely to come from urban areas given the prevalent strategy of SMO mobilization, with 41% of SMO-led DALR participants coming most immediately from urban areas, as compared to 25% for the spontaneously acting individuals. Results also support our expectation in Hyp-2a that settlers in SMO-led DALR settlements more often target private property (73%), while settlers in spontaneous DALR seek public lands (59%). However, we did not find support for our subsequent hypothesis, Hyp-2b, that because they target private land, settlers in SMO-led DALR experience more con- flict than spontaneous DALR settlers. This is likely explained by the high residential turnover in SMO initiated PAs; data showed that 54% of the respondents in SMO-led PAs were not the original settlers on the land, compared to 46% in spon- taneous DALR PAs. 7 Nevertheless, key informant interviews with long time residents, SMO leadership, and public officials, tell a tale of contentious land struggle in SMO-DALR sites specifically, which is supported with secondary sources such as local newspapers and CPT accounts that give detailed re- ports on violent conflict. Finally, testing on Hyp-2c supports the hypothesis that spontaneous DALR settlers have a greater potential for deforestation, given they occupy heavily forested lands, with an average of 91% under forest cover at time of occupation. Regardless, impact on forests by settlers in SMO-led DALR cannot be dismissed, given that average for- est area at time of occupation is still high, at 80%.
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	437
private or public, and whether they experienced conflict when they settled their land. For (Hyp-2c), we use data derived from the questionnaire that explicitly asks the percentage of land cover in forest at time of occupation, which gives us percent- ages for comparison.
In order to assess (Hyp-3a), that settlers in SMO-DALR set- tlements experienced greater improvements in wealth than spontaneous settlements, we followed precedent set by Walk- er, Perz, Caldas, and Silva (2002) and Caldas et al. (2007), using data derived from the surveys that reveal the ownership of an array of durable goods that correlate well to wealth (Morris, Carlleto, & Hoddinott, 2000). 6 Because we did not have prices of the goods, we did not create a single monetary value (Junming, 1997; Morris et al., 2000), and rather than imposing a weighting scheme, we chose categories that could be used to define dummy variables (Menon, Ruel, & Morris, 2000; Weil, 1989). Four wealth categories were created ranging from 1, the poorest cohort, to 4, the richest. This was done for two time periods: (1) at time of arrival on the settlement, and (2), at the time of the interview (see Tables 3a and 3b). We next create an improvement variable that indicates whether the households moved up in wealth category, reflecting improve- ments in rural livelihood (see Table 3c), and use it in the anal- ysis to examine whether a statistically significant difference between DALR type exists. Walker et al. (2002) and Caldas et al. (2007) used such categorical data successfully in statisti- cal analyses similar to the one presented here.
To test Hyp-3b through 3d, we used binary (y/n) response information derived from questions on the surveys that query whether respondents received title, credit, and agricultural extension. Finally, to test whether settlers in SMO-DALR set- tlements have greater access to agricultural technology (Hyp- 4a–g), we use responses from a variety of questions on the sur- vey that illicit, yes or no, whether respondents used the agri- cultural practice. We also measured sustainability in terms of (yes or no) whether the respondent experienced (Hyp-5a) decline in land fertility and/or (Hyp-5b) exposure to wildfire.
(d) Results and discussion As for general characteristics of the survey households and
their farming systems, Table 4 shows them to be similar in Table 3a. Wealth categories at arrival
Table 3c. Wealth change, from time of arrival until time of interview by DALR type
Notes: Wealth was defined on specific durable goods possession as queried in the survey.
Wealth category at interview
1 2 3 4 Total
Spontaneous DALR
77 (59) 107 (55) 119 (37) 39 (51) 338 (47)
SMO-DALR
Total
Table 3b. Wealth categories at time of interview
Notes: Wealth was defined on specific durable goods possession as queried in the survey.
54 (41)	131
86 (45)	193 207 (63)	326 37 (49)	76 385 (53)	723
Development status over time of moves
Stayed the same Total % same Improved
Total % improved Declined
Total % declined Total = n
Spontaneous	SMO
171	156 52%	42%
1 74 91 2 55 99 3 11 9
42%	53%
􏳶1 15 15 􏳶2 3 2 􏳶3 1 0
6%	5% 330	372
438
A. Households characteristics
Age of household head (yrs) Length of land occupation (yrs)* Day labor bought* Day labor sold Number of people on property Number of families on property Education Household head (yrs)* Consumption characteristics (%)
Corn Rice Manioc
Market engagement (%)
B. Farm system characteristics
Mean property size (ha)* Annuals
Corn (ha)* Rice (ha) Manioc (ha)
Perrenials Coffee (ha)
Cocoa (ha)* Banana (ha) Cattle (heads) Pasture area (ha)
WORLD DEVELOPMENT Table 4. Descriptive characteristics of settlements and households
Full sample mean (Std. Deviation)
44.55 (13.00) 7.81 (5.45) 15.49 (45.93) 17.08 (52.58) 4.52 (2.81) 1.10 (0.42) 3.01 (2.62)
53.59 (0.50) 52.39 (0.50) 51.06 (0.50) 56.76 (0.50)
57.82 (57.10)
1.10 (3.96) 0.96 (1.54) 0.56 (1.26)
0.68 (12.30) 1.81 (7.45) 0.43 (2.37) 28.92 (58.79) 22.60 (51.35)
SMO-DALR mean (Std.
45.20 (12.66) 7.27 (3.91) 17.54 (39.75) 13.89 (47.97) 4.50 (2.71) 1.09 (0.37) 2.76 (2.36)
56.10 (0.50) 54.86 (0.50) 50.62 (0.50) 57.18 (0.50)
41.43 (25.31)
0.95 (1.43) 0.95 (1.45) 0.56 (1.21)
0.61 (1.74) 0.55 (3.43) 0.52 (3.07) 23.41 (35.83) 21.35 (50.59)
Deviation)
Non-SMO-DALR mean (Std. Deviation)
43.80 (13.37) 8.44 (6.77) 13.09 (52.16) 20.47 (56.96) 4.55 (2.94) 1.11 (0.47) 3.31 (2.88)
50.71 (0.50) 49.57 (0.50) 51.57 (0.50) 56.29 (0.50)
76.97 (75.15)
1.26 (5.59) 0.97 (1.63) 0.55(1.31)
0.76 (2.80) 3.26 (10.09) 0.32 (1.10) 35.18 (76.58) 24.01 (52.25)
Notes: Inferential statistics were performed on the indicators (chi-square and difference of the means as appropriate). Variables in bold with an * indicate significance at the .05 level.
Table 5. Development and Sustainability Indicators, by DALR type
Full sample	SMO
Spontaneous
A. Settlement characteristics
Hyp-1 Last residence—urban (%)* Hyp-2a Land targeted for occupation*
Private (%) Public (%)
Hyp-2b Land conflict (%) Hyp-2c Forest at time of occupation (average% in forest)*
B. Development indicators
Hyp-3a Improvement livelihood (%)* Hyp-3b Title security (%)* Hyp-3c Credit (%)* Hyp-3d Agricultural extension (%)
Top 3 sources
C. Agricultural technology
Hyp-4a Inputs (%)** Hyp-4b Years fallow (yrs) Hyp-4c Contour farming (%) Hyp-4d Green manure/plant cover (%) Hyp-4e Terracing (%) Hyp-4f Crop rotation (%)* Hyp-4g Mulch cover (%)
D. Sustainability indicators
Hyp-4h Decline in land fertility (%) Hyp-4i Exposure to wildfire (%)*
* Statistically significant at .05. ** Statistically significant at .10.
34	41	25
43	73	9 36	15	59
5	6	4 86	80	91
45	53	42 62	48	77 64	71	56 18	17	20
Cooperative	EMATER EMATER	INCRA
INCRA	Cooperative
Cooperative CEPLAC EMATER
5.5	3.6	1.9 1.3	1.4	1.2 3.8	4	3.5
12	13.7	10.6 3.8	4.6	2.9
14.8	19.4	9 10.4	9.2	12
37	39	34 45	50	38
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	439
The data analyses show a statistically significant effect on livelihoods as posed in Hyp-3a, with 53% of settlers in SMO-led sites improving their circumstances compared to 42% for spontaneous settlers. These results are further elabo- rated in Tables 3a, 3b, and 3c, which provide additional infor- mation on the dynamics of durable goods possession, showing that more households in spontaneous DALR sites experienced no change or a decline in wealth status compared to SMO- DALR participants. As for differences in access to title, credit, and agricultural extension, the results are mixed. Our findings reveal a statistically significant difference with respect to tenure security, Hyp-3b, but they contradict expectations, with a lar- ger proportion of settlers in spontaneous settlements (77%) having title, as compared to those living in SMO-led DALR sites (42%). The reason for this may be SMO strategy. Accord- ing to a number of key informants in SMO settlements, they prefer not to get title because that signifies the final stage of INCRA support, at which time the households are no longer eligible for cesta basica and other subsidies. 8 With regard to credit, Hyp-3c, results are statistically significant and agree with expectations that SMOs facilitate access.
Findings from the analysis of differences for Hyp-3d regard- ing access to agricultural extension were not significant, with nearly 20% of all households across DALR types receiving some form of agricultural extension. However, there is a sub- stantive difference in terms of which organizations supplied this service for which DALR type. For SMO-DALR settlements, agricultural extension was primarily provided by government services, most importantly the State agency Empresa de Assisteˆncia Te ́cnica e Extensa ̃o Rural (EMATER) and INCRA, followed by local cooperatives contracted by the local rural syndicates. In contrast, spontaneous DALR resi- dents more often received extension from local cooperatives, followed	by	government	agencies	such	as	the	Comissa ̃ o Executiva do Plano da Lavoura Cacaueira (CEPLAC) and EMATER. The spontaneous DALR residents rarely men- tioned receiving assistance from INCRA. In general, this gives some support to our hypothesis that SMOs are better able to pressure the government for services that benefit residents in their settlements.
Finally, with respect to measures of agricultural technology and sustainable practices (Hyp-4a–4i), results show statisti- cally significant differences for inputs, crop rotation, and wild- fire exposure. Findings for both inputs and crop rotation are consistent with hypothetical statements, with SMOs evidently managing to (1) acquire capital inputs to increase farm pro- ductivity, which may or may not be sustainable, and (2) em- ploy green farm practices, in particular crop rotation that is used by nearly 20% of the SMO-DALR households surveyed. The application of green manure and mulch cover are also important techniques used by DALR households, with no sig- nificant difference between the DALR types. The sustainability result for fire, however, does not conform to expectations, a problem that appears more prevalent in the SMO-led settle- ments. In terms of land fertility declines, over one-third of households sampled said this was a problem, although no sig- nificant differences emerged.
In summary, analyses support a number of hypothesis state- ments. SMO-led DALR tends to promote relative wealth accumulation, and their farming systems are somewhat ‘‘greener” than spontaneous actions, with less settlement in areas of primary forest and greater reliance on agricultural inputs. That said, SMO-led PAs experience more wildfire, a critical concern in present-day Amazonia. As for wealth accumulation, it is important to point out that members of spontaneous settlements also experience wealth accumulation.
That DALR participants in general appear to improve their life circumstances probably explains the widespread and aggressive nature of the movement. Perhaps ironically, but also in concert with expectations, large numbers of settlers in SMO-led PAs show urban residency prior to PA formation. Of course, such individuals are likely to have started out in rural areas, and where they lived immediately prior to DALR involvement often indicates a chain of circular migrations with return flows to the rural environment. In other words, DALR, and specifically its SMO variant, has the potential to instigate migration flows in reverse of the pervasive tendency of rural to urban movement that generally occurs with economic develop- ment. 9 In fact, a preliminary assessment of the data does indi- cate a significant difference with greater circular migration (rural–urban–rural) in SMO-DALR, supporting hypothetical assertions made earlier by Simmons et al. (2002b) and Sim- mons et al. (2007b). Such a migratory phenomenon possesses implications for the Amazonian forest, since much of the land occupied is forested (Fearnside, 2001; Simmons et al., 2002b; Simmons, 2005).
(e) Complexities in the PA formation process
Evidently, the DALR categories as elaborated are instruc- tive with respect to attributes of household and farming sys- tems, and useful for distinguishing SMO from spontaneous DALR in an effort to examine rural livelihood improvements, as we demonstrate in the previous section. However, the typol- ogy does not reflect the nuanced differences that emerge in the formative processes within settlements in each DALR cate- gory. From a broader policy perspective, understanding how PAs come into existence is a key part of the story, and a prin- cipal goal of the paper. To this point, we have advanced from the literature a sharp contrast between SMO-led PAs on the one hand, and the spontaneous version on the other hand. This provides an intelligible distinction, with exotic SMOs importing a confrontational politics of occupation at one ex- treme, and local residents seeking their own opportunity via manipulation of the state, on the other extreme.
Nevertheless, the empirical processes of PA implementation present more complexity than described, and here we identify a select number of distinguishing features that contribute to a more nuanced understanding of DALR in Amazonia. Since the rank-and-file participants have little information on imple- mentation, we draw on insight gained from key informant interviews in a re-creation of settlement histories. Two specific issues are paramount in this regard. One involves what we shall refer to as locational contingency, and the other, hybridity in the political forces—and agency—that set in motion and sustain the PA formation process. As for the locational issue, property targeting and DALR action, particularly with SMO- led actions, may bear a highly contingent relation to where the PAs are ultimately established. Specifically, there is not a nec- essary correlation between site of occupation and site of a new PA; in fact, the occupation may not be the precipitate factor to PA creation. A rather dramatic example is provided, perhaps ironically, by PA 17 de Abril in southern Para ́ formed in re- sponse to the massacre in Eldorado dos Caraja ́s in 1996.
This PA, organized by the MST, involved almost every tac- tic endorsed by the larger landless movement from occupa- tions of the desired land and public buildings, encampments on roadsides, to well-publicized protests, marches and road blockades. Success, however, was unintentional, at least with regard to the precipitating event that led to the expropriation of Fazenda Macaxeira. In fact, it was the un-intended conse- quence of the road blockade and the subsequent massacre of
440	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
19 landless workers by the military police that led to the crea- tion of this and many other settlements across the Amazon and the Brazilian countryside. In particular, the international and national press coverage of the events that transpired that tragic day were far-reaching, with an expose ́ in the New York Times, for example. The outcry in response to the bloody images of bodies on the roadside forced the government to re- spond to the needs of the landless, and consequently, several PAs in the immediate vicinity of Eldorado dos Caraja ́s were established within the year, PA 17 de Abril among them. 10
Thus, DALR actions, particularly those precipitating vio- lent response by the state or land owners, can have significant spillover effects, and the PA formation process may not unfold as planned by an SMO or individuals pursuing DALR. Specif- ically, targeted properties do not always fall to direct action tactics, particularly in the case of private lands judged produc- tive by the relevant authority. In such circumstances, which are relatively common, INCRA seeks to provide alternative sites for settlement. Although the case of Eldorado dos Cara- ja ́s is by far the most famous example of the intersection be- tween violence and DALR pursuant to the desire to create a PA, an almost identical incident transpired the previous year in Curumbiara, Rondoˆnia, with a military assault on an encampment on Fazenda Santa Elina that left 12 people dead, nine missing, and hundreds wounded. In its aftermath, the government promised to provide the surviving families land in a number of newly created settlements in the vicinity, sev- eral of which are included in our sample. 11
Another empirical situation that does not meet our initial presentation involves the admittedly simplistic two-way cate- gorization into SMO-led and spontaneous DALR, and the assumptions that SMO-DALR is initiated by an extra-local SMO, in contrast to endogenous agricultural expansion pro- cesses that unfold in spontaneous DALR. Specifically, DALR may reveal hybridized processes involving a diverse mix of ac- tors, radical leadership that emerges endogenously, not via exotic import, and state agency, as when government officials, sympathetic to the landless, provide their knowledge, exper- tise, and support to SMOs and/or individuals seeking land. The PA Tutu ́ı Norte, an SMO-DALR PA in the study area along the Transamazon Highway in the State of Para ́, pro- vides a good example here. 12
The creation of this PA was instigated by an occupation of a ranch that was targeted not for expropriation, but simply as a means to force INCRA to provide the participants land, some- where. The 30 families that participated in the occupation pre- viously lived on another PA in the vicinity, PA Rio do Peixe— a spontaneous DALR PA—, from which they were evicted by INCRA and forced to move to town because the land lacked water. As it turns out, their leader, Senhor Gustavo, was a for- mer employee of INCRA and therefore knowledgeable about the land statutes and administrative obligations of the agency he had worked for. To initiate DALR, Mr. Gustavo enlisted the local rural syndicate in the nearby town of Uruara ́ (Figure 1a) for political support and assistance in mobilizing the urban landless for the occupation. Once the families occupied the property, its owner appealed to INCRA, at which point Mr. Gustavo indicated the occupied property was not large enough for their purposes. That is, their DALR actions were actually meant as a tactic in a longer-term negotiation with INCRA for a sizeable parcel. After more than a year, they succeeded with the establishment of PA Tutuı ́ Norte on 34,000 ha of govern- ment land along the Tutu ́ı River, taking on a shoe string shape so that all residents have access to water.
Finally, spontaneous DALR also reveals hybridity, with processes that do not always conform to the unplanned, unor-
ganized, and endogenous settlement evolution elaborated in our typology. To the contrary, the vast majority of settlers in spontaneous DALR PAs across the study region were immigrants from the Northeast, and many received help in the initial stages of settlement from a diverse set of actors lo- cated outside their social network of family and friends. In several PAs, the rural syndicate working in conjunction with INCRA advised the participants on the best location for set- tlement in order to increase their likelihood of receiving title. Settlement histories also revealed a precarious relationship be- tween settlers and loggers, with initial occupation triggering conflict over resources, but later turning into mutual ex- change, whereby loggers built roads and supplied housing materials for settlers and, in return, the settlers gave them ac- cess to the wood from their land claim, lending legality to their illegal operations.
In sum, the initial categorization of DALR outlined at the outset is subject to internal complexity and variation. For in- stance, PAs are not necessarily created on the land that was originally targeted for expropriation, DALR evidently in- volves a broad cross-section of society, and actors in unex- pected, difficult-to-theoretically-delineate, roles, and familial networks provide support but do not alone determine success of DALR. Nevertheless, the final distinction between SMO and spontaneous-led DALR is both empirically useful and va- lid. The ultimate distinction revealed by the ethnographic study is that the SMO-led actions shape the entire DALR pro- cess from land occupation to PA formalization; whereas the spontaneous variant involves the occupation of land by like- minded individuals in an unplanned and independent fashion, and only later in the process do participants come together to create the INCRA-mandated association.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The main objective of this research was twofold. The first was to develop a comprehensive understanding of DALR in the Brazilian Amazon, which is a new and growing post-devel- opment strategy to bring economic and social justice to the rural hinterlands, beginning with equitable land access. The second was to examine the impact of DALR on the livelihoods of participants, and the potential implications for the environ- ment and land conflict. In order to address these issues we per- formed a cross-basin study involving both in-depth key informant interviews at national, regional, and local scale and 751 comprehensive household surveys in 26 settlements across the study region. In doing so, this study represents one of the first examinations of Brazilian DALR, as well as one of the few large-scale household surveys done at the cross-basin scale. As such, the findings from this research could have far-reaching policy implications for other regions and countries facing populist discontent with land inequality and their own form of DALR movement.
In general, we have found that DALR involves a complex and heterogeneous set of processes, although each settlement can be classified as either SMO-led DALR or spontaneous DALR depending on whether it was initiated by an occupa- tion. Nevertheless, within each category exists a great deal of diversity, which is important to consider in the overall exami- nation. When it comes to SMO-led DALR, our case revealed the collaboration of a multitude of actors including informal and formal social movements active at a variety of scales, from endogenous populist action spearheaded by a charismatic farmer to coordinated events initiated by national and interna- tional organizations. Indeed, the landless struggle in the Ama-
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	441
zon today involves a myriad of social movements, such as theMovimentodosCamponeˆsdeCorumbiara(MCC),an endogenous SMO that split with the MST, and others such as the Ligas Camponesas, Movimento Luta de Terra, Movi- mento dos Pequenos Produtores, each with their respective ideologies.
The examination of spontaneous DALR settlements re- vealed that our initial description did not always hold. In par- ticular, settlers were often immigrants from the Northeast of Brazil who moved to the region in search of land to farm, and not from the local area as suggested in the demographic lifecycle. In many respects, this form of settlement resembles the initial wave of colonization, although these settlers do not have the same degree of subsidies and support by the gov- ernment in the initial phase of occupation as the colonist farm- ers did in the early years. Instead, they rely on support from a vast network of family and friends. Key informants gave evi- dence that would suggest a process of chain migration and channelization is at work, connecting places in the Northeast through kin relations to specific sites in the basin, and, there- by, creating and recreating socio-economic and environmental conditions. Given the importance of social networks and chain migration to the success of spontaneous DALR settlements, these phenomena merit greater attention and future research.
While our research shows great diversity in DALR settle- ments, the households living in these PAs across the study re- gion are quite similar. The typical head of household was born in the Northeast of Brazil, is middle aged, and supports a fam- ily of four. The main economic activity is farming, with an emphasis on rice, corn, manioc, and beans for consumption, and cattle and perennials for market. In general, farmers across the sample, regardless of whether they live in SMO- led or spontaneous DALR PAs, use the same agricultural technology and land management practices. Nevertheless, there were important differences. As we hypothesized, many settlers in SMO-led DALR sites came from urban areas and targeted private land for occupation, compared to settlers in spontaneous DALR PAs who more often came from rural areas and targeted forested land, each having potential im- pacts on land conflict and the environment.
When it comes to development, measured in terms of improvement in wealth, and access to title, credit, and agricul- tural extension, we expected residents in SMO-led DALR set- tlements to have better outcomes given greater access to political and social capital, and the subsequent power wielded by SMOs necessary to pressure the government for support. For the most part, this hypothesis was upheld by our research, particularly in terms of wealth improvements and access to credit. We found no statistically significant difference between participants in the two types of DALR PAs in terms of access to agricultural extension, although an assessment of the source of extension revealed that SMO-led DALR participants re- ceived the vast majority of assistance from the government, specifically INCRA. To the contrary, spontaneous DALR participants received negligible assistance from INCRA or any other government agencies for that matter, and this was the biggest complaint expressed by spontaneous settlers.
In a similar vein, we expected that SMO-led participants would have greater access to technological inputs and educa- tion on ecologically sound agricultural practices. As a result, we expected that their farming systems would be more produc- tive and perhaps more sustainable than farmers in spontane- ous settlement sites, leading to less fertility decline and accidental fire damage. However, the results from the analyses were not so clear. We did find that participants in SMO-led DALR sites did have greater access to inputs (i.e., fertilizer,
pesticide, and herbicide), although across the sample the num- ber of farmers using such inputs was less than 5%. Likewise, only a small fraction of farmers practiced the agricultural tech- nologies identified. Of greatest importance was crop rotation, which was used by twice as many farmers in SMO-led DALR PAs than those living in spontaneous sites, nearly 20% of the sample. Two other practices, green manure (12%) and mulch cover (10%), were used by farmers equally across the sample. When it comes to sustainability, there was no statistical differ- ence in the number of respondents reporting fertility decline, which revealed that across the sample more than a third expe- rienced such degradation. Furthermore, contrary to expected outcomes, we found that settlers in SMO-led DALR PAs experienced greater accidental fire than those living in sponta- neous DALR sites.
These apparent contradictory outcomes may reflect the inability of individuals living in SMO-led DALR PAs to main- tain the political and social capital in the long term. Specifi- cally, SMOs are successful at short-term organization and mobilization of people and resources prior to settlement for- malization, when the precipitate factor to the struggle is still unsatisfied, and consequently, the settlers receive the immedi- ate benefits for development. At the same time, it may also re- flect their inability to maintain cohesion within settlements for the long term necessary for sustainability. This may explain widespread accounts of accidental fire in SMO-led sites, which led to damage of crops, equipment, and housing (Simmons, Walker, Wood, Arima, & Cochrane, 2004). Concern regarding the lack of social capital and organizational capacity was like- wise expressed by respondents and key informants in the spon- taneous sites, who explicitly stated that the associations created in accordance with INCRA regulations at the begin- ning of the formalization stage were basically non-existent to- day despite continued and pressing need.
Also important for consideration is the impact of DALR on land conflict. Specifically, SMO-led DALR targets private land for occupation, and the expectation is that this is likely to lead to contentious encounters between the landless and landowners. Despite the fact that our research showed no sta- tistical significance in the prevalence of land conflict at time of occupation between SMO and spontaneous DALR, news ac- counts on an almost daily basis lend evidence to the fact that it is occurring. As noted earlier, more than 1,500 landless workers have been killed in the struggle, and in the recent years there has been an increase in violence (CPT, 2008). The prime objective of the larger landless movement is the eradication of latifundios, and the occupation of private hold- ings is the tactic of choice, which generates contention and vio- lence whether as an externality of action or as part and parcel of the overall strategy. 13
In terms of potential environmental impacts, our research shows that settlers in SMO-led and spontaneous DALR settle- ments target forest due to the protection it provides by the cloak of the canopy and the initial capital garnered from sale of valuable hardwoods. While spontaneous DALR is likely to have a greater impact on primary forest at the edge of the agricultural frontier, SMO-led DALR may result in a second wave of deforestation on the once hollow frontier (Simmons et al., 2007b). Given the high rate of turnover in these settle- ments, it is likely that some residents abandon their land and return to nearby frontier towns in search of employment. There, these newly landless migrants may once again be re- cruited by the landless movement and return to the rural areas, initiating a new cycle of deforestation. Indeed, Brazil now rec- ognizes DALR settlement formation as a significant deforesta- tion driver. That said, we wish to re-emphasize the greater
442	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
impact that other actors, particularly large-scale ranchers, have on the Amazonian environment. Although we recognize the potential impacts of DALR on forest cover, our main focus is on development outcomes, and we leave a full treatment of DALR and the environment to future research.
DALR exists in contemporary Brazil because individuals are willing to build their own futures. Further, the organiza- tional capacity of SMOs pursuing DALR represents hard won social capital that appears to be improving the lives of its participants. The policy implication is that the Brazilian Government has freely at its disposal substantial human and institutional resources, which it should use in shaping an ap- proach to agrarian reform that increases farm viability as it mitigates environmental impact and social conflict. Coopera- tive engagement with the social movements is likely to im- prove livelihoods in the agricultural sector, thereby helping to resolve persistent problems of rural poverty that have pla- gued Brazil, even in this period of unprecedented growth and development. The Brazilian government, by providing minimal assistance in the selection of areas for settlement for-
mation, and certain basic agricultural inputs, could create a viable family farming sector at low environmental cost.
DALR in Brazil today is a social movement that has taken Brazil by surprise, given that country’s robust recovery from mismanagement by the military government, and the adjust- ments all have had to make to an increasingly globalized world economy. To be sure, President Lula da Silva’s social welfare programs have wider sweep than those of his predecessor, President Cardoso, but many SMOs view Lula da Silva with suspicion, and they clearly represent a shadow government at local level in the PAs they have fought to establish. Millions of Brazilians interpret the world and their place in it through the optic of the DALR struggles they have endured, and the leaders who have inspired their efforts. Thus, SMO-led DALR, and DALR in general, must be recognized as a pre- eminent post-development phenomenon, a social welfare quest with its own philosophy, culture, and agenda, and with mini- mal governmental input. Because the Brazilian state never managed to create a life of dignity for the rural poor, it must now follow the lead of those who are doing it for themselves.
1.	Land Statute 601 of September 18, 1850, can be found on the INCRA website http://www.incra.gov.br/_htm/serveinf/_htm/legislacao/lei/ 601.htm.
2. Of course, from the landowner’s perspective this same action constitutes an invasion of private property, which is also constitutionally protected. Herein lies the essence of the legal battle.
3.	Terra Devoluta is unclaimed public land, not yet dedicated to specific uses.
4. He ́bette2002,analyzedwhatisreferredtoas‘‘parentesco”offthe Transamazon highway in Para ́.
5. The difficulties of field data collection complicated formal efforts at geospatial sample design (Griffith, 2005). Moreover, random sampling by distance (every nth kilometer) and household count (every nth farmstead) proved impractical given proprietor absence and difficulty in house identification from the road. In addition, the remoteness of household locations made time a serious constraint on data acquisition. For reasons such as these, the analysis sample was collected opportunistically; in essence we conducted interviews with people we could find, building geographic representation by daily updates of the survey geography using regional maps. Evidently, the sample possesses both systematic and random spatial components, given the desire for representation on the many settlement roads, and the randomness of opportunity once sampling occurred on them. Such a sample possesses desirable statistical properties (Griffith, 2005).
6. The poorest households (category 1) possess none of the durable goods considered. Category 2 households possess either a stove or a chainsaw, and nothing else, and category 3 households possess a stove or a chainsaw, plus either (i) some good depending on electricity generation or (ii) a motorcycle. The wealthiest households (category 4) have what
category 3 households own, but also possess either a car or a tractor. In essence, our categorization here elaborates the two categories used in Walker et al. (2002).
7. Analyses show a statistically significant difference with greater lot turnover in SMO DALR. So, it follows that many of the current residents were not involved in the initial land occupation and were not exposed to related conflict, as is reflected in the data.
Almeida,B.A.W.(1994).Carajas:Aguerradosmapas[Carajas:Awarof the	maps].	Bele ́ m:	Falangola.
Alves, D. (2002). Space–time dynamics of the deforestation in Brazilian Amazoˆ nia. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 23(14), 2903–2908.
Arima, E., Barreto, P., & Brito, M., 2005. Pecua ́ria na Amazoˆnia: Tendeˆ ncias	e	implicaßco ̃ es	para	a	conservaßca ̃ o	[Ranching	in	the Amazonia: Tendencies and implications for conservation]. Bele ́m: Imazon.
NOTES
REFERENCES
KI Interview, Eldorado de Caraja ́s, July 2006.
8.
9. urban-rural migration trends in SMO-DALR, this does not demonstrate a change in the predominant rural to urban trend at the regional scale (Perz et al., unpublished manuscript). The substantive impact of this migration cycle is the subject for future research.
10. The number of PAs created throughout Brazil after 1996 almost doubled, from 992 at end of 1995 to 2,506 after. In Para ́ State the number of PAs tripled.
11. The decision to accept the government’s proposition without the expropriation of the fazenda was a serious point of contention within the landless movement in Rondoˆnia that eventually led to a split with the MST and the creation of Movimento dos Camponeˆs de Corumbiara (MCC), a radical endogenous SMO.
12. ThedetailsonPATutu ́ıNortederivefromkeyinformantinterviews in 2007. Names changed to protect identity of respondents.
13.	Some have suggested that DALR SMOs plan their action to generate the greatest attention, and target land for political reasons.
Although the data reveal a statistically significant difference in rural-
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral
da da da da da da da da da da
Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra
(CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT).
(1992). (1995). (1996). (2002). (2003). (2004). (2005). (2006). (2007). (2008).
Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos
no no no no no no no no no no
campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo.
Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m:
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	443
Bernstein, H. (2002). Land reform: Taking a long(er) view. Journal of Agrarian Change, 2(4), 433–463.
Borras, S. M. (2003). Questioning market-led agrarian reform: Experi- ences from Brazil, Colombia, and South Africa. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3(3), 367–394.
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Browder, J. O., & Godfrey, B. J. (1997). Rainforest cities: Urbanization, development and globalization of the Brazilian Amazon. New York: Columbia University Press.
Browder, J. O. (1988). Public policy and deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. In R. Repetto (Ed.), Public policies and the misuse of forest resources (pp. 247–297). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, for World Resources Institute.
Caldas, M., Walker, R., Perz, S., Arima, E., Aldrich, S., & Simmons, C. (2007). Theorizing land cover and land use change: The peasant economy of colonization in the Amazon Basin. Annals of the Association of American Geographer, 97(1), 86–110.
Caldas, M. M., 2008. Settlement formation and land cover and land use change: A case study in the Brazilian Amazon. PhD dissertation, Michigan State University.
He ́ bette,	J.	(2004).	Movimentos	Sociais	Contemporaˆ neos	no	campo Paraense. Cruzando a Fronteira: 30 anos de estudo do campesinato na Amazoˆnia (Vol. 2, pp. 197–211). Bele ́m: Editora Universitaria UFPA.
Ianni,	O.	(1979).	Colonizaca ̃ o	e	Contra-reforma	na	Amazoˆ nia.	Petro ́ polis: Vozes.
INCRA. (2000). Principais aßco ̃es do Instituto Nacional de Colonizaßcao e reforma agraria.
Junming, Z. (1997). Multilevel analysis of rural outmigration in Guan- dong, China. Working paper series no. 97.03. Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies, Harvard University, Cam- bridge, MA.
Mahar, D. J. (1979). Frontier development policy in Brazil: A study of Amazoˆnia. New York: Praeger.
Martins, J. S. (1989). Caminhando no Cha ̃o da noite. Sa ̃o Paulo: Hucitec. MDA/INCRA.	(2007).	Diretoria	de	obtenßca ̃ o	de	terras	e	implantaßca ̃ o	de projetos de assentamento. Projetos de reforma a ́gra ́ria conforme fases
de implementaßca ̃o. Medeiros, L. S. (2002). Movimentos sociais, disputas polı ́ticas e reforma
agra ́ria de mercado no Brasil [Social movements, political disputes and
market agrarian reform in Brazil]. Serope ́dica, RJ: EDUR. Menon, P., Ruel, M. T., & Morris, S. S. (2000). Socioeconomic differentials in child stunting are consistently larger in urban than in rural areas. Food Consumption and Nutrition Division, FCND Discussion Paper No. 97. Washington, DC: International Food Policy
Research Institute. Morris, S. S., Carlleto, C., & Hoddinott, L. J. M. (2000). Validity of rapid
estimates of household wealth and income for health surveys in rural
Africa. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 54, 381–387. Moyo, S., & Yeros, P. (Eds.) (2005). Reclaiming the land: The resurgence of rural movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. New York: Ced
Books. MST National Secretariat. (2007). Linhas pol ́ıticas reafirmadas no V
Congresso Nacional do MST-2007, CARTA DO 5 CONGRESSO NACIONAL	DO	MST.	<http://www.mst.org.br/mst/pag- ina.php?cd=4178> Accessed 12/18/2008.
Perz, S. G., Brilhante, S., Brown, F., Caldas, M., Ikeda, S., & Mendoza, E. (2008). Road building, land use and climate change: prospects for environmental governance in the Amazon. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363, 1889–1895.
Petras, J. (1998). The new revolutionary peasantry: The growth of peasant-led opposition to neoliberalism. Z Magazine, October. <http://www.mstbrazil.org/petras1098.html>.
Riedinger, J. M. (1995). Agrarian reform in the Philippines: Democratic transitions and redistributive reform. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Riedinger, J. M., Yang, W.-Y., & Brook, K. (2001). Market-based land reform: An imperfect solution. In H. Morales, & J. Putzel (Eds.), Power in the Village (pp. 363–378). Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press.
Rosset, P., Patel, R., & Courville, M. (Eds.) (2006). Promised land: Competing visions of agrarian reform. Oakland, CA: Food First Books. Santos, R. (1984). Law and social change: The problem of land in the Brazilian Amazon. In M. Schmink, & C. Wood (Eds.), Frontier expansion in Amazonia (pp. 180–203). Gainesville: University of
Florida Press. Santos,	W.	M.	(2001).	Desapropriaßca ̃ o,	reforma	agra ́ ria,	e	meio	ambiente:
Aspectos substanciais e procedimentos reflexos no direito penal [Dis- appropriation, land reform, and the environment: Substantial aspects and the penal code]. Belo Horizonte: Mandamentos.
Schmink, M., & Wood, C. (1992). Contested frontiers in Amazonia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sigaud,	L.	(2005).	As	condißco ̃ es	de	possibilidade	das	ocupaßco ̃ es	de	terra. Tempo Social, revista de sociologia da USP (Vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 255– 280).
Sigaud, L., Rosa, M., & Macedo, M. (2008). Ocupaßco ̃es de Terra, Acampamentos e Demandasao Estado: Uma Ana ́lise em Perspectiva Comparada. DADOS—Revista de Cieˆncias Sociais, Rio de Janeiro, 51(1), 107–142.
Simmons, C. S. (2004). The political economy of land conflict in Eastern Amazonia. Annals of the Association of American Geographers.
Simmons, C. S. (2005). Territorializing land conflict: Space, place, and contentious politics in the Brazilian Amazon. Geojournal, 64, 307–317. Simmons, C. S., Walker, R. T., & Wood, C. (2002a). Small producers and reforestation in Brazil and Panama: Implications for forest recovery.
Agroforestry Systems, 56, 89–105.
Deininger, K. (1999). Making negotiated land reform work: Initial experience from Colombia, Brazil and South Africa. World Develop- ment, 27(4), 651–672.
Deininger, K., & Binswanger, H. (1999). The evolution of the world bank’s land policy: Principles, experience, and future challenges. World Bank Research Observer, 14(2), 247–276.
De Janvry, A. (1981). The agrarian question and reformism in Latin America. Baltimore: John Hopkins University.
De Janvry, A., & Sadoulet, E. (1989). A study in resistance to institutional change: The lost game of Latin American Land reform. World Development, 13(4), 513–534.
De Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., & Wolford, W. (2001). The changing role of the state in Latin American Land reforms. In A. De Janvry, G. Gustavo de Anda, E. Sadoulet, & P. Jean-Philippe (Eds.), Access to land rural poverty and public action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Esteva, G. (1992). Development. In W. Sachs (Ed.), The development dictionary: A guide to knowledge as power. London: Zed Books.
Fanelli, L. (2001). Movimento Sem Terra and Migrations. Paper presented at the meeting of the Latin American, Studies Association, Washing- ton, DC, September 6–8, 2001.
Fearnside, P. M. (2001). Land-tenure issues as factors in environmental destruction in Brazilian Amazonia: The case of Southern Para ́. World Development, 29(8), 1361–1372.
Fernandes, B. M. (2000). A formaßca ̃o do MST no Brasil [The MST formation in Brazil]. Petro ́polis: Vozes.
Foweraker, J. (1981). The struggle for land: A political economy of the pioneer frontier in Brazil, 1930 to present. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Griffith, D. A. (2005). Effective geographic sample size in the presence of spatial autocorrelation. Annals of the Association of American Geog- raphers, 95, 740–760.
Hall, A. L. (1989). Developing Amazoˆnia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in Brazil’s Caraja ́s Programme. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
444	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Simmons, C. S., Perz, S., Pedlowski, M. A., & Silva, L. G. T. (2002b). The changing dynamics of land conflict in the Brazilian Amazon: The rural–urban complex and its environmental implications. Urban Ecosystems, 6(1/2), 99–122.
Simmons, C., Walker, R. T., Wood, C., Arima, E., & Cochrane, M. (2004). Wildfires in Amazonia: A pilot study examining the role of farming systems, social capital, and fire contagion. Journal of Latin American Geographers, 3(1), 81–96.
Simmons, C. S., Walker, R. T., Arima, E. Y., Aldrich, S. P., & Caldas, M. M. (2007a). The Amazon Land War in the South of Para ́. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 97(3), 567–592.
Simmons, C., Caldas, M., Aldrich, S., Walker, R., & Perz, S. (2007b). Spatial process in scalar context: Development and security in the Brazilian Amazon. Journal of Latin American Geographers, 6(1), 125–148.
Stedile, J. P. (1997). A reforma agra ́ria e a luta do MST. Petropolis, RJ. Vozes.
Toni, F. (1999). State-society relations on the agricultural frontier: The struggle for credit in the Transamazoˆnia region. PhD disser- tation, Department of Political Science, University of Florida, Gainesville.
Treccani,	G.	D.	(2001).	Violeˆ ncia	e	grilagem:	Instrumentos	de	aquisißca ̃ o	da propriedade da terra no Para ́. Bele ́m: Universidade Federal do Para ́.
Veiga, J. E. (1990). A reforma que virou suco: uma introdußca ̃o o ao dilema agrario no Brasil. Petopolis: Vozes.
Velho, O. (1972). Frentes de expansa ̃o e estructura agra ́ria. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar.
Walker, R. (2003). Mapping process to pattern in the landscape change of the Amazonian frontier. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 93(2), 376–398.
Walker, R. T., Perz, S., Caldas, M., & Silva, L. G. T. (2002). Land use and land cover change in forest frontier: The role of household life cycles. International Regional Science Review, 25(2), 169–199.
Walker, R. T., Moore, N., Arima, E., Perz, S., Simmons, C. S., Caldas, M., et al. (2009). Protecting the Amazon with protected areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(26), Available from www.pnas.org_cgi_doi_10.1073_pnas.0806059106.
Weil, C. (1989). Differential economic success among spontaneous agricultural colonists in the Chapare, Bolivia: The conversion of rain forest to pastures in Panama. In D. A. Schumann, & W. L. Partridge (Eds.), The human ecology of tropical land settlement in Latin America (pp. 264–297). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Welch, C. (2006). Movement histories: A preliminary historiography of the Brazil’s Landless Laborers’ Movement (MST). Latin American Research Review, 41(1), 198–211.
Wolford, W. (2003a). Families, fields, and fighting for land: The spatial dynamics of contention in rural Brazil. Mobilization: An International Journal, 8(2), 201–215.
Wolford, W. (2003b). Producing community: The MST and land reform settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3(4), 500–525.
Wolford, W. (2004). This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 94(2), 409–424.
Wood, C. (1983). Peasant and capitalist production in the Brazilian Amazon: A conceptual framework for the study of frontier expansion. In E. Moran (Ed.), The dilemma of Amazonian development (pp. 259–277). Boulder: Westview Press.
Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First! Publications.
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

2004
Sociology
Annals of the Association of American Geographers
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil
Wendy Wolford

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
In recent years, scholars of ‘‘contentious politics’’ have paid increasing attention to the dynamics of space and place in the construction of organized resistance. To date, however, the literature has tended to focus on the social construction of space rather than the equally important spatial constitution of the social. In this paper, I analyze how particular understandings of space, or what I call ‘‘spatial imaginaries’’—cognitive frameworks, both collective and individual, constituted through the lived experiences, perceptions, and conceptions of space itself—influenced the formation of the largest grassroots social movement in Brazilian history, the Movement of Rural Landless Workers (the MST). I analyze the decision to join the MST among small family farmers in southern Brazil and rural plantation workers in northeastern Brazil. People from both groups decided to join the movement, but the farmers from southern Brazil used their spatial imaginaries to embrace the act of occupying land and to create new frontiers for colonization while the rural workers from northeastern Brazil overcame the spatial imaginaries produced through the plantation labor system and joined the movement because they had few other options available to them. Because such imaginaries stay with people long after they engage in the initial acts of mobilization, incorporating this sort of analysis introduces an important dynamic component into the analysis of movement formation. Key Words: social movements, agrarian political economy, Brazil.
On April 17, 1997, more than 50,000 people marched through the streets of Bras ́ılia in a historic demonstration of support for what had become the largest grassroots social movement in Bra- zilian history—O Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the Movement of Rural Landless Workers, or the MST). Created officially in 1984, in the wake of a repressive military dictatorship, MST members aggres- sively occupied ‘‘unproductive’’ land as a way of pres- suring the newly elected government for rights to the property. Over the next 19 years, the Brazilian govern- ment responded to the MST’s actions with an erratic combination of violence and diplomacy that generated a frightening list of rural victims (CPT 2000), but also led to the redistribution of over 1,000 rural properties. To- day, the MST represents approximately 1 million people on land reform settlements and in temporary squatter camps throughout Brazil.
As one of the most visible examples of the ‘‘New Left’’ in Latin America (Petras 1997), the movement’s rise has inspired an extensive literature.1 In their discussion of the movement’s origins, academics and movement lea- ders have consistently stressed the importance of agri- cultural restructuring, political opportunity, and religious mobilization. The MST’s formation is so uniformly at- tributed to these three factors that they now constitute what I call the Official Genesis Story: the MST was formed because agricultural restructuring in the coun-
tryside created a ‘‘landless class’’ at the same time as the return to democracy provided the opportunity for large- scale mobilization, and progressive religious activists served as natural incubators, or ‘‘institutional hosts’’ (cf. Houtzager 1997) for the fledgling movement. This ‘‘story’’ roughly parallels three important schools of work on social movements: grievance theories, political op- portunity theories, and resource mobilization theories.
The official story was compelling enough on paper that when I began field research in 1998, I did not intend to study the formation of the movement. I did not want to revisit processes and events that had already been well documented in the literature. As I talked with MST members over the course of the year, however, I realized that while the story explained what factors facilitated the formation of the movement, it did not actually do a good job of predicting who would join the MST or why. There were many poor people in rural Brazil who were affected by agricultural modernization, political opening, and religious organization, and most of them did not join the movement. So what distinguished those who did join from those who did not? Were the former simply more affected by the contextual factors, or did they perceive the contextual factors in a different way?
In this paper, I suggest that we will only have a complete picture of movement formation if we go be- yond the sort of structural factors outlined in the Official Genesis Story to show how mobilization is shaped by—
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 94(2), 2004, pp. 409–424 r 2004 by Association of American Geographers Initial submission, November 2001; revised submission, October 2002; final acceptance, May 2003 Published by Blackwell Publishing, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, and 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, U.K.
410	Wolford
and shapes—the way people internalize and engage with their specific material and symbolic spatial environments (Escobar 2001; Massey 1994; Miller 2000; Pile and Keith 1997; Sewell 2001). In recent years, scholars of ‘‘con- tentious politics’’ (McAdam, Tarrow, and Tilly 2001) have paid increasing attention to the dynamics of space and place in the construction of resistance. Using the Oxford English Dictionary’s definition of space as ab- stract and concrete, historian William Sewell Jr. (2001, 56) argues that scholars of resistance should take space seriously because, ultimately, ‘‘all social life is located.’’ People, or ‘‘spatial agents,’’ manipulate the material and symbolic character of location in expressing discontent, and at the same time, their actions ‘‘can restructure the meanings, uses, and strategic valence of space’’ (Sewell 2001, 55).
This conceptualization of space as the physical en- vironment that structures (facilitates and constrains), and is restructured by, resistance dominates the aca- demic studies of mobilization. Influenced by the spatial turn in critical social theory, excellent work has been done both within geography and without on safe spaces (Gamson 1989; Whittier 1995), segregated spaces such as urban ghettos (Feagin and Hahn 1973), tactical manipulations of space (Auyero 2003; Marston 2002; Routledge 1997), symbolic reappropriations of place (Escobar 2001; Moore 1997), spatial patterns of state control (Routledge 1997; Sewell 2001; Tilly 2000), the ‘‘power of distance’’ (Davis 1999), and ‘‘jumping’’ (or manipulating) scales (Adams 1996; Herod 1997; Miller 2000; Smith 1993). Clearly, these are all important aspects of the geography of resistance. Claims to, and control over, the physical environment are reactions to the apparently footloose nature of contemporary capi- talist development. But place and space constitute more than the physical world in which we live, and, as Doreen Massey (1994) has argued more generally, we need to go beyond the ‘‘social construction of space’’ to better incorporate the spatial construction of the social. A geography of resistance needs to examine the ways in which the physical environment is internalized, embo- died, imagined, and remembered. In Foucault’s (1979) conceptualization of modern society, the importance of Bentham’s panopticon was not simply that physical space was reordered in ways that allowed for isolation and ef- fective supervision; rather, the panopticon was powerful because the threat of supervision was internalized by those within. The spaces of incarceration shaped the prisoners’ consciousness and, in so doing, shaped their perception of, and relationship to, the outside world.
In relation to the struggle for land in Brazil, the spatial construction of social relations shaped people’s decision
to join the MST. The formation of resistance was em- bedded in particular understandings of space, or what I call ‘‘spatial imaginaries’’—cognitive frameworks, both collective and individual, constituted through the lived experiences, perceptions, and conceptions of space itself (Lefebvre 1991). Analyzing these spatial imaginaries will help to explain more precisely how people in rural Brazil experienced agricultural modernization, political open- ing, and religious mobilization in ways that made them choose to leave everything behind and join a radical landless movement.
In order to illustrate the importance of spatial ima- ginaries, I compare settlers who were originally small family farmers in the southern state of Santa Catarina to settlers who were originally rural plantation workers in the northeastern state of Pernambuco. These two groups possessed very different spatial imaginaries that shaped their perception of the MST and their decision to join the movement. Ultimately, people from both groups joined the movement even though the small farmers’ spatial imaginaries were much more compatible with the movement’s methods and ideology than the rural workers’. In the southern case study, small farmers, whom Eric Wolf (1969) would have called ‘‘middle farmers,’’ used their experiences of production and re- production on the land to question the large land- holders’ claim to property. They joined the movement because they had the social, cultural, and material re- sources to fund their struggle, and they believed that doing so was worthwhile. In the northeastern case study, the poorest and most mobile rural workers, whom Jeffery Paige (1975) might have called ‘‘migrant workers,’’ were the first to join the MST—not because they had the resources or because they necessarily believed in the movement’s methods or ideology, but because the local sugarcane economy had collapsed, and they felt the movement was their best alternative.
Going beyond the Official Genesis Story to explain how different spatial imaginaries played out in unique ways to shape an individual’s decision to join the MST builds on work that analyzes the importance of dynamic mechanisms of contention. Recent work by three ve- teran scholars of social movements, Douglas McAdam, Sydney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly (2001, 24–32), em- phasizes the need to push new studies away from general models that prioritize structure towards case studies that prioritize ‘‘causal mechanisms, causal processes and contentious episodes.’’ Mechanisms are the smallest unit of the three and can be broken down into environmental mechanisms (context), cognitive mechanisms (percep- tion), and relational mechanisms (interaction among actors and actors and context). Analyzing the different
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	411
reasons for joining the MST makes it clear that spa- tial imaginaries are important cognitive mechanisms of contention.
Because such imaginaries stay with people long after they engage in initial acts of mobilization, incorporating this sort of analysis introduces an important dynamic component into the analysis of movement mobilization. The character of a movement as it grows through time and space will be shaped by the ideas that individuals bring with them when they join the movement (cf. Zamosc 1986). Analyzing the spatial imaginaries in the MST helps to explain postmobilization experiences that might not otherwise make sense.
In what follows, I outline the context of the MST’s formation and describe the methods and ideologies employed by the movement. Then I analyze the offi- cial story—in theory and in history—and elaborate on a perspective of the MST’s formation that takes into account the importance of diverse spatial imaginaries.2
Historical Background: A Movement in the Making
Brazil is one of the most developed, industrialized, and urban economies in Latin America. And yet it is in Brazil that rural unrest is making headlines. The reasons for this seeming contradiction have everything to do with the legacies of inequitable land tenure. From the year 1500 (when Brazil was ‘‘discovered’’ by the Portu- guese) until the present, power and prestige in Brazil have derived in large part from access to land.3 The agrarian elite controlled national politics to such an extent that the presidents between 1898 and 1930 were referredtoas‘‘caf ́ecomleite,’’or‘‘coffeewithmilk,’’ because most of them came from either the coffee plantations in S ̃ao Paulo or the dairy ranches in Minas Gerais (see Fausto 1999, 148–60; also Bethell 1987).
Because of the enormous inequalities in access to land, the agrarian elite was able to manipulate the al- location of labor in such a way as to maintain both status and production. The various labor allocation strategies employed by the elite—slavery, subsidized immigration, and family labor—created high levels of poverty and uneven access to social infrastructure (schools, health services, etc.) throughout the countryside (cf. Martins 1981; Sigaud 1979; Stolcke 1988). Poverty and ongoing social inequality generated frequent resistance, which coalesced in the mid-1900s as the Communist Party, the Catholic Church, and trade unions all expanded their mobilization efforts into the countryside (Forman 1975).
As membership in the Communist Party began to grow and progressive Catholic priests urged their con- stituents actively to pursue a better life, Brazil seemed to be poised at the edge of radical changes (Stepan 1973). But these changes did not sit well with certain sectors of the Brazilian elite, and in 1964 the armed forces stepped in to establish authoritarian law and order (Skidmore 1988). Democratic, civilian elections would not be held again until 1985.
The 21 years of military rule were turbulent ones. Between 1967 and 1973, Brazil experienced such rapid economic growth that the period was dubbed the ‘‘economic miracle’’ (Burns 1993). GDP increased at an astonishing annual rate of 11.2 percent during this per- iod (Fausto 1999, 291) and inflation fell from 58.2 percent per annum in 1965 to a low of 16.4 percent per annum in 1970 (Skidmore 1999, 178). The government focused on domestic manufacture in an attempt to make the transition from an underdeveloped agricultural economy to a developed industrial one. The largest landowners were provided with generous incentives and resources for modernization in the hopes that production increases in agriculture would generate foreign currency and lower the cost of living for urban workers (Delgado 1985; Mu ̈ller 1985).
Despite the initial advances in production, this rapid period of what came to be called ‘‘conservative moder- nization’’—or, alternatively, ‘‘painful modernization’’ (Graziano da Silva 1982)—had devastating social ef- fects. Changing labor requirements due to mechaniza- tion spawned a massive exodus from the rural areas into the cities. Between 1960 and 1980, the population of Brazil’s largest city, S ̃ao Paulo, rose from 4.7 million to 12.6 million.4 With such an influx of labor, real urban wages fell by two-thirds from 1960 to 1976 (IBGE 1990). The concentration of land ownership grew, and in 1985, just over 10 percent of the landowners in the country controlled almost 80 percent of the land. Growing levels of inequality meant that a large part of the country’s population was left out of the economic miracle alto- gether.5 Religious mobilization increased in the coun- tryside as the Catholic Church worked to convince the rural poor that access to land was a ‘‘gift of God’’ rather than a right of birth.
By the late 1970s, the military’s ambitious industrial development plan had run its course and the econom- ic miracle was over. When international interest rates doubled overnight in 1979, Brazil’s massive public debt became a crippling burden on an already unstable eco- nomy (Burns 1993).6 Beginning in 1978–1979, the mili- tary slowly withdrew from government, and in 1985, the first civilian president in 21 years was elected.7 This
412	Wolford
was the year that the Movement of Rural Landless Workers (MST) held its first National Congress.
As early as 1978, several hundred families in the southernmost states of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina had organized land occupations (see Fernandes 1999). These occupations met with immediate state censure, but they were ultimately successful and provided the impetus for the formation of an official movement. In 1985, MST members established a short-term goal of securing ‘‘land for those who work it’’ and a long-term goal of creating a just, socialist society. Many of the first MST leaders came directly out of the church as the local Ecclesiastical Base Communities (CEBs) provided im- portant resources for the spread—and legitimation—of militant ideology (Stedile 1997; Schwade 1992).
The movement’s aggressive tactics of occupying land exploited contradictions at the heart of the Brazilian state. On paper, the Brazilian Constitution was extremely progressive. Article 186 of the most recent (1988) con- stitution states that if land is not fulfilling its ‘‘social responsibility to be productive’’ then the federal govern- ment is empowered to expropriate the area from the owner. But in practice, the law is rarely upheld without aggressive actions undertaken by groups of squatters. The Brazilian state acknowledges and reinforces the contra- dictions between formal law and practice by sometimes legalizing the occupations and sometimes criminalizing them and depicting the squatters as illegal invaders.
MST activists worked in poor rural and urban com- munities, spreading news of the movement and inform- ing people of their right to land (Petras 1997). Church leaders and union workers often helped the activists by using their connections within local communities to spread word of the movement. When a group of inter- ested people were organized, the immediate goal was to occupy land, setting up temporary barracos (barracks) made out of heavy black plastic and wood. The squatters often had to reoccupy a given area several times as the government and/or private landlord usually responded with violence before negotiations (Fernandes 1999).
These methods have been extremely effective. In the past nineteen years, the MST has carried out approxi- mately 230,000 occupations, secured over 1,000 settle- ments and expanded its base from 3 states to 22 (of 26). For the first time in Brazilian history, a social movement has organized a coherent membership base in each of the country’s highly differentiated geographic regions.
The Official Genesis Story
As the MST has grown and taken its struggle past the farm gate into the cities, the question of the movement’s
formation has generated a considerable literature. Most answers to the question ‘‘Why did the movement form when and where it did?’’ have identified three major factors—agricultural modernization, democratic transi- tion, and religious mobilization. As Zander Navarro, one of the most influential and widely read scholars of the agrarian question in Brazil, has written:
The social struggles of Brazil’s landless agricultural workers and small producers over the past two decades . . . [were] stimulated by a number of factors, three of which stand out. First, the political liberalization that characterized the final years of the dictatorship and the gradual development of the conditions leading to the Brazilian political transition opened space for active social protest. Second, progressive sectors of the Catholic Church not only lent an ethical- religious endorsement to the mobilization of rural workers under the canons of Liberation Theology, but also offered broad operational and logistical support to the incipient social movements. And third, the intense capitalist mod- ernization of the rural areas of central and southern Brazil wrought profound social and economic changes that fueled rising social protest.
—(Navarro 2000, 36–37)
Jo ̃ao Pedro Stedile, one of the MST’s founding mem- bers and arguably the movement’s intellectual spokes- person,andBernardoMan ̧canoFernandes,aBrazilian geographer who has done some of the most thorough and intensive work on the MST to date, also write about the modernization of agriculture and the progressive actions of the church. They argue that these two factors came together to generate high levels of participation in the movement (cf. Fernandes 1999; Stedile 1997; Stedile and Fernandes 1999). These contextual factors are so regular- ly emphasized in discussions of the MST’s formation that they have created what I refer to as an official genesis story. The theoretical basis of this official story parallels three influential schools of thought on social movements: grievance theories, political opportunity theories, and resource mobilization theories.
Grievance theories generally argue that resistance arises in response to economic conditions perceived as exploitative or oppressive. Although grievance theories have largely been rejected in analyses of ‘‘new social movements’’ for whom the ‘‘freedom to have’’ is replaced by the ‘‘freedom to be’’ (Melucci 1989, 177–78), they continue to be prominent in studies of Third World social movements (Edelman 1996; Eckstein 1989; Velt- meyer 1997). Scholars working on the MST have argued that the expansion of agroindustrial capitals into the countryside forced subsistence producers off of their land and into the movement (Oliveira 1994). Political
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil
413
opportunity theories argue that movements are very sensitive to the balance between repression and inclu- sion because they are, by definition, both marginal to the institutional political process and engaged in a struggle over the nature of political expression and control (Jenkins and Perrow 1977; McAdam 1982; Skocpol 1979; Tarrow 1998). Analyses of the MST’s formation have argued that the transition to democracy in Brazil provided a crucial opportunity for the movement’s de- velopment. Resource mobilization theorists argue that the formation of social movements is facilitated and constrained by the institutional, financial, and cul- tural resources of their members (McCarthy and Zald 1973). In Brazil, the institutional strength of established Catholic and Lutheran churches has been considered a crucial resource for mobilization among the rural poor throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Peter Houtzager (1997) argues that the Catholic Church operated as an ‘‘institutional host’’ for incipient rural mobilization ef- forts during the 1970s and 1980s (see also Mainwaring 1986; Houtzager and Kurtz 2000).
The official genesis story as stated by Zander Navarro in the beginning of this section, with its emphasis on grievances, politics, and resources, highlights important aspects of the context in which the MST was first formed, but it does not fully explain who would actually join the movement.8 As McAdam, Tarrow and Tilly (2001, 43) say, ‘‘No opportunity [or threat], however objectively open, will invite mobilization unless it is a) visible to potential challengers and b) perceived as an opportunity’’ (see also Kurzman 1996). Many different groups of people joined the movement, and the best way to explain why is not simply to research the development of capitalism, or the rise in political opportunity, or the actions of radical priests. The best way to explain who joined the MST is to investigate the relationship between members and the movement’s methods and ideology—a relationship shaped by spatial imaginaries. I have chosen two groups for this paper, a group of small family farmers in southern Brazil and a group of rural workers in northeastern Brazil. People from both groups joined the movement, and their unofficial genesis stories point to the importance of imagination as a lens for turning context into action. In each case, the decision to join the MST was shaped by culturally specific rela- tionships formed between individuals and their spatial environments.
The Geographic Analysis of Resistance
The settlers being compared in this paper live on MST settlements—one in the southern state of Santa
B R A Z IL
Pernambuco
Atlantic Ocean
e
0	400 kilometers
800
Brasília
~ Sao
Paulo
Santa Catarina
Figure 1. Map of field research sites.
Catarina and one in the northeastern state of Pernam- buco (see Figure 1). This comparison rests on the dif- ferent spatial imaginaries formed by small farmers and rural workers in two particular places. I do not claim to be representing ‘‘the South’’ or ‘‘the Northeast’’ in this paper, but a group of family farmers from the South, and a group of rural workers from the Northeast.
Who Joined the MST and Why?
The MST community in Santa Catarina being pre- sented as a case study for the purposes of this paper will be referred to as Vento.9 A land reform settlement with 97 families, Vento is located in the center of the state. Most of the 97 families were previously small farmers who owned or rented land in western Santa Catarina. They came to the settlement in 1989 after living in MST squatter camps for several years. On the settlement, the families were given 18 hectares of land and funds to build a simple house. By 1998, most of the settlers were planting corn and beans, along with a few vegetables, and raising chickens, pigs, and the occasional cow.
These families came from a tradition of farming that was inherently expansive, and migrating along the edge of the spatial frontier was a traditional survival strategy in the face of that expansion. Roberto’s story is a typical one.10 Roberto was the son of Italian immigrants. His parents came from Italy in the early 1900s and settled in a small town in the southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul. Roberto grew up in an Italian community of small farmers, and he remembered speaking his parent’s lan- guage as a child. Roberto had 11 brothers and sisters, and his parents did not have enough land to support all
414	Wolford
of them. When Roberto married Isa, the daughter of neighboring small holders, the two moved northward to find land of their own. They moved to a small com- munity in western Santa Catarina where the land was still covered in forest and belonged to a ‘‘colonizing company’’ called Bertasco. Colonizing companies were common in Santa Catarina during the early 1900s when the state government made territorial colonization a priority. The state put private companies in charge of selling land to the immigrants who arrived regularly from Europe looking for land along the spatial frontiers of southern Brazil (Seyferth 1990).11
Roberto and Isa bought four urban blocks and five rural hectares from Bertasco. Soon after, they sold their urban property and moved into the countryside to build a small wooden house on their five hectares. This was a good time, according to Roberto, a time when the couple had no children and ‘‘didn’t have to worry about any- thing.’’12 Five hectares of land was enough to provide a good living because the soil was better than it had been in Rio Grande do Sul. Roberto was soon able to buy a used car, which he proudly parked beside the house.
But gradually, the couple ran out of land. They took some land out of production to build the house. Then they gave some land to their children and ‘‘it all started to go.’’ The couple did not have enough land for themselves and all of their children ‘‘ . . . and we had such a dream of having land for the kids.’’ Roberto and Isa lived with their two sons and three daughters until 1987 when an MST militant approached them and be- gan talking about agrarian reform. One son was married and the other engaged, and Roberto and Isa saw the MST as a way to solve their problem of finding land for the children. They encouraged their sons to join in an occupation: ‘‘We can’t give you land, but we will help you until you do manage to get land of your own. When you have land, then you are on your own.’’ Their daughters moved into a nearby town and found work in a factory.
As Roberto and Isa’s story suggests, family farming was expansive because of the so-called demographic lifecycle of the farming household (cf. Chayanov 1966). Due to both necessity and tradition, the sons of small family farmers in the region sought land of their own in order to begin a new household (see also Cazella 1992; Metcalf 1992; Paulilo 1996). One tall, thin man with light brown hair and nervous eyes traced his story back over two states and three farms. When he was seven years old, Vilmar and his family packed up all their be- longings, threw them on top of a big truck, and left their small town in Rio Grande do Sul. They moved further north in search of good hunting and fishing. The land
they found belonged to the state of Santa Catarina, and they were able to pay a cheap price for two colonias (48.4 hectares). His parents brought up their two children on that land, but when Vilmar was old enough, he rented his own farm on the outskirts of town, even though he said his parents had sufficient land for him to work. Vilmar wanted his own land to start a new family, but he could only afford to rent a small amount of land. So when he found out about the MST in 1988, he decided to join.
It was common for younger generations to travel far from their parents in search of new land. The families on Vento had migrated an average of two times each before joining the MST.13 They decided to join the movement because the spatial frontier in Santa Catarina (and in southern Brazil more generally) had come to an end and they were at the point in their demographic cycle where some members of the family needed new land.14 Be- tween 1980 and 1991, 70,000 people left rural western Santa Catarina because of the end of the spatial frontier and the decreasing size of small-holdings that were in- evitably situated on the worst land in the region. As one woman said, ‘‘I always say that [joining the MST] was a decision made out of necessity. We had 13 brothers and sisters and so where were you going to put all these kids? For this, we joined the movement.’’
Farmers who had sufficient land to farm often joined the movement as a way to escape the position of sharecropping. Settlers who had rented land said they saw tenancy as a stepping-stone to owning their own land, but as the territorial frontier in Santa Catarina closed, sharecropping became increasingly common (Cazella 1992, 19). In 1995, 28 percent of small far- mers (those with fewer than 10 hectares) were renting the land they worked (IBGE 1996b 21).15 Many of the settlers described paying their landlord as an unfair imposition and said that they joined the MST in search of land of their own. One older man who had three children said that he and his family did very well before they joined the movement. They rented land and got along well with the landowner until they started to do ‘‘too well.’’ The family managed to buy 12 head of cattle and 28 pigs, and the landlord worried that their success would give them legal rights to the land in his absence. So he threw the entire family off of the farm. The family left because they were unsure of their rights and did not want to ‘‘make a stink.’’
The demographic nature of the way these families farmed in western Santa Catarina not only pushed them into the MST, it also pulled them in. Parents often helped their children through occupation periods be- cause they felt it was their responsibility to see them
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	415
successfully set up a new household. Roberto and Isa brought their sons food regularly and even stayed with them in the occupation camp for 40 days. The two sons received land on Vento in 1989. Families were pulled into the movement by the encouragement of sons, daughters, fathers, mothers, uncles, and others who left for the movement and called their relatives to join them. Often, one person winning land through the movement was enough to encourage the entire extended family to join as well. Many settlers on Vento argued that they had joined the MST at the urging of other family members. Some saw their brothers and sisters win land and joined an occupation to ‘‘stick with’’ the family and ‘‘see what would happen.’’ One woman on the settlement, to whom everyone referred affectionately as ‘‘the little old one,’’ had joined the MSTwith her husband in 1984 and by 1998 seven of her nine children had also joined the movement. Each household on the settlement had an average of four adult relatives living on MST settlements somewhere in the state (as compared to fewer than one for settlers on Flora).
The search for new land was also a legacy of the en- vironmental degradation experienced by small family farmers in western Santa Catarina. When the region had originally been colonized in the 1920s, it had boasted excellent natural soil fertility and ample trees for both construction and sale. By 1990, a government-sponsored report ‘‘Sustainable Development in Western Santa Catarina’’ (Testa et al. 1996) judged that 41.5 percent of the former agricultural land was totally inappropriate for cultivation due to soil loss, hillside slope, and prevalence of rocks. Over the years, the land that Roberto and Isa farmed grew worse: ‘‘There were so many rocks, and it seemed like there were more every year.’’ The land the settlers had worked in western Santa Catarina was no longer able to support the extensive method of cultiva- tion practiced by many of the small farmers. Years of planting corn and beans on hillside slopes led to dete- riorating soil conditions and lower yields. When the land in one area became exhausted, families were forced to move on and look for new land (see also Paulilo 1996).
Because of this historical experience with mobility as a productive and reproductive survival strategy, the set- tlers understood and accepted the MST’s seemingly ra- dical methods. The MST’s slogan of ‘‘land for those who work it’’ fit with the small farmer’s spatial imaginaries where migration had created the perception of an endless frontier. ‘‘Squatting’’—or occupying land—was considered a legitimate solution to limited land, de- graded soil, and usufruct impositions conceived of as unfair. The settlers took this experience with the spatial frontier and used it to create a political frontier. They
reframed space that was physically occupied by powerful actors and presented it as morally empty in a conscious political effort to alter the material shape of that space. Symbolically revising the nature of spaces constitutes an important resource for actors who are otherwise mar- ginalized or economically weak (Sewell 2001). This new political frontier generated an intense struggle as ex- clusive and opposing sets of rights were imposed upon the natural landscape.
The settlers were supported in their decision to join the MST by strong rural communities who presented a familiar public forum for discussing ideas that were often considered dangerous. Members within the community were important sources of information as families often met on Sundays in church or for a game of soccer and exchanged news. These social ties helped to spread word of the MST’s mission and encouraged people to join the movement. As one young settler whose entire family had joined the movement said, ‘‘We were organized by the community. The MST activists came to the meetings in the church. There were 18 families in the community, and all of them came to the meeting in the church.’’ One older settler on Vento named Paolo was born the son of small farmers who rented 12 hectares of land in a small farming community in Rio Grande do Sul. Paolo always participated in meetings because he was considered one of the community’s leaders. When MSTactivists came to his town and talked about their new movement, he was selected by the community to lead the local struggle for land. It was common for communities to respond to the MST’s message cautiously, by sending one or two people to find out more about the movement. These ‘‘delegates’’ were expected to report back to the community and were often pivotal mediators in the formation of MST net- works. Paolo decided that he agreed with the move- ment’s message, and an occupation was scheduled in the state of Santa Catarina. Paolo convinced a few other families to leave with him, and they all joined the occupation.
While the historical search for new land was moti- vated, in large part, by productive and reproductive concerns, the settlers shared a desire to continue farming that was embedded in culturally informed notions of an honest life. The settlers expressed a real love for the land; land was a tradition in and of itself and a means for continuation of a life many found extremely valuable. As one young MST settler who was preparing to become an activist ‘‘on the front lines’’ ( frente da massa) of the movement said, having land meant having ‘‘citizenship, and the dignity of being able to produce. Land is life.’’ For many of the settlers, the city meant chaos, insecurity, and violence as opposed to the stability, security, and
416	Wolford
peace of the countryside. An older woman on Vento said,
Living on the land means not having to live in the city, which is full of commotion, and it is difficult to bring up a family. In the country you work the whole day, rest at night, and it’s calm. The country is free of a lot of bad things. It’s easier to survive because you plant everything you need and don’t buy very much on the market.
The settlers on Vento had formed their spatial ima- ginaries on the moving frontier, and they used these imaginaries to justify participation in the MST. Their lived spaces were altered by the increasing penetration of agro-industrial capitals into the countryside, but the way they experienced that change was shaped by their his- torical understanding of the land, family, and commu- nity. In the face of the decreasing availability of land, the small farmers who ended up on Vento created a political frontier, using the moral and material support of family and friends to help them colonize new land.
The situation on the settlement in the sugarcane region of northeast Brazil was in many ways the opposite of the South. The MSTcommunity in Pernambuco being presented as a case study for the purposes of this paper will be referred to as Flora.16 Forty-seven families lived on Flora, 13 of whom received land because they oc- cupied the area with the MST. The other 33 families had been given land because of their previous association with the property, which had been a large-scale sugar- cane plantation before its expropriation in 1997. Federal law mandated that all of the families living or working on the plantation be given the chance to receive land, even though this included a wide range of social classes (e.g., the boss, administrative heads, team leaders, and work- ers). Most of the people living on the plantation that became Flora accepted the offer of land because few alternatives existed in the region. Each family recei- ved approximately nine hectares and funds to build a simple house. Production on the land varied greatly, but by 1999, most of the settlers were planting manioc and corn.
In this region, it was difficult for people to imagine joining the MST because the spatial imaginaries pro- duced through plantation labor clashed with the MST’s methods and ideology. Local traditions of work, family, and community in the sugarcane region of Pernambuco created a perception of the plantation as ‘‘not-frontier,’’ and this perception was not compatible with the idea of occupying ‘‘someone else’s land’’ for distribution. A not- frontier is the opposite of the spatial frontier; it is a space that may be technically or legally ‘‘empty,’’ but is re- presented, perceived, and experienced as not available
for occupation or exchange. It is not always clear who ‘‘owns’’ not-frontiers, but possession is usually backed up by significant political and economic strength.
In the context of limited land availability, the majority of the plantation workers in Pernambuco had little ex- perience with family farming, and there was no wide- spread belief that having land was necessary for beginning a new family. The workers had occasionally been allowed to plant subsistence crops by their houses inside the plantation, but they were always at the whim of the plantation owner. Landlords who did provide their workers with land for planting did so as a dom (gift), and many plantation owners simply refused ever to allow their workers access to land. According to an older man who had worked on several different plantations, the workers were only given land to plant crops if something happened to the sugarcane: ‘‘When there was that drought, all of the sugarcane died, and then there were people planting [food crops] everywhere . . . . If the cane doesn’t die, there isn’t land for people to work on.’’ Another worker said that the mill where he worked ‘‘didn’t want to give anything to the worker because they thought that the worker would take over their lands.’’
Without access to land, the workers were dependent on employment in the plantations. The work was not easy, nor was the pay very good. One settler who had begun cutting cane when he was eight years old said, ‘‘I didn’t like it. The cane cut us a lot, and there were always ants and snakes. And it is very heavy work— weeding cane is work for animals. And you earn very little!’’ Although life in the sugarcane was difficult, the workers learned to prefer receiving a salary to working on their own land. As a local leader in the region said,
When you go to them with an idea about going after land . . . they measure the time [that they would spend in an occupation] against the time that they would spend em- ployed. If they started a job today, in five days they would already have money in his pocket. And so if you go to them and ask if they want land or a job, they are going to say a job.
The rural sugarcane workers on Flora also had very different notions of family and community than their counterparts in the South. The monopolistic production of sugarcane had created a tradition of mobility in search of work that actually weakened family ties across gen- erations. Young men often began work with their fathers at the age of eight or nine. A few years later, one male settler on Flora said, they left in search of their own fortune: ‘‘When we were grown up and came into our own and were going to bring up our own families, we left to go out into the world, and my father stayed there with
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	417
his family.’’ Family labor on the plantations was seg- mented, and men often worked in the fields by them- selves while the women took care of the home. Because of this segmentation, mobility in search of work often meant that the men left their families on one plantation, or in town, while they found work elsewhere. And be- cause plantation owners accepted laborers as they chose, larger extended families rarely moved around together. As a result, families on the settlement tended to be small, and there were very few extended families on the settlements. There was no strong tradition of investment in either land or jobs for the future generations.
Mobility was also the most effective means of ex- pressing discontent with a plantation.17 Working con- tracts were usually informal and open to interpretation, so exit was often the only effective resistance to difficult working conditions perceived as unfair. The option to move to another plantation was important for the workers’ sense of autonomy and freedom. As one man who had worked as a team leader on the plantation before winning land said, ‘‘At that time, there wasn’t anything holding you in one place . . . . I would spend two or three years in one place, and when that started to get bad, I was already leaving for somewhere else.’’
Community ties on the plantation were extremely tenuous because of the workers’ mobility and individual production practices. Each person’s wages were assessed according to the amount of land they cleared or cane they loaded into the trucks, and there were few incentives to cooperating or working together during the harvest. The communities that did develop with- in the plantations were relatively hierarchical because social networks reflected the labor process. The way that sugarcane was produced on the plantation re- quired a few skilled ‘‘empregados’’ (employees) and many unskilled ‘‘trabalhadores’’ (workers). The employees managed the estate and oversaw the work crews. The workers cut the cane, weeded the fields, and loaded the trucks. Labor segmentation was enforced formally, in the sense of occupational difference, and informally through traditional norms attached to rights and privi- leges. But rights and privileges were negotiated con- stantly as the informal nature of labor contracts left the details open to constant reinterpretation. The balance of the negotiations was indicated in the size and kind of residence a worker had on the plantation. Workers who were contracted seasonally, or without their working papers (called clandestinos or illegals), occupied the most insecure, unstable positions within the plantation.
In spite of the many factors discouraging rural workers from joining the MST, the movement began to build its membership in the region when agricultural restructur-
ing in the 1980s generated a massive crisis in the su- garcane industry.18 State subsidies that had propped up the industry for years were withdrawn, and many plan- tations and mills found themselves saddled with huge debts and unable to continue production (Lima and Silva 1995; Buarque 1997). In 1995, 44 percent of the sugarcane refining distilleries in Pernambuco were clas- sified as ‘‘paralyzed or functioning with difficulty’’ (Lins 1996, 2). One settler summed up the situation, saying, ‘‘[Before], we would go out and get a job, but now we can’t. Now, if a guy has a job, he should stay put, because if he leaves it, he is going to starve. We can’t find work. The mill owners don’t even want us to work for them, not even for an hour, or for free.’’
The people most affected by the crisis were those who had not been given housing in the interior of the plan- tations and were living in the cities. Many of these workers were seasonally employed.19 Being forced to live in the town made their position within the planta- tion more unstable, and they often had to do the most menial tasks of the harvest for a fraction of the pay they were promised. They had little recourse, however, if they wished to be contracted again the following year.20 These workers were the ones who occupied the plantation with the MST. Even though many of them were un- comfortable with the act of occupying land and at- tending public demonstrations against the state, they felt that the movement offered a better alternative than they would see on the plantations. One former uncertified worker described a meeting an MST activist held by the side of the road where a number of workers were resting: ‘‘He talked to us to find out if we were wanting to in- volve ourselves with the movement—if we wanted to get a plot [of land], and if we wanted to be part of the movement. I said to him, ‘Buddy, I am for whatever works and for what comes my way.’ At that time I was unemployed—not just me, a lot of people.’’ Another settler who participated in the original occupation said the miserable conditions of working on the plantation pushed him into the MST. When Fernando was eight years old, he began working in the plantations. His father had land, but the family still worked for a mill during the mornings. In the afternoons, they worked in their own garden, growing foodstuffs to take to the market on the weekend. Eventually, Fernando’s father sold his land, and the children were forced to find work where they could: ‘‘I was working for some of the large [mills] aroundhere....OnedayIwenttoamillnearXexeu, and I beat myself up . . . cutting myself everywhere. I broke the hoe, threw it away, and came here on foot. I said that while I had faith in God, I would not work for anyone anymore.’’
418	Wolford
The traditional construction of community shaped the way that people thought about their options in general and the MST in particular. None of the people on Flora had joined an occupation with members of the same original community. Even when two people from the same community joined the MST, they made their decisions independently and did not consciously main- tain social ties after receiving land. The people most like- ly to join the MST were also those who did not have the option of attaching themselves to communities al- ready established in the city or another rural area.
At the same time, another group of people in Per- nambuco who were not as badly affected by the su- garcane crisis joined the MST. These were the people who had been offered land as a right of association rather than as a result of having joined an MST occupation. These settlers were often doing a little bit better than the uncertified workers, but not well enough (in most cases) to leave the plantation. They joined the MST because the movement came to their new settlement and ag- gressively began to organize. The movement’s organizing efforts, together with the promise of money and the desire for a political voice, provided powerful incentives for joining. These people did not have to join the MST after receiving land, but many decided to do so because membership provided them with political leverage that they would not otherwise have.
The settlers who had been living and working on the plantation at the time of the occupation were drawn into the movement almost against their will. When the MST members were settled on a plantation, there were brief conflicts between the two groups of people (the MST members and the original occupants of the plantation). One of the men who originally occupied the plantation said, ‘‘In the beginning, [the residents] didn’t support the movement because they think that we messed up their lives, because when they worked for the boss, they had work, every week they had a little income, and after we got there, they didn’t have this any more.’’ But the residents were drawn into the MST because the move- ment became the most obvious vehicle for organizing the settlement.
The crisis in the sugarcane industry brought with it a reorganization of local power structures. As sugarcane industries went bankrupt and many of the old sugar elites pulled out of the region altogether, the local elites were no longer able to protect or control their workers politically. Once the plantation had been expropriated, the settlers could not approach their former patr ̃ao for assistance. The unions, which had been an important organization for workers in the region during the 1950s and 1960s, were encountering membership diffi-
culties as a result of widespread unemployment on the plantations.
In this new political environment, the MST offered the best representation vis-`a-vis both the local mayor and the state government. According to a settler, ‘‘The movement helps us. They put pressure on the govern- ment to make the projects happen for us; it’s always the strength of the movement.’’ Because of the elitist char- acter of politics in the Northeast, a political voice is synonymous with an economic voice. For a community that often feels as powerless as the plantation workers do, the political visibility that the movement provides is extremely significant. Not everybody is happy about the change, however. Some settlers argued that they joined the movement unwillingly, but felt they had to. One older man who had been a team leader before receiving land on Flora said, ‘‘Whether I want to or not I have to be part [of the movement] because we arrange things within the movement.’’
In spite of the clear clashes between the MST’s peasant-based ideology and the rural workers’ spatial imaginaries, so many people have joined the movement in this area that the MST considers it a focal point of their organization in the Northeast.
What Difference Does It Make? Ongoing Participation in the MST
Analyzing the spatial imaginaries that influenced in- dividuals’ decision to join the MST is useful because it helps to explain very different styles of postmobilization participation. In spite of the MST’s rhetorical coherence at the national level, the regional constitution of people and place has created very different movement actors throughout the country. Focusing on the structural fac- tors that facilitated the movement’s formation hides the fact that some of the movement’s members desperate- ly tried to avoid joining and had very different ideas about participation than people who joined because they agreed with the MST’s basic argument that land was a necessary component of both production and reproduction.
In the southern settlement of Vento, the small farmers who joined the movement did so because they wanted land. This land was central to their plans for the future, and most of them worked it with the idea that it would eventually be passed on to their children. One settler, an energetic man with three children, was constantly engaged in agricultural experiments (he planted small patches with watermelon and strawberries one season to see how they would do on his land) that he hoped
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	419
would pay off so that he could leave an inheritance for his children.
As small farmers who had had difficulty making a living on their land before joining the movement, the settlers on Vento were acutely aware of how hard life could be on the settlement. Most thought that if they worked hard enough, they would have enough to eat, but to prosper on the land, they needed the MST’s help. As one settler said, ‘‘Even though we have a lot of things now, we cannot stop yet because the situation is not easy.’’ The movement was seen as an extremely effective vehicle for pressuring the state to distribute the re- sources it had promised the settlers. These resources included investment credit as well as basic infrastructure on the settlement, including good roads and potable water. As one settler said, ‘‘Today the movement is re- spected because we have won some of the things that we wanted. Our credit is subsidized, for example, and not even the union got that!’’ Access to credit provides a fundamental justification for participation in the move- ment because working the land requires investment capital. As one settler said, ‘‘Without the movement, there would be no money to work on the land and without that, we wouldn’t be able to stay.’’
MST settlers living in Vento participated regularly in movement activities. They were involved in local activities such as regular meetings organized by the movement and even the occasional land occupation. The MST’s experience suggested that strength during occupations lay in numbers, and sometimes people were brought in from established settlements to participate in new occupations. The settlers on Vento also participated in movement activities that took place further away, including demonstrations anywhere from 200 miles to 2,000 miles away. People who did not actively participate often said they had an obligation to be supporting the activities in other ways. An older woman who had been living on Vento since 1993 said, ‘‘I am settled, but they are fighting for us. So today, we put together food for people [mobilizing] in [a nearby town].’’
Regular participation in movement activities gener- ated a self-sustaining ‘‘virtuous circle’’ of participation. The longer the settlers stayed in the movement and the more they participated in organized activities, the more they were exposed to the movement’s political, social, and cultural opinions. As one settler in Vento said, ‘‘The movement educates you much better than the farm. Now we know that our government is against us . . . and we are the ones who are going to lose.’’ An older man on the settlement said, ‘‘Other people my age don’t know so many things about the government, politics.’’ In addition to information about politics, movement activists con-
tinually reminded the settlers of the debt they owed the organization. And most people agreed; one woman put it simply: ‘‘The people who get land through agrarian reform will be guaranteed a better life.’’
In the northeastern settlement of Flora, things were very different because most of the MST settlers in the sugarcane region had joined the movement out of des- peration, rather than out of a deep desire for land, and so they tended to participate much less in movement activities than their counterparts on Vento. Many did not even think of themselves as being integral to the movement; rather, they saw the movement as an assis- tance organization they signed up for much like a trade union or a political party. One man said, ‘‘I think it’s good. They are always doing marches and things, and it’s to help us, isn’t it? They confront INCRA, they pressure the government, they even make the projects happen for us.’’ As members of an association, the settlers ex- pected the MST to provide certain services and were sometimes reluctant to pay their dues if they did not see the material manifestation of those services.
The settlers’ attitudes toward the MST became clear in 2001 when the local sugarcane economy roared back into life (Wolford 2004). In the early and mid-1990s when the settlers joined the movement, the price of sugarcane was low and many distilleries had stopped harvesting or accepting cane altogether. In 1999, when I first visited Flora, the settlers were experimenting with alternative crops such as vegetables and fruits that might earn a higher price in the market. The MST promoted and supported these experiments as much as possible. The local agricultural extension agent, who was con- tracted by the MST, ran the settlement meetings, and he always spent some part of the meeting discussing the reasons why the settlers should move away from the exploitative sugarcane crop and into niche markets that were healthier for the body and for society.
In 1999, the settlers were making an effort to move toward fruits such as bananas, coconuts, and pineapple. But a drought in southern Brazil weakened sugarcane production there, pushing up the price in the North- east, and by 2001, most of the settlers were planting sugarcane again. Many had dropped their alternative projects either because the alternative crops were not doing well or because they thought that sugar would do better. In the case of banana trees, many settlers happily abandoned their plantings because they had never be- lieved bananas would grow well on their land and had only agreed to try because, at the time, the government provided R$2,000 (about $1,000 in U.S. dollars in 1999) for projects built around either bananas or coconut trees. The government’s offer of credit was particularly
420	Wolford
attractive because only half of the money had to be repaid; the other half was a ‘‘rebate,’’ which the MST prided itself on having won for settlers throughout the country.
In 2001 the settlers moved back to sugarcane because they knew the crop well and knew that there were well- established marketing lines so that if the price were good and the harvest decent, they would have money in their pockets again. And in spite of the rhetoric of govern- ment agrarian reform officials, it would have been difficult to completely dismantle the sugarcane indus- try since the entire economic and social structure of the Pernambuco sugarcane region was built around the rhythm of cane production. Even amid generalized crisis, few people suggested that sugarcane production be abandoned entirely. Instead, state plans for diversifica- tion included agrarian reform as a means to occupy land that was not considered appropriate for sugar produc- tion. The state hoped that agrarian reform settlements would employ excess labor on a seasonal basis and, at the same time, foster smallholder suppliers of cane for the large distilleries (MEPF 1998, 2). By 2001, this was what was happening on the settlements.
When I returned to Flora in 2001, the settlers were busily preparing for the sugarcane harvest. Indications of the MST had all but disappeared from the settlement. Two of the men who had originally occupied the plan- tation with the MST had left the settlement and were reportedly no longer involved with the movement. Per- haps most importantly, however, the young agronomist employed by the MST, who had been such an active spokesperson for the movement, had also left. The agronomist, Antonio, had been nominated for his posi- tion by the town’s mayor, although the MST paid his salary and set his monthly agenda. When I first arrived in A ́gua Preta, Antonio appeared to be passionately com- mitted to the movement. He had only been with the movement for a year, having returned from a brief stint working for a large cattle rancher in Bahia, but he worked tirelessly. He was always up early and in meet- ings until very late. Antonio was considered a key MST activist in the region because his close ties to the mayor resulted in what were considered to be generous concessions.
Antonio talked seriously in meetings about the need for a new way of doing politics, but his own influence depended on the traditional way—personal connections. People on the settlement were thankful that Antonio had the kind of connections that experience had taught them were necessary in order to access resources. And if Antonio said that the movement was responsible, they were glad to be part of it, although they expressed
their gratefulness to Antonio himself, rather than to the movement. Settlers would often bring Antonio and his family a treat from their farm—an especially sweet piece of fruit or a handful of manioc, a starchy tuber all of the settlers relied on for nourishment. The wife of the former patr ̃ao would occasionally visit Antonio’s small house, bringing little gifts for the children and for his wife.
In 2001 Antonio left the movement. He had worked faithfully to secure the settlers’ vote for the mayor’s re- election campaign, and when the mayor was reelected, Antonio was asked to begin working with him full time. Antonio left the movement, and it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that the movement left the settle- ment at the same time. The settlers had never fully embraced the MST’s ideals, and without a constant spokesperson for the movement, they had little reason to remain involved. Antonio still worked to provide services and goods for the settlers, but instead of encouraging them to thank the movement, he now encouraged them to thank the mayor. The settlers, who were used to seeing state investments as gifts or favors, had little difficulty shifting their allegiance back to the mayor and thanking him for things that only months before the movement had tried to teach them were their rights as citizens of Brazil. Settlement meetings were still held regularly, but without the extension agent’s pre- sence, they seemed less organized and had little to do with the MST. This situation had everything to do with the different spatial imaginaries the settlers brought to the movement.
Conclusion
After examining the stories of people who joined the MST, I would restate the movement’s genesis stories in these terms: in the context of agricultural restructuring, political opening, and religious mobilization, a small group of landless farmers in southern Brazil used—and reformulated—their spatial imaginaries to embrace the act of occupying land and to create new frontiers for colonization, while a small group of unemployed rural workers in northeastern Brazil overcame the spatial imaginaries put in place by the local sugarcane economy and joined the movement because they had few other options available to them.
These different genesis stories are the product of very different representations and perceptions of space. Whether people saw space as open or closed was shaped by their historical experiences on the land and in various labor arrangements. The way social life was embedded in particular spaces—or the way those spaces were
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	421
‘‘lived’’—informed both the decision to join or not to join the MST. As participation in the movement moved past the initial act of gaining land, those same spatial experiences engaged with new spatial arrangements to produce very different political actors within the movement.
It is not that the official genesis story is wrong, of course; many of the settlers emphasized their frustration at not having land and spoke emotionally about the assistance provided by members of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches. And the MST activists themselves stress their own involvement in the Church and how discussions with local priests and study groups helped them understand the injustices of capitalism in the countryside. They argue convincingly that the Brazilian state is complicit with business interests to a degree that compromises the quality of citizenship for millions of marginalizados (marginalized people). It is not the in- tention of this paper to defend capitalism or the state in Brazil. Instead, it is to give the members of the move- ment back their voices, with all of the diversity, com- plexity, and contradiction that doing so implies. This is a particularly important project for the study of social movements because movements often strive to create strong ‘‘master frames’’ as a way of legitimating un- orthodox strategies or goals.
Bringing geography into the study of social move- ments through the careful study of how political actors are constituted in meaning and in practice can shed light on the critically important relationships between context and imagination, or perception. It is never enough to know what factors might facilitate the formation of a movement; the critical study of resistance requires an analysis of the ways different historical-cultural frame- works shape the decision to mobilize in particular people and places.
Acknowledgments
This research was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Stu- dies at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. This paper was submitted to the AAG Nystrom Competition for Best Dissertation in 2002 and selected as a co-winner. The author would like to thank the Nystrom selection committee as well as Julie Guthman, Felicia Mebane, Andrew Perrin, Charles Postel, Jessica Teisch, Michael Watts, and Angus Wright for their help with previous drafts of this paper.
Notes
1. Some of the most comprehensive and informative pieces on the movement include: Fernandes 1999, Rocha and Bran- ford 2002, and Wright and Wolford 2003.
2. This research was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. I spent one year (1996–1997) in Brazil conducting preliminary research and returned in 1998 and 1999 to carry out the field research. I spent seven months in Santa Catarina and seven months in Pernam- buco, interviewing approximately 200 MST settlers, as well as many MST leaders, local politicians, small farmers in the regions surrounding the settlements, agrarian reform agents, and agricultural day-laborers living in urban peripheries. A return trip to Brazil in the summer of 2001 helped me to solidify my arguments.
3. In the 1930s, the political-economic basis of development shifted from a fairly exclusive focus on agricultural com- modities to include industrial manufacturing. See Warren Dean’s (1985) work on the transition from coffee to in- dustry in S ̃ao Paulo in the early 20th century. Despite this shift, rural elites continued to be a strong political voice. Inequalities in the rural areas have arguably generated the most consistent political tension in the country.
4. In 2000, the population of S ̃ao Paulo was estimated at 17.8 million. These figures almost certainly underestimate the actual population given the difficulty of counting heads in rapidly changing urban squatter settlements.
5. In 1960, the wealthiest 5 percent of Brazil’s economically active population earned 27.7 percent of the country’s total income. In 1990, the top 5 percent earned 35.8 percent of total income (see Skidmore 1999, 198).
6. Brazil’s foreign debt increased from US$49.9 billion in 1979 to US$91.0 billion in 1984 (see Hirst at http://www.mre. gov.br/acs/diplomacia/ingles/h_diplom/gm017i.htm).
7. During the years that the military held power in Brazil (1964–1985), the fiction of civilian elections was main- tained. Upon being nominated for president, the indicated military leader revoked his military status and technically became a civilian leader. Nineteen eighty five was the first year since 1964, however, that the president of Brazil did not come out of the military’s ranks.
8. The Official Genesis Story may be as effective as it is be- cause it fits into the movement’s ‘‘master frame’’ (Benford and Snow 2000), actively constructed (although not neces- sarily intentionally) to legitimate the movement’s actions both internally and externally. The movement’s master frame focuses on capitalism and the state as key figures in the exploitation of rural landless workers and calls on the power of the Catholic Church to justify mobilization. The state is portrayed as a class enemy that will only accede to demands for land under great pressure and if people mobilize within the movement. MST documents stress the need to experiment with economic and political alter- natives in the settlements, working toward the creation of a ‘‘new society.’’ In this context, the Official Genesis Story appears self-evident and serves to bolster the movement’s master frame.
9. Not the community’s real name. 10. All names have been changed.
422	Wolford
11. The state of Santa Catarina made colonization a priority because of territorial disputes with the neighboring state of Parana. These disputes culminated in the Contestado War (1912–1916) (see Diacon 1991).
12. All direct quotes in this paper are taken from interviews conducted by the author between October 1998 and No- vember 1999. Interviews were either taped or written down, depending on the circumstances. The author received ap- proval from the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at the University of California at Berkeley (ap- proval #99-4-76).
13. Maria Paulilo (1996) found that the settlers she interviewed in Santa Catarina had moved an average of three times before joining an MST occupation (124).
14. Western Santa Catarina was an area of relatively recent colonization in Brazil. The region offered a seemingly gen- erous spatial frontier that began to attract people—pri- marily small farmers—in the 1920s and did not fill up until the 1970s.
15. Thecontractsmediatingrentalvariedconsiderably,although they generally exchanged usufruct rights to land for any- where from one-quarter to one-half of production income.
16. Not the community’s real name. 17. Another strategy used by the mill owners was to order
workers to do jobs for which they were either not qualified or which were below their previous position (cf. Siguad 1977). As one former cane worker said, ‘‘I stayed there for four years all at once, I worked with the tractor there. And . . . something happened there—the tractor broke down— and the man said, ‘If you want, you can go cut cane’ and so I said, ‘If it’s to cut cane, I will do it somewhere else, but not here in your mill.’’’
18. After the First National Congress in 1985, MST activists attempted to establish a branch of the movement in Per- nambuco. The movement saw the sugarcane region of Pernambuco as important because of the region’s history of rural organization and because of the return of Miguel Arraes (in 1986 and 1994) as governor of the state. Arraes, who had been governor of Pernambuco at the time of the military coup, became known as a friend of the rural poor because of his support for rural workers’ rights. MST’s efforts to organize in Pernambuco during the 1980s were un- successful however. The leaders attributed their difficulties to a surprising lack of support from Arraes and to an un- willingness to organize among the local population.
19. According to federal law, the mill owners are expected to sign working papers for every person employed on the plant- ation. The papers are intended to ensure that the workers receive their rights, that they are eligible for union mem- bership, and that they have their years of service counted in the interests of receiving their benefits. Uncertified workers, on the other hand, did not receive any of the public or private benefits of being registered as a legal worker.
20. The uncertified workers were also kept from joining the rural unions, a traditional source of protection for the plantation workers. The unions were hurt badly by the region’s sugar crisis because when there aren’t any jobs, nobody pays the union fees. The unions were also deeply implicated in the sugar industry and highly ambivalent about supporting MST: ‘‘In seven or eight cities around here, it’s the mill owner who controls the unions, so the president of the union does whatever the boss says.’’
References
Adams, P. 1996. Protest and the scale politics of telecommuni- cations. Political Geography 15 (5): 419–41.
Auyero, J. 2003. The geography of popular contention: An urban protest in Argentina. Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 28:37–70.
Benford, R. D., and D. A. Snow. 2000. Framing processes and social movements: An overview and assessment. Annual Review of Sociology 26:611–39.
Bethell, L. ed. 1987. The independence of Latin America. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buarque, S. C. 1997. Proposta de re-estrutura ̧c ̃ao do setor sucro-  ̃ ́
alcooleiro e negocia ̧cao da dıvida por terra para assentamento de reforma agr ́aria. Recife, PE: National Institute for Colo- nization and Agrarian Reform.
Burns, E. B. 1993. A history of Brazil. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cazella, A. A. 1992. Assentamentos rurais e coopera ̧c ̃ao agr ́ıcola: Pol ́ıticas conflitantes. Master’s thesis, Center for Research in Agriculture and Development with the Federal Rural Uni- versity of Rio de Janeiro.
Chayanov, A. V. 1966. The theory of peasant economy, ed. D. Thorner, B. Kerblay, and R. E. F. Smith. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Comiss ̃ao Pastoral da Terra (CPT) 2000. Assassinatos no campo Brasil 1985–2000: Violˆencia e impunidade. Goiˆania, MT: CPT Press.
Davis, D. 1999. The power of distance: Re-theorizing social movements in Latin America. Theory and Society 28: 585–638.
Delgado, G. C. 1985. Capital financeiro e agricultura no Brasil: 1965–1985. Campinas, SP: Editora UNICAMP.
Diacon, T. 1991. Millenarian vision, capitalist reality: Brazil’s contestado rebellion, 1912–1916. Durham, NC: Duke Uni- versity Press.
Eckstein, S. 1989. Power and popular protest: Latin American social movements. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Edelman, M. 1996. Reconceptualizing and reconstituting pea- sant struggles: A new social movement in Central America. Radical History Review 65:26–47.
Escobar, A. 2001. Culture sits in places: reflections on globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political Geography 2 (2): 139–74.
Fausto, B. 1999. A concise history of Brazil. Cambridge: Cam- bridge University Press.
Feagin, J., and H. Hahn. 1973. Ghetto revolts: The politics of violence in American cities. New York: Macmillian.
Fernandes, B. M. 1999. MST, Movimento dos trabalhadores rurais sem-terra: Forma ̧c ̃ao e territorializa ̧c ̃ao. S ̃ao Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, S. 1975. The Brazilian peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press.
Foucault, M. 1979. Discipline and punish. New York: Random House.
Freyre, G. 1967. The masters and the slaves: A study in the development of Brazilian civilization. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Gamson, W. A. 1989. Safe spaces and social movements. In Perspectives on social problems, ed. G. Miller and J. A. Holstein, 27–39. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil	423
Graziano Da Silva, J. F. 1982. A moderniza ̧c ̃ao dolorosa: Estrutura agr ́aria,fronteiraagr ́ıcolaetrabalhadoresruraisNoBrasil.Rio de Janeiro, RS: Zahar Editores.
Herod, A. 1997. Labor’s spatial praxis and the geography of contract bargaining in the US East Coast longshore indus- try, 1953–89. Political Geography 16 (2): 145–69.
Houtzager, P. P. 1997. Caught Between state and church: Popular movements in the Brazilian ountryside, 1964– 1989. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Houtzager, P. P., and M. J. Kurtz. 2000. The institutional roots of popular mobilization: State transformation and rural poli- tics in Brazil and Chile, 1960–1995. Comparative Studies in Society and History 422:394–424.
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estat ́ısticas (IBGE). 1990. Censoseconˆomicos–1985.2vol.RiodeJaneiro:Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics.
FFF. 1996a. Censo agropecu ́ario, 1995–1996. Rio De Janeiro: IBGE.
FFF. 1996b. Censo agropecu ́ario, Santa Catarina, No. 21, 1995–1996. Rio De Janeiro: IBGE.
Jenkins, C. J., and C. Perrow. 1977. Insurgency of the powerless: Farm worker movements (1946–1972). American Sociolo- gical Review 24:249–68.
Kurzman, C. 1996. Structural opportunity and perceived oppor- tunity in social movement theory: The Iranian revolution of 1979. American Sociological Review 61:153–70.
Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Lima, J., and G. V. Silva. 1995. A economia canaviera de pernambuco e a reestrutura ̧c ̃ao necessaria. Revista de Econ- omia Nordeste de Fortaleza 262:181–203.
Lins, C. 1996. Programa de a ̧c ̃ao para o desenvolvimento da zona da mata do Nordeste. Recife, PE: Superintendent for the Development of the Northeast.
Mainwaring, S. 1986. The Catholic church and politics in Brazil, 1916–1985. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Marston, S. A. 2002. Making difference: Conflict over Irish
identity in the New York City St. Patrick’s Day Parade.
Political Geography 21 (3): 373–92. Martins, J. D. S. 1981. Os camponeses e a pol ́ıtica No Brasil: As
lutas sociais no campo e seu lugar no processo pol ́ıtico. Petro ́-
polis, RJ: Vozes. Massey, D. B. 1994. Double articulation: A place in the
world. In Displacements: Cultural identities in question, ed.
A. Bammer. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. McAdam, D. 1982. Political process and the development of black
insurgency. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. McAdam, D., J. D. McCarthy, and M. N. Zald, eds. 1996. Comparative perspectives on social movements: Political oppor- tunities, mobilizing structures and cultural framings. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. McAdam, D., S. Tarrow, and C. Tilly. 2001. Dynamics of con-
tention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. McCarthy, J. D., and M. N. Zald. 1973. The trend of social movements in America: Professionalization and resource mobi-
lization. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press. Melucci, A. 1989. Nomads of the present: Social movements and individual needs in contemporary society. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press. Metcalf, A. C. 1992. Family and frontier in colonial Brazil:
Santana de Parna ́ıba, 1580–1822. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Miller, B. A. 2000. Geography and social movements: Comparing antinuclear activism in the Boston area. Minneapolis: Uni- versity of Minnesota Press.
Ministerio Extraordin ́ario da Pol ́ıtica Fundi ́aria (MEPF). 1998. Programa integrado de reforma na zona da mata nordestina. Recife, PE: MEPF.
Moore, D. 1997. Remapping resistance: ‘‘Ground for struggle’’ and the politics of place. In Geographies of resistance, ed. S. Pile and M. Keith. London: Routledge.
Mu ̈ller, G. 1985. A dinˆamica da agricultura Paulista. S ̃ao Paulo: Foundation for the State System of Data Analysis.
Navarro, Z. 2000. Breaking new ground: Brazil’s MST. NACLA Report on the Americas 33 (5): 36–39.
Oliviera, A. 1994. O campo Brasileiro no final dos anos 80. In A quest ̃ao agr ́aria hoje, ed. J. P. Stedile. Porto Alegre, RS: Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul.
Paige, J. M. 1975. Agrarian revolution: Social movements and export agriculture in the underdeveloped world. New York: Free Press.
Paulilo, M. 1996. Terra a vista . . . . e  ̃ao longe. Florianopolis, SC: Federal University of Santa Catarina.
Petras, J. 1997. Latin America: The resurgence of the Left. New Left Review 223:17–47.
Pile, S., and M. Keith, eds. 1997. Geographies of resistance. New York: Routledge.
Rocha, J., and S. Branford. 2002. Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Routledge, P. 1997. A spatiality of resistances: Theory and practice in Nepal’s revolution of 1990. In Geographies of resistance, ed. S. Pile and M. Keith. New York: Routledge.
Scheper-Hughes, N. 1992. Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Schwade, E. 1992. A luta n ̃ao faz parte da Vida . . .  ́e a vida: O projeto pol ́ıtico-religioso de um assentamento No Oeste Catar- inense. Florianopolis, SC: Universidade Federal de SC.
Sewell, W. H. Jr. 2001. Space in contentious politics. In Silence and voice in the study of contentious politics, ed. D. McAdam, S. Tarrow, and C. Tilly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Seyferth, G. 1990. Imigra ̧c ̃ao e cultura No Brasil. Bras ́ılia: Editora Universidade Federal de Brasilia.
Sigaud, L. 1979. Os clandestinos e os Direitos: Estudo sobre trabalhadores da cana-de-a ̧c ́ucar de pernambuco. S ̃ao Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades.
Skidmore, T. E. 1988. The politics of military rule in Brazil, 1964–85. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
FFF. 1999. Brazil: Five centuries of change. New York: Oxford University Press.
Skocpol, T. 1979. States and social revolutions: A comparative analysis of France, Russia, and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, N. 1993. Homeless/global: Scaling places. In Mapping the futures: Local cultures, global change, ed. J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson, and L. Tickner, 87–119. London: Routledge.
Stedile, J. P. 1997. O MST e a quest ̃ao agr ́aria: Entrevista com Jo ̃ao Pedro St ́edile. Estudos Avan ̧cados 11 (31): 69–98.
Stedile, J. P., and B. M. Fernandes. 1999. Brava gente: A trajet ́oria do MST e a luta pela terra No Brasil. S ̃ao Paulo: Editora Funda ̧c ̃ao Perseu Abramo.
424	Wolford
Stepan, A. C. 1973. Authoritarian Brazil: Origins, Policies, and future. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Stolcke, V. 1988. Coffee planters, workers and wives: Class conflict andgenderrelationsonS ̃aoPauloplantations,1850–1980. Houndmills, U.K.: Macmillan.
Tarrow, S. G. 1998. Power in movement: Social movements and contentious politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Testa, V. M., R. D. Nadal, L. C. Mior, I. T. Baldiserra, and N. Cortina, with J. Wilkinson. 1996. O Desenvolvimento sus-
tentavel do Oeste Catarinense. Floriano ́polis, SC: EPAGRI. Tilly, C. 2000. Spaces of contention. Mobilization: An Interna-
tional Journal 5 (2):135–59. Veltmeyer, H. 1997. New social movements in Latin America:
The dynamics of class and identity. Journal of Peasant Studies 25 (1): 139–69.
Whittier, N. 1995. Feminist generations: The persistence of the radical women’s movement. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Wolf, E. 1969. Peasant wars of the twentieth century. New York: Harper and Row.
Wolford, W. 2004. Of land and labor: Agrarian reform on the sugarcane plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 31 (2): 147–70.
Wright, A., and W. Wolford. 2003. To inherit the Earth: The landless movement and the struggle for a new Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
Zamosc, L. 1986. The agrarian question and the peasant movement in Colombia: Struggles of the National Peasant Association, 1967–1981. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Campus Box 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu.

2007
Political Science
Latin American Perspectives
Introduction: Globalizing Resistance: The New Politics of Social Movements in Latin America Author(s): 
Richard Stahler-Sholk, Harry E. Vanden, Glen David Kuecker 
Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 34, No. 2, Globalizing Resistance: The New Politics of Social Movements in Latin America (Mar., 2007), pp. 5-16


Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27648006 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 19:41
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
Introduction
Globalizing Resistance The	New	Politics	of Social	Movements	inLatin America
by Richard Stahler-Sholk, Harry E. Vanden, and Qlen David Kuecker
The past two decades have seen an upsurge of Latin American social move
challenging	the neoliberal	paradigm	and	the governments	thatwould impose it.
A little over ten years ago, Latin American Perspectives published	two special issues on social movements. Edited by David Slater (1994b, 1994c), these
issues focused on the significant increase in research and theory concerning
the intersections of politics, economics, society, and culture in social move ments. The case studies presented in them pointed to the emergence of Latin America's new social movements as important actors. The growth of these movements has been the subject of intense study ever since. In today's
context, such movements	include the indigenous mobilizations	led by the Confederaci?n	de	Nacionalidades	Ind?genas	del	Ecuador	(Confederation	of
ments,
Nationalities	of Ecuador?CONAIE),	the cocoteros and mobiliza
Indigenous tions against water privatizations and gas pipeline investments in Bolivia, the Zapatista	movement	inMexico,	theMovimento	dos	Trabalhadores	Rurais
Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers' Movement?MST)	in Brazil, Afro Colombians	resisting	displacement	in	a	region	coveted	by	investors,	the
piquetero eruptions ofworkers and the urban poor in thewake ofArgentina's financial crisis, and the incipient cross-border and migrant movements and
mobilizations against "free-trade" agreements. They contest the region's polit ical and economic systems and challenge traditional definitions of citizenship,
democracy, and participation. As they contest power and policy, they chal lenge traditional rule by the dominant economic classes and the politicians
who	enable	it (see Vanden,	2003). These	phenomena	transcend	the expectations	of themainstream	"transitions
to-democracy" literature, which interpreted social movements as a tempo
rary outgrowth of the suppression of conventional politics by bureaucratic authoritarian regimes, a trend thatwould fade again with the return of elec
toral democracy.1 The intensification of social movements appears to be not only a continuation of historical resistance and mobilization of themasses but a specific response to the advance of neoliberal globalization within the process	of nominal	democratization.	Although	it flows most	strongly	from	the
Richard Stahler-Sholk is an associate professor of political science at Eastern Michigan University and an associate editor of Latin American Perspectives. Harry E. Vanden is a professor of political science at theUniversity of South Florida, Tampa. Glen David Kuecker is an associate professor of Latin American history at DePauw University. The collective thanks them for their work in
this issue.
organizing LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 153,Vol. 34No. 2,March 2007 5-16
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X06299088 ?	2007 Latin American	Perspectives
5
6	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
laboring	classes,	this resistance	is, however,	by no means	exclusively	mani
fested in class-based organizing. And while the global spread of free-trade market forces involves a rollback of the state, the neoliberal state has devel
oped new functions of structuring and policing the new conditions for global
capital	accumulation.	In	this	era	of	increasing	globalization,	pressure	to
become integrated into global markets threatens a heterogeneous group of social subjects who, in turn, are generating new resistance movements.
These new movements	seek to define a novel relation to the formal political
realm by fundamentally reworking relations of power. Unlike traditional guer rilla movements or electoral expressions of the left, they are not fundamentally
organized to seize state power. Yet they have contributed to destabilizing and in some cases ousting governments in, for example, Bolivia, Argentina, Ecuador, and, arguably, Mexico, while coexisting in awkward relationships
with leftparties such as Brazil's Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers' Party?
and	Mexico's	Partido	de Democratic Revolution?PRD)
la	Revoluci?n	Democr?tica	(Party	of	the and guerrilla movements such as Mexico's
PT)
Ej?rcito	Popular	Revolucionario Ej?rcito	Revolucionario	del	Pueblo	Insurgente	(Revolutionary	Army	of	the
(Popular	Revolutionary	Army?EPR)	and	the
Insurgent	People?ERPI).	And	they have	forced policy	to the left in places	like Argentina. Parallel to the increase in social protest movements is the develop
ment ofmovement-based politics of a populist variety such as Lavalas inHaiti, chavismo	inVenezuela,	and	the Evo Morales	phenomenon	in Bolivia.
Mainstream attention has been focused on the apparent ascendance of the electoral left (in its domesticated or demonized variants) across the region as
the twenty-first century begins. But perhaps significant for lasting change is the grassroots mobilization	that gave those "left" parties an opening and con
tinues to hold them accountable to their base. The ability of these new move ments to influence and articulate policy does indeed suggest that?to some extent?they actually can rule from below. There are parallels here to the ten
sion between themobilized base of theUnidad Popular coalition inChile from 1970 to 1973 and theAllende government's effort to effect change fromwithin the existing liberal-democratic	institutions, and to the "radical moderation"	of the Sandinista government in Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990 (Winn, 1986;
Vanden and Pr?vost, 1993). From theArgentine cry of "?Que se vayan todos!"
(taken up by movements	elsewhere)	to the Zapatista	concept of mandar obede ciendo,	these movements	are	struggling	for a	radical	redefinition	of politics.
Building on the 1994 special issues on social movements and political
change in Latin America, this issue explores the roots and implications of social movements in the contemporary context. The contributors offer fresh insights that flow from their recent fieldwork. They examine three sets of
issues: the origin and context of the upsurge of social movements, the strate gies and dynamics of their struggles, and their outcomes and implications.
WHY NOW?
It ishard	to take themeasure	of a historical	trend that is stillhappening.	Rather than simply assuming the existence of the phenomenon in question, it isworth
old/new
discontinuity, analysts of social movements	since the 1980s have noted
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	7
posing the basic question what is really new about the Latin American social movements of recent decades (Kuecker, 2004). The phrase "new social move ments" has been in vogue since at least the early 1980s (Melucci, 1980; Tarrow,
1998). The early invocations of that phrase focused on the advanced industrial ized capitalist societies, whose emerging "postmaterialist" values and redefini
tions of equality and citizenship had supposedly shifted the locus of organizing from traditional unions and parties tonew, amorphous groupings around values
such as civil rights, environmentalism, gay rights, feminism, and planetary sur vival in the nuclear age (see, e.g., Laclau and Mouffe, 1985). Yet this analysis was questioned by Latin Americanists who noted a somewhat parallel phenomenon
in a very different regional context (Foweraker, 1995; Slater, 1985; 1994a). The Latin American-enriched	study of social movements	added	important compar ative analyses, particularly the influential compilations by Eckstein and Alvarez
(1992) and Alvarez, Dagnino, and Escobar (1998). Some usefully questioned the dichotomous terminology of "old" and "new" movements (Fuentes and Frank,
1989), suggesting amore dynamic and interactive process ofmovements adapt ing to changing forms of the state and market. The new forms of global capital
ism and	the challenges	of its reregulation?a	transition	in the "world	system"	for some?are part of the common context for changing responses of popular mobi lization in both the center and the periphery of that system (Foran, 2003).
Neoliberal restructuring or reregulation of global capitalism is caused by the breakdown of the Fordist system in the capitalist center and the emergence of
flexible regimes of accumulation (Harvey, 1989). The devastating social impacts in Latin America	are part of the context of the current wave	of popular mobi
lization (Green, 2003; Prashad and Ballv?, 2006). Indeed, there is a strong argu
ment to be made that the region iswitnessing a sea change in politics and participation and that these new movements have taken full advantage of post
colonial definitions of agency and citizenship, the Internet and other globalized
communication, globalized networks of resistance, and the political space that democratization has provided to create repertoires of resistance and action that are indeed new and subversive of traditional politics and traditional political cul
ture (Gills, 2000b; Vanden,	2004; 2006). Social movements are, then, in some senses "new" by definition in that they
eschew the conventional political institutions of the day in favor of heteroge
neous collections ofgroups and individuals employing impolite ("contentious") tactics and organizing challenges to old social values. Without overdrawing the
their (1) tendency to seek autonomy from conventional/hierarchical	political
institutions, (2) attention to horizontal and participatory process in decision
making,	and	(3) quest	for solidarity	derived	from notions	of social	justice	linked
to shared subjective identities such as race/ethnicity or gender (Hellman, 1995). Several things are noteworthy about the changing context for social movement organizing since the 1980s. One is clearly the framework of global
ization and theneoliberal free-market project signaled by the 1982 debt crisis that began with theMexican crash and inaugurated a wave of "structural adjust ment programs" supervised by international financial institutions. These were
actually predated by themonetarist orthodoxy of the "Chicago Boys," reflecting the ultra-free-market	ideology	purveyed	by University	of Chicago	economists
8	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Milton Friedman and Arnold Harberger and ushered into the halls of power by the 1973 coup inChile (the "Other September 11"). The standard economic
formulas	that were	tellingly	labeled	the	"Washington	consensus"	centered
around	public-sector	cutbacks	(austerity),	privatization,	and	market oriented realignment (economic liberalization) of trade and finance (Rosen
and McFadyen,	1995). More than simply a shrinking of the state, the neoliberal project called for
a reconceptualization	of the state and its interaction with civil society (Robinson, 2004; Hardt and Negri, 2000). The new globalized regime of capi
tal accumulation converted states into brokers for a transnationalized ist class (Sklair, 2000). The resulting destabilization of the established citizenship compact (of nation-states) has been accompanied by a new sense of outrage
capital
(Vilas, 1996; Eckstein and Wickham-Crowley, 2003; Hershberg and Rosen, 2006). An example of this visceral response can be seen in the postfinancial crisis Argentine escraches, graffiti/street-theater identifying those seen as betraying the public trust (i.e., the state-society pact). Neoliberal market
reforms make	the poor	invisible	by	redefining	citizenship	as market	partici pation. Today's social movements are battles to redefine citizenship, in effect
constructing a broader and more inclusionary meaning (Kuecker, 2004; Vilas, 1997). Inwhat Yashar (2005) calls the "postliberal challenge," Latin America's
poor and marginalized are demanding collective citizenship rights, not just the individualism and formal equality promised by themarketplace that in
practice leaves somany destitute and disempowered. Ironically, the liberal,
U.S.-style
market-linked	version	of	democratization	and	the	concomitant
emphasis	on procedural	democratic	guarantees	has helped	the popular	strug gle to open greater political space inwhich mobilizations	and new forms of
resistance	can	challenge	the neoliberal	model	and	the very	capitalist	concep
tion of formal, representative	democracy	that underpins	it. The changing political context has also included a wave of regional transi
tions from various	forms of authoritarianism	to low-intensity democracy	(Gills,
2000a).	The	transitions-to-democracy	literature	analyzing	the demise	of bureau cratic authoritarianism	in South America	noted	the emergence	of social move
ments where traditional political organizing had been thoroughly suppressed by themilitary regimes of themid-1960s tomid-1980s. The Mexican case of soft
authoritarianism was somewhat distinct, with a series of mobilizations and
politicalcrises(in1968,1982,1985,1988,and 1994)highlightingthefailureofthe state to address the needs of the people, leading to a partial political liberaliza tion in 2000 that had stalled by 2006 (Rus and Tinker-Salas, 2006). In all these
cases, the assumption (hope?) was that theywould quietly go away, Rosie-the Riveter-like, when normal politics returned. They have not.
In seeking to explain the spaces being occupied by these movements, some have argued that formal democracy in the sense of "choice" of leaders devoid
ofmuch substantive content or direct participation?polyarchy?is	the logical
political complement ofneoliberalism (Robinson, 1996). Parties and other tradi tional institutions become vehicles for technocrats and marketing specialists,
and people	lose interest and trust. In any event, the larger scale of global market structures and the shift of power to distant international institutions results in
what mainstream political scientists call a "democratic deficit," a globalization
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	9
from above that critics insist can be challenged from below by those who believe
that "another world is possible" (Brecher, Costello, and Smith, 2000). This shift, however, has ambiguous implications for the relation between social move
ments and parties. In that gray area, some parties have tried to repackage them selves as movements,	and parallel	to the rise of social movements	is the rise of
populist	formulas	on	both	the	left and	the	right,	capitalizing	on widespread	cyn icism about	the political	class.
The universal condemnation of authoritarian regimes and the atrocities they
committed has thoroughly delegitimized and discredited the repressive mech anisms	thatwere	required	to stop	the popular	mobilizations	and	revolutionary
movements of the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s. In accordance with the U.S democratic model, elitist control is increasingly being exercised by hege monic control of themedia and culture and attempts todefine democracy pro
cedurally (democracy exists so long as there is freedom of press and assembly and bourgeois elections), regardless ofwhether it really is by, of, and for "the people"?a	construct defined by the impoverished majority inLatin America.
As	these new	popular	movements	have	broken	this hegemony	and	insisted	on
real, effective, and participatory democracy, they have developed and refined mechanisms of power that promote liberation and invoke visions of a new
society	(see Vanden,	2006). What	is still unclear	iswhether,	even	if they dele gitimize, discredit, and disregard neoliberal policies and traditional forms of
rule and control, theywill be able to implement new policies and alternative
conceptions of power, rule, and the state. The fundamental question is how much liberation can be achieved with mechanisms of power that endeavor to rule from below without actually taking power and utilizing state control to
achieve	their objectives. Finally, the changing context must also include the end of the cold war, for
mally symbolized by the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall but perhaps under way in
slow motion throughout the late Brezhnev-Reagan years. This change may have freed some of the Latin American left from theweight of vanguard and central
izing political models, as Casta?eda (1994) has rather smugly observed.2 The declining appeal of state socialism and of seizing state power from above also creates	space	for a different model	of organizing	from below	(Holloway,	2002).
MOVEMENT STRATEGIES AND DYNAMICS
In studying what	is new	about	the current wave	of social movements, important not to romanticize	social-movement	cycles of protest or assume	that the strategies will necessarily be effective just because they are noble or cre
it is
ative.	Bearing	inmind	the historical	context,	it is useful	to recall	thatwhereas revolution was a prominent feature of the Latin American agenda from the 1960s through the 1980s, now we speak the different language of social move
ments, civil society, and contentious politics. Some of the current social move
ments are also not necessarily against capitalism but more narrowly oppose the particular	form of capitalism	that is neoliberalism,	making	at least some of them reformist rather than revolutionary. Indeed, we may need to rethink the
very definition	of "revolution"	in an era of globalization,	when	the overthrow
10	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES of the state is not necessarily the key to radical transformation of social rela
tions (Stahler-Sholk, 2001). Clearly it is not just the forms of popular that have adapted but also the forms of organization of the state and the
market in dynamic interaction with each other. The essays in this issue invite the reader to consider what strategies will work in the context of global capi tal and a downsized	state.
Revolutionary movements and organizations of the past were excessively hierarchical and centralized, which proved problematical forhorizontal democ
racy and empowerment of themass base. Those that still cling to their vanguard models	have	lost momentum.	An	important	question	to	consider	is whether
contemporary social movements are necessarily more internally democratic or
progressive	than	other	forms	of	organizing	and	if they necessarily	lead	to higher levels of empowerment. Informal networks of power can be just as stultifying
as more	institutionalized	hierarchies	and	perhaps	harder	to change.	The	old	rev olutionary movements often found that seizing state power was hard enough but social and ideological transformation was even more difficult. It is not yet clear that contemporary social movements solve these problems by skipping
straight to the transformation phase without a foothold in state power. Before
celebrating the separation from parties and other traditional organizations?the "fetishism	of autonomy,"	as Hellman	(1992)	calls	it?we	need	to ask whether
that autonomy yields more horizontal and participatory and transparent
processes and whether it is an effective organizing strategy. A cautionary example is the caudillo model of populists who claim to be above politics yet
mobilize from above for their own purposes. At the same time, the bottom-up emphasis of new left social movements may come at the expense of organiza
tional focus and ideological coherence.
Another	strategic	challenge	facing	social	movements	is how	to generate	and sustain a subjective sense of solidarity in the face of the atomizing effect of the
neoliberal policies applied across the region for over two decades. The new movements are defining agents of social change inways that cut across old
categories?for example, theBrazilian MST recruiting among landless peasants and urban favela dwellers; theArgentine piqueteros bringing together elements of	the middle	class,	the workers,	the	unemployed,	and	other	urban	poor;	and
Mexico's	Zapatistas	issuing	appeals	to all	those	"on	the	left and	at	the bottom." The effectiveness of these attempts to construct new social subjects depends on
whether they build community and collective consciousness so that the per ceived commonalities of interest are transformed into durable alliances.
A related issue is the strategy of organizing around identities such as race, ethnicity,	and	gender.	The	"old	left" often	suffered	from blindness	to any	iden
titybesides class, a category derived frommaterial relations of production. But nonmaterial identities, woven around economic relations, influence people's
willingness	to act. The	challenge	for social movements	is to connect	the dots	of identity-based forms of resistance that are very localized, making itvery hard forgeographically	dispersed	pockets	ofmobilization	to communicate,	interact, and do what isnecessary to form a collective consciousness around an identity issue. The organizing	challenge	is, for example,	forAfro-Colombians	in the
Choc? and indigenous people inMesoamerica	to see that they are being dis placed from ancestral lands in the interest ofmega-investment	schemes such as
struggle
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	11
dams and canals, and for targets of femicide inCiudad	Ju?rez to see the struc tures of transnational capital that produce themaquiladoras	and drug cartels
that	interact with	patriarchal	ideologies	in a murderous	brew.	Identity	politics is problematical	in terms of forming the collective consciousness	thatmay be
necessary	for a revolutionary	agenda.	Lacking	that agenda,	being	fragmented leaves identity-based movements vulnerable to co-optation, as inwhat Hale
(2004) calls "managed neoliberal multiculturalism" or the "indio permitido."
Identity does not have to be a narrow and exclusionary basis formobilization, but connecting such identity to broader struggles against neoliberalism is a
strategic challenge. The relation between social movements and allegedly progressive parties
and governments is another challenge. The dilemmas can be seen in the various positions	reflected, for example,	in the Brazilian MST's	critical distance	from the ruling PT, the Zapatistas7 avoidance of the PRD electoral sideshow, and the
Ecuadorian indigenous movement's ambivalence toward thePachacutik option
ofmorphing	frommovement	into party. The Argentine	piqueteros	divided	over responses to reformist concessions by theKirchner administration. Left-leaning
governments face the discipline of global financial markets, as is illustrated by
"Lula Lite" in Brazil and by themarket-friendly platform of the 2006 presiden tial candidate Andr?s Manuel L?pez Obrador inMexico. The Chavez adminis
tration inVenezuela, with its oil resources, may be the exception that proves the rule, but the government's autonomy from international finance does not nec
essarily mean	social-movement	independence	from the government	(Ellner and Tinker Salas, 2005). It remains to be seen how Bolivian President Evo Morales
will fare in facing the dual pressures of grassroots mobilization	and interna tional constraints.
Similarly, the strategy of forming transnational social movement networks is
a double-edged sword. They may be a necessary response to the organizing
advantages of increasingly mobile global capital, but old colonial patterns may be replicated in the relation between Northern-dominated	nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and local grassroots organizations in the South. Not
every component of civil-society organizing is a social movement, and not all social movements are progressive. Institutions such as the Inter-American
Development	Bank	and	corporate-sponsored	outfits	such	as	Conservation International have learned the advantages of funding workshops forwell
behaved	local	groups	to undercut	the	initiative	of more	radical	bottom-up mobilizing.
WHAT NOW?
If contemporary	social	movements	aim	to bring	about	fundamental	change without	taking	state power,	they nevertheless	have	to have	some	effect on	the
state. Their	lasting	impact may	depend	on	their ability	to bring	about	change in political institutions to consolidate their gains. Civic mass protest move
ments	have	demonstrated	a	capacity	to bring	down	governments,	but	if they are not going to enter the new governments themselves they need to devise another way to affect policy beyond the yes-or-no referendum of the street.
12	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Revolutionary movements of the past that had the goal of taking state power
(and	sometimes	succeeded)	faced	problems	of how	a movement	organized	for insurrection might become one that governs (Selbin, 1998) or, in the Sandinista
case	inNicaragua,	how	to go back	to being	a movement	thatmight	"govern
from below,"	in the language	of Daniel	Ortega's	unfulfilled	promise	of 1990. Contemporary	social movements	that do not seek state power nevertheless have to deal with issues of internal power relations in their organizations and
parallel governance in their territorial spaces. The challenges can be seen in the Zapatistas' bold and creative solution of Juntas de Buen Gobierno and
"leading by obeying," an experiment that appears promising but does not entirely avoid the issue of how to transform the state?a challenge that they
have taken up since late 2005 with the national outreach known as the "Other
Campaign"	(Harvey, 2005). Ifwe think of social movements that are concentrating on organizing civil
society rather than taking state power in terms of a Gramscian war of position, we also need tobe aware that changing power relations through resistance leads
to countermeasures by the state, including sophisticated strategies of low
intensity conflict and low-intensity democracy. As social movements	are exper
imenting with new strategies, there are also adaptations in theWashington consensus on neoliberal economics and in the politics of counterinsurgency.
With	the Free Trade Area	of theAmericas	(FTAA)	stalled	in its original	formu
lation,	the package	is being	broken	into	little bits,	as	bilateral	agreements	nego tiated between theUnited States and individual Latin American countries are
thewave	of social movements,	international
pushed	through piecemeal.	Riding financial institutions and "development"	agencies are co-opting the language of
civil-society participation and sustainability, with Powerpoint-ready workshops to train their preferred domesticated	intermediaries.
The outcomes of today's social movements will not be apparent until after a fewmore rounds of these dynamic struggles. Some of the keys will include the ability of themovements	to create local self-sufficient economies	that represent
viable	alternatives	to global	capitalism	and	regional	social movement	solidarity such as the Latin American women's movement, V?a Campesina, or the
Mesoamerican	coalitions against theCentral American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and Plan Puebla-Panam? (PPP). In raising theunanswered question of social movement outcomes, an issue that remains to be explored iswhether the resistance can survive if itdoes not put forward a coherent anticapitalist alter
native. In an era of globalization and mobile capital, creating local political and
economic autonomy without transforming larger structures (i.e., revolutionary change) may mean that the problems caused by those structures are simply dis
placed	to other places	in theworld	that are not organized	in local resistance.
Alternative models that seem locally promising (such as fair-trade, organic
shade-grown coffee) do not necessarily translate into a globally sustainable model	of alternative	development.
NEW IDEAS
The essays in this collection are a sampling of work that brings new research and new perspectives to bear on these questions of origin, strategy,
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	13
and outcomes	of social movements	in Latin America	today. Versions	of these and a wider selection of essays are being edited for inclusion in a projected
volume forRowman and Littlefield's LAP in theClassroom series. Vanden	frames the current wave	of social movements	in historical	context.
He uses the examples of the Brazilian MST and Bolivian indigenous move ments to reflect on historical continuities and discontinuities, highlighting
new	repertoires	of collective	action	including	national	mobilizations	that have
altered or toppled governments. Spronk	and Webber	consider	the origins	and	context	for the emergence	of
social movements, taking a political economy approach in comparing the Bolivian gas and water wars. Drawing on David Harvey's (2003) concept of "accumulation	by dispossession,"	they emphasize	structural differences between the contexts of these movements stemming from the different strate
gic places of the two resources in today's global capitalist system. Yet they
are also attuned to questions of agency and issue framing that shaped movement.
each
Most of the essays speak centrally tomovement strategies and dynamics. Stahler-Sholk's piece on theZapatista autonomy movement examines some of
the ambiguities and pitfalls of the concept of "autonomy" in the era of global ization. The Zapatista movement, while deeply rooted in the local, is also
struggling	to	find	a	strategy	of wider	mobilization	that will	help	bring	about macro changes inMexican national politics and in the articulation to the
global economy. Mora, also writing on the Zapatistas, focuses on indigenous identity. Her	extensive	fieldwork	inZapatista	communities	draws	out ways	in
which themovement's formulation of indigenous collective rights destabi lizes	the neoliberal	paradigm	but	also	poses	challenges	for an	old	left vision still wedded narrowly to class analysis. Swords's article recasts the scope
of this same case by examining social-movement "networks," specifically
some	of the groups	inspired	to organize	in parallel	to the Zapatista	initiative. She	applies	this	broader	definition	to	an	examination	of	the way	the move
ment has altered political discourse about such concepts as democracy and
development. The essays by Kuecker and Swanger offer close-up portraits of two move
highlighting	in different ways	the centrality of community-building
ments, strategies in forging the collective consciousness and motivation of partici
pants. Kuecker takes us into the life experiences of communities in the
Ecuadorian mountains confronting amining subsidiary of the transnational Mitsubishi. His study explores the question whether local victories are suffi
cient to challenge mobile capital in a global system. Swanger brings us the feel
and the voices of emerging solidarity among women organizing in the alien ating border environment of Ciudad Ju?rez. Both convey a sense that the
consciousness-raising	ismore important for the long term than the specific organizational	forms and outcomes	in the short term. Issa's article on theMST,
Latin America's largest social movement, adds new perspective on the ideo
logical dimension of organizing. Focusing on the concept of m?stica, she explores the processes that built a subjective sense of solidarity among the social subjects of rural struggles in Brazil, a key factor in the growth and
longevity of thatmovement.
14	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Villal?n's contribution on theArgentine piqueteros illustrates not only the diverse	social	origins	ofmovement	participants	who	largely	left their old	party and union ties behind but also the richly creative range of strategies and tactics
available. At the same time, the case carries a cautionary note about outcomes, as the breadth of the coalitions proves a source of strain and the electoral "left" co-opts a layer of leadership from themovement with amodicum of social com pensation. Alca?iz and Scheier focus on a specific radical group within the
piquetero movement that adopted a creative strategy, building on Communist
party networks and cooperative economic projects to gain financial and organi zational autonomy from the statewhile resisting party control. These two takes
on	the Argentine	case	illustrate	the	dilemmas	of movement	strategy	and	the
complexities	of sustainability. Space constraints make it impossible to address the full range of social
movements	shaking	Latin	American	politics	(which	would	include,	for example, various cross-border and transnational community organizing initia
tives). We	hope	to highlight	some	trends	and	raise	some	critical	questions	for
further reflection and action. There are still gaps in the research agenda on Latin American social movements. There have been significant advances in understanding themovements' origins and dynamics, but more theoretical
work is needed on their outcomes. The region's political shift to the electoral left at the beginning	of the twenty-first century calls for academic	and activist
analysis of the opportunities and problems posed for social movements. The essays in this issue should help stimulate debate on the possibilities and pitfalls
of contemporary	social movement	organizing	inLatin America.
NOTES
1.A critical review of this early "redemocratization"	literature can be found inNef (1988). See
also Petras and Morley	(1992). 2. For an interesting polemic about left strategies in Latin America, see Ellner (2004; 2006) and
Casta?eda	et al. (2005).
REFERENCES
Alvarez,	Sonia	E.,	Evelina	Dagnino,	and	Arturo	Escobar	(eds.) 1998 Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures: Re-Visioning Latin American Social Movements.
Boulder:	Westview	Press.
Brecher, Jeremy, Tim Costello, and Brendan Smith 2000 Globalization from Below: The Power of Solidarity. Cambridge:	South End Press.
Jorge G.
Casta?eda, 1994 Utopia Unarmed: The Latin American Left after theCold War. New York: Vintage Press.
Casta?eda,	Jorge G., Marta Harnecker,	James Petras, and Steve Ellner 2005 "Left strategy inLatin America: A symposium." Science & Society 69: 137-190.
Eckstein, Susan E. and Sonia E. Alvarez (eds.) 1992 The Making	of Social Movements	in Latin America:	Identity, Strategy, and Democracy.
Boulder:	Westview	Press.
Eckstein,	Susan	E.	and	Timothy	P. Wickham-Crowley	(eds.) 2003 Struggles for Social Rights inLatin America. New York: Routledge.
Ellner, Steve 2004	"Leftist	goals	and	the debate	over	anti-neoliberal	strategy	in Latin	America."	Science	& Society 68: 10-32.
Hardt,	Michael	and	Antonio
2000	Empire.	Cambridge:
Harvey,	David 1989The Condition
Negri Harvard
University	Press.
Stahler-Sholk,	Vanden,	and Kuecker	/GLOBALIZING	RESISTANCE	15
2006 "The defensive strategy on the left in Latin America: objective and subjective conditions in the age of globalization."	Science & Society 79: 397-410.
Elmer,	Steve	and	Miguel	Tinker-Salas	(eds.) 2005 Venezuela: New perspectives on politics and society. Latin American Perspectives 32(3).
For an, John (ed.) 2003 The Future ofRevolutions:RethinkingPolitical and Social Change in theAge ofGlobalization.
London:	Zed	Books.
Foweraker,	Joe 1995 Theorizing Social Movements: Critical Studies of Latin America. London: Pluto Press.
Fuentes, Marta and Andr? Gunder Frank 1989 'Ten theses on social movements/' World Development 17: 179-191.
Gills, Barry 2000a	"American	power,	neo-liberal	economic	globalization,	and	low-intensity	democracy:
An unstable trinity," pp. 326-344 inMichael Cox, G. John Ikenberry, and Takashi Inoguchi (eds.),	American	Democracy	Promotion:	Impulses,	Strategies,	and	Impacts.	Oxford:	Oxford
Press. 2000b "Introduction," in Barry K. Gills (ed.), Globalization and thePolitics ofResistance. New
York: Palgrave. Green, Duncan
2003 Silent Revolution: The Rise and Crisis ofMarket Economics in Latin America. 2d ed. London:
Latin American	Books. Hale,	Charles	R.
2004 "Rethinking indigenous politics in the era of the 'indio permitido.'" NACLA Report on the Americas	38(2):	16-21.
University
An	intothe	Cultural ofPostmodernity:	Inquiry	Origins of	Change.Cambridge,
UK: Blackwell. 2003 The New Imperialism. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Harvey,	Neil 2005	"Inclusion	through	autonomy:	Zapatistas	and	dissent."	NACLA	Report	on	theAmericas
39(2): 12-17. Hellman, JudithAdler
1992 "The study of new social movements in Latin America and the question of autonomy," pp.	52-61	in Arturo	Escobar	and	Sonia	E. Alvarez	(eds.),	The Making	of Social Movements	in Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
1995 "The riddle of new social movements: who they are and what they do," in Sandor Halebsky and Richard L. Harris (eds.), Capital, Power, and Inequality in Latin America. Boulder:
Westview	Press.
Hershberg, Eric and Fred Rosen (eds.) 2006 Latin America afterNeoliberalism: Turning theTide in the21st Century? New York: New Press.
Holloway,	John 2002 Change theWorld Without Taking Power. London: Pluto Press.
Kuecker,	Glen 2004 "Latin American resistance movements in the time of the posts." History Compass
2(LA126): 1-23. Laclau, Ernesto and Chantal Mouffe
1985 Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso.
Alberto 1980	"The	new	social	movements:	a	theoretical	approach."	Social	Science	Information	19(2): 199-226.
Melucci,
Nef, Jorge 1988 "The trend toward democratization and redemocratization in Latin America: shadow
and substance." Latin American Research Review 23: 131-153.
Petras, James and Morris Morley 1992 Latin America in theTime ofCholera: Electoral Politics, Market Economics, and Permanent
Crisis. New York: Routledge.
16	LATINAMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Prashad, Vijay and Teo Ballv? (eds.) 2006 Dispatches from Latin America: On theFrontlines Against Neoliberalism. Cambridge: South End Press.
Robinson,	William	I. 1996	Promoting
Polyarchy:	Globalization,	U.S.	Intervention,	and	Hegemony.	Cambridge:
Press. 2004 A Theory of Global Capitalism: Production, Class, and State in a Transnational World.
Baltimore:	Johns Hopkins	University	Press. Rosen, Fred and Deidre McFadyen	(eds.)
1995 Free Trade and Economic Restructuring inLatin America. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Rus,	Jan and Miguel	Tinker	Salas	(eds.) 2006 The Mexican Presidency, 2006-2012: Neoliberalism, social movements, and Electoral Politics.
Cambridge	University
Latin American
Perspectives	33(2).
Selbin, Eric 1998 Modern Latin American Revolutions. 2d ed. Boulder: Westview Press.
Sklair, Leslie 2000 The Transnational Capitalist Class. New York: Blackwell.
Slater, David 1994a "Power and social movements in the other Occident: Latin America in an international context." Latin American Perspectives 21(2): 11-37.
Slater, David	(ed.) 1985 New	Social Movements	and	the State	in Latin America.	Amsterdam:	CEDLA. 1994b Social Movements and Political Change in Latin America 1. Latin American Perspectives
21(2). 1994c Social Movements and Political Change in Latin America 2. Latin American Perspectives
Tarrow, Sidney 1998	Power	inMovement:	Social	Movements	and	Contentious
21(3). Stahler-Sholk,
Richard 2001 "Revolution," inNeil J.Smelser and Paul B. Baltes (eds.), International encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences, vol. 26. Oxford: Pergamon.
University Vanden,	Harry	E.
2003 "Globalization American	response."
in a time of neoliberalism:
social movements 308-333.
1996
29(6): 1997
"Neoliberal	social	policy:	managing	poverty	(somehow)."	NACLA	Report	on	theAmericas 16-25.
Press.
politicized Journal	ofDeveloping	Societies	19(2-3):
movements,	governance,	and	the	breakdown	of	traditional	politics	in America."	International	Journal	ofPublic	Administration	27(13-14):	1129-1149. "Social	movements,	hegemony,	and	resistance,"	inGary	Pr?vost	and	Carlos	Oliva	(eds.),
"New	political
2004 Latin 2006 The Bush Doctrine and Latin America. New York: Palgrave.
Vanden, Harry E. and Gary Pr?vost 1993 Democracy and Socialism in Sandinista Nicaragua. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Vilas, Carlos M.
"Participation,	inequality,	and	the whereabouts	of	democracy,"	in Douglas	A.	Chalmers et al. (eds.), The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and
Representation.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press. Winn,	Peter
1986 Weavers of Revolution: The Yarur Workers and Chile's Road to Socialism. Oxford: Oxford
Press. Yashar,	Deborah	J.
2005	Contesting	Citizenship	in Latin Challenge.	Cambridge:	Cambridge
University
Politics.
Cambridge:
Cambridge
and the Latin
America:	The	Rise	of Indigenous	Movements	and	thePostliberal
University
Press.

2001
Sociology
Geoforum
Global economic restructuring and the world of labor in Brazil: the challenges to trade unions and social movements
Ricardo Antunes

Department of Sociology, State University of Campinas 􏰁UNICAMP), Livre Docente, Brazil
The crisis and challenges faced by labor, including the trade unions and social movements have proportions not yet fully un- derstood. The repercussions, owing to globalization, also reached Third World countries, especially intermediate countries that hold important industrial estates such as Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, etc. Brazil is part of an economic, social, political and cultural context which has universal traces of global capitalism, but also possesses singularities. During the last decades, Brazilian trade unions and social movements have either followed a di􏰀erent path. There was a widespread and highly signi®cant strike movement 􏰁in the 1980s) with a notable expansion of trade unions organizing salaried sector 􏰁teachers, bank workers, public sector workers, etc.);therewasalsotheriseoftheUnionCongressessuchastheCUT-CentralU􏰃nicadosTrabalhadores􏰁WorkersCentral)andthe advance of rural unionism and the Landless Workers' Movement 􏰁MST, Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Terra) and new urban social movements such as the Homeless Movement. By the end of these decades, we joined in a more signi®cant way the challenges which were presented to the unionism and social movements. These challenges are discuss in this paper. Ó 2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.
Keywords: Restructuring of production in Brazil; New trade unions and social movements in Brazil; Challenges to trade unions and social movements
1. Introduction
My objective in this paper is to present the main changes occurring in the world of labor, in the new trade union movement and social movements in Brazil in re- centyears,especiallyinviewofthetransformationof today's capitalist system that has impacted on Taylorist and Fordist industries. If, since the 1970s, these changes hit the most advanced capitalist economies, due to the con®guration of the capitalist system at a global level, in Brazil these changes greatly intensi®ed throughout the 1990s with the government of Fernando Collor de Mello and, later, of Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
This paper will proceed as follows. In the ®rst part, I will present the more general tendencies that have been a trademark of the so-called capitalist restructuring, em- phasizing the latter's main characteristics. In particular, I will analyze the impact of the Japanese model 􏰁or Toyotism) on the restructuring of capital in the West. In addition, I will also analyze, in general terms, the main consequences of this process for the world of labor. In
E-mail address: rantunes@unicamp.br 􏰁R. Antunes).
0016-7185/01/$ - see front matter Ó 2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. PII: S 0 0 1 6 - 7 1 8 5 􏰁 0 1 ) 0 0 0 2 1 - 5
the second part, I will show how these transformations have a􏰀ected capitalism in Brazil, causing it to change its basic characteristics. I will show how these economic, political and ideological changes have also a􏰀ected Brazil's new trade unionism, comparing conditions in the1980s±whentheCentralU􏰃nicadosTrabalhadores 􏰁CUT) and the new trade unionism were born ± to those in the 1990s. Finally, in the conclusion, I will re ̄ect on the main challenges to Brazil's new trade unionism as well as the rising importance of the Landless Rural Workers' Movement 􏰁Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem-Terra, MST) and new social movements in the re- newal and progress of social action in Brazil.
As it has evolved during the last decades, contem- porary capitalism has accentuated many tendencies of its destructive logic; this has strongly a􏰀ected the world of labor. The pattern of capitalist accumulation, struc- tured by the duality of Taylorism and Fordism, has in- creasingly changed, mixed or even been substituted by more  ̄exible and deregulated productive forms, of which the so-called  ̄exible accumulation and the Jap- anese model, or Toyotism, are examples.
Synthetically, we see this duality, Fordism/Taylorism, as an expression of a productive system and its
www.elsevier.com/locate/geoforum
450	R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458
respective work processes ± based on mass production and responsible for more homogeneous production ± that dominated large industry during a good part of the 20th century. This duality was characterized by the in- terweaving of assembly line production with the Tay- lorist time e􏰂ciency, as well as being based on piecework and fragmentation, with a clear demarcation line between conception and execution. This productive process and work, based on large concentrated and vertical industries, resulted in the mass-worker, the collective worker, in highly hierarchical large businesses.
In the same way, the welfare state, that sustained the social-democratic model in various capitalist developed countries, comes under question by privatizing and anti- social neo-liberal deregulation. Having its material base in the productive restructuring of capital, the neo-liberal project took on unique forms and caused various capi- talist countries to reorganize their productive world, seeking to combine elements of the neo-liberal creed with the restructuring of productive capital.
It was in this context that the process of capitalist expansion in Japan, under way in that country since the post-1945 period, emerged forcefully on the Western world. Since the 1970s, Toyotism has presented itself as the most structured productive prescription o􏰀ered by capital as a possible cure for its structural crisis. Re- sponsible for a vigorous return to capitalism in Japan, Toyotism, or the ``Japanese model'', can be understood, summarily, as an organizational form of labor that is born in the Toyota factory in post-war Japan. It di􏰀ers basically from Fordism in the following ways:
1. It is production connected to demand. 2. It is varied and considerably heterogeneous. 3. It is based on team work, with multi-faceted functions. 4. It has as its basic principle just in time, the greatest
possible use of time in production and functions ac- cording to the system of kan-ban, signs or command codes for replacement of parts and stock, which in Toyotism should be kept to a minimum. While in a Fordist factory almost 75% of the ®nal product was produced within the same plant, in a Toyotist factory only about 25% of the ®nal product is produced with- in the same plant. It has a horizontal productive pro- cess and transfers to third parties a great part of what was previously produced within the factory 􏰁see Hi- rata, 1993; Coriat, 1992; Antunes, 1995).
This development path of contemporary Japanese capitalism shows, to the West, how a possible alternative can be incorporated by capital, with more or less mod- i®cations in relation to the original project. It was from a basis in various capital experiments, from the Japanese way to the experience in the USA 􏰁California), from the North of Italy to the Swedish experience, among many others, but having Toyotism as its boldest project, that capital redesigned its productive processes 􏰁see Harvey, 1989). Because of the actual telos that drives these ten-
dencies, that are, in reality, responses of capital to its structural crises 􏰁of a continuous and deepening de- pressive e􏰀ect), the destructive elements that direct its logic are accentuated. The greater the increase in com- petitiveness and inter-capital competition, the more di- sastrous are the consequences of which, as I said earlier, two manifestations are particularly virulent and grave: the destruction and/or precariousness, without parallel in the modern era, of the labor force of which structural unemployment is the major example; and the growing degradation, which destroys the environment, of the organic relationship between humans and nature, di- rected by a social logic concerned primarily with the production of goods and the process of capital accu- mulation 􏰁see M􏰃esz􏰃aros, 1995; Bihr, 1991; Kurz, 1992).
In the daily struggle to expand to the parts of the world that interest them and, at the same time, to manage the crises, capitalists wind up bringing even more destruction and uncertainty. Latin America be- comes ``part'' of this so-called globalization, socially destroying itself. From Argentina to Mexico, passing through Colombia and Peru, the levels of social im- poverishment speak for themselves. In Asia, this enormous expansion occurs at the cost of a brutal super- exploitation of labor, of which the strike of the metal workers in South Korea, in 1997, is a ®rm denunciation. Super-exploitation also profoundly a􏰀ects women and children.
This situation, whose more serious problems we only highlight here, had enormous consequences in the world of labor. Here we can only indicate the most important ones: 1. Reduction in manual, factory, ``stable'' labor force,
typical of Taylorism/Fordism and of the expansion
phase of vertical and concentrated industry. 2. The accentuated increase in the new proletariat, in the innumerable ways of sub-proletarization or desta- bilization of labor, resulting from the expansion of part-time, temporary, sub-contracted, contracted out labor, and which has intensi®ed on a world scale, as much in Third World countries as in the developed
capitalist countries. 3. An expressive increase in female labor within the
working class, also on a world scale, an increase which has principally supplied 􏰁though not exclu- sively) work that is precarious, sub-contracted, tem- porary, part-time, etc.
4. The enormous expansion of middle-salaried workers, especially in the ``service sector'' that, initially grew on a large scale, but has also witnessed levels of tech- nological unemployment.
5. Exclusion of young and old workers, according to the de®nition of capital 􏰁around 40 years of age) from the labor market in the developed capitalist countries.
6. Intensi®cation and super-exploitation of labor, with the brutalized utilization of immigrant workers, as
well as the expansion in the levels of child labor, un- der criminal conditions, in so many parts of the world like Asia, Latin America, etc.
7. There is, on explosive levels, a process of structural unemployment that, if summed up with precarious work, part-time, temporary, etc., a􏰀ects about 1 bil- lion workers, around one-third of the world's human labor force;
These elements ± only indicated here in their most generic tendencies ± do not make it possible to attribute validity to the thesis about the end of labor under the capitalist mode of production. This is still more evident when considering that two-thirds of the labor force is found in the so-called Third World, where the tenden- cies, pointed out previously, have a very particular and di􏰀erentiated character. Restricting oneself to Germany or France, and making generalizations about the end of labor or of the working class, ignoring what happens in countries like India, China, Brazil, Mexico, South Ko- rea, Russia, Argentina, etc., not to speak of Japan, is an error of great signi®cance. It is worth adding that the thesis of the end of the working class, even when re- stricted to the developed capitalist countries, is, in our opinion, without foundation, neither empirical nor an- alytical. A broader notion of labor, which takes into account its multi-faceted character, is much needed as a forceful response to this evidence.
2. Industrial restructuring in Brazil
When one re ̄ects upon the transformations through which the world of labor of the developed capitalist countries has passed and their repercussions and paral- lels with those practiced in Brazil, it is necessary to take into consideration mediating factors. Brazil is part of an economic, social, political and cultural context that has universal traces of global capitalism but has singularities that need to be understood. Here, an important concern is with an unequally combined globality that should not permit an acritical or epiphenomenal identi®cation be- tween what happens in the central countries and the subordinated countries.
Capitalism in Brazil, particularly its pattern of in- dustrial accumulation developed since the mid-1950s and intensi®ed during the period after the military coup of 1964, has a a dual productive structure. On the one hand, it is structured for the production of durable consumer goods, such as automobiles, electric appli- ances, etc., for a selective and restricted internal market composed of the dominant classes and a signi®cant part of the middle classes, especially in the higher strata. On the other, there is the production for export, not only of raw materials, but also industrialized consumer prod- ucts. The increasing erosion of workers' salaries made levels of accumulation that attracted monopolist capital
possible. In this way, the industrial capitalist expansion was sustained 􏰁and is still sustained) by a process of super-exploitation of labor, due to the connection be- tween low salaries, long hours and intensive work, fol- lowing an industrial pattern typical of a subordinate country. This pattern of accumulation developed strongly, especially from the 1950s to the 1970s.
During the 1980s this process began to experience its ®rst changes. Although, in its basic characteristics, the pattern of accumulation and its ``economic model'' re- main the same, it was possible to see some organiza- tional and technological mutations within the productive process and services, even though, at a much slower rhythm than that experienced by the central countries. This is because, until then, the country was still relatively distant from the process of productive restructuring of capital and from the neo-liberal project, already under way in accentuated rhythm in the ad- vanced capitalist countries.
In the 1980s, the ®rst impulses of the productive re- structuring process in Brazil occurred, leading compa- nies to adopt, initially in a timid and restrictive mode, new organizational and technological patterns. There were also changes in the management patterns of the labor force in Brazilian industry, particularly in the automotive ®eld. The introduction of the ®rst robots, the just-in-time system, production based on team work in the total quality programs, as well as the enlargement of the process of microelectronics di􏰀usion were all observed. So-called ``participative'' methods, that is, mechanisms that seek the ``involvement'' of workers in companies plans, were also slowly initiated 􏰁Alves, 2000; Gitahy and Rabelo, 1991).
A few basic elements should be brought to attention when focusing on the principle causes of the productive restructuring process in Brazil during the 1980s: 􏰁1) the need for Brazilian companies to compete on an inter- national level; 􏰁2) the actions of the transnational com- panies which lead their subsidiaries in Brazil to adopt new organizational and technological patterns that were, to a certain extent, inspired by Toyotism and by  ̄exible forms of accumulation; 􏰁3) the response to the advancement of the new trade unionism 􏰁novo sindical- ismo) that sought to strengthen itself in the work place 􏰁Alves, 2000; Carvalho and Schmitz, 1990).
In the ®rst years of the decade, facing Brazilian eco- nomic recession, the productive restructuring was basi- cally characterized by cost reduction brought about by labor force cutbacks. These particularly a􏰀ected the automotive and autoparts, textile and banking sectors. Due to the 1980/3 recession, the retraction of invest- ments initially slowed the introduction of new micro- electronic technologies, which were to arrive, to a limited extent, from the mid-1980s on. In sum, it can be said that the need to increase productivity occurred mainly through the reorganization of production, the
R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458	451
452	R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458
reduction in the labor force, the increase in the number of hours of the standard work day, the emergence of Quality Control Circles 􏰁QCC), and of the just-in-time and kan-ban production systems. However, it is inter- esting to note that in spite of the tardiness of its pro- ductive restructuring, Brazil was second only to Japan in the number of QCCs in the world in 1982 􏰁see Alves, 2000).
It was only from 1985 on, with the partial recupera- tion of the Brazilian economy, that the new technolog- ical innovations expanded, through the introduction of microelectronic industrial automation in the metal- mechanic, automotive, petrochemical, and steel sectors. In the automotive sector, the installation of new pro- duction lines coexisted with traditional production lines. This relatively high degree of technological heterogene- ity inside the companies came to characterize the pro- ductive restructuring in Brazil 􏰁Alves, 2000).
It was only in the 1990s, however, that the productive capital restructuring was more extensively implemented. Elements such as the so-called Toyotism and the  ̄exible company, lean production, the just-in-time kan-ban system, and the total quality process, were introduced. Also an enormous increase in sub-contracting and third party hiring of the labor force were observed. Another element seen was a process of productive decentraliza- tion characterized by industrial relocation. So-called ``traditional'' sectors such as the shoe industry and the textile industry initiated a movement of geographical changes due to competition from similar products im- ported from China and Southeast Asia 􏰁Alves, 2000). Several shoe factories were transferred from the Franca region, in the interior of the state of S~ao Paulo, and from the Vale do Sinos region, to the states of Cear􏰃a and Bahia, in the northeast of Brazil. By the same token, industries considered to be ``modern'', in the metal- mechanic and electronic sectors, were either transferred from the Greater S~ao Paulo region to areas in the in- terior of the state of S~ao Paulo, such as Rio Claro or S~aoCarlos,orwererelocatedtootherareasofthe country: some were moved to the interior of the state of Rio de Janeiro to places like Resende, for instance; others to the interior of Minas Gerais 􏰁Juiz de Fora) or to states like Paran􏰃a, Bahia, Rio Grande do Sul, etc. 􏰁Alves, 2000).
Within the context of world trade deregulation of the 1990s, the Brazilian automobile industry underwent changes in the policy of import duties. The reduction of tari􏰀s on the importation of vehicles dropped from 80% to 35% in 1990 in the automobile industry and from 60% to 20% in 1994 in the autoparts sector 􏰁Previtalli, 1996). Suppliers then began to intensify the productive re- structuring process through technological innovations involving changes in the layout design, the introduction of robots and CAD/CAM systems, as well as organi- zational changes involving the deverticalization and re-
duction of management hierarchies, and the implementation of new smaller factories structured around production blocks, team work, etc. The oldest production units of Volkswagen, Ford and of Mercedes- Benz, situated in the ABC area of S~ao Paulo, also de- veloped a strong restructuring program such as these, seeking to acquire new technological and production levels 􏰁Previtalli, 1996).
Particularly with the economic stabilization plan, the Real Plan, beginning in 1994 under the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, total quality programs, the just-in-time and kan-ban systems, and the introduction of salary gains linked to the increased pro®tability and productivity of companies found a promising macroeconomic situation for the develop- ment of productive restructuring. If initially the tech- nological innovations were restricted and separated by sectors, from the mid-1990s on, there was an ampli®- cation of the utilization of automatic microelectronics in the Brazilian production. Expenditure on microelec- tronic automation increased from 16.1% in the period of 1987/89 to 25% in 1993. Thus, if the productive re- structuring process in Brazil was limited and selective during the 1980s being characterized by a restrictive tendency, the 1990s were characterized by intensi®cation in the technical and organizational realms 􏰁see Alves, 2000).
The ®nancial sector also experienced the impacts of the restructuring process. Workers in the banking sector were strongly a􏰀ected by the changes in their work processes, mainly due to microelectronics technology and organizational and administrative innovations. These new administrative policies were instituted mainly in banks, through total quality programs and variable wages. The concession of merit-based incentives to banking managers who exceeded established goals; the development of an e􏰂cient and sophisticated means of communication between the banks and its employees ± by means of the liberal distribution of newsletters, magazines, and videos throughout the workplace; the creation of quality improvement groups in the work- place, as well as widespread teamwork, were increas- ingly used 􏰁Jinkings, 1995, 2000; Segnini, 1998).
The  ̄exible hiring practices of ®nancial institutions through third party contracts, part-time, and temporary employees caused a precarious trend in jobs and salaries, more deregulation of working conditions, and the loss of social rights for third party employees. From the point of view of the ®nancial institutions, these hiring practices provided businesses with enormous pro®ts while at the same time strengthening the capacity of bank management by fragmenting and hindering the organization of labor unions and syndicates. Supported by technological development, these organizational ad- justments greatly reduced the administrative structure and the functional departments of the ®nancial institu-
tions. Computer centers, services and payroll depart- ments were drastically reduced while some whole de- partments were done away with in bank branches and central administrative o􏰂ces. While the economic strength of large private ®nancial conglomerates grew, the number of banking employees was reduced from approximately 800,000 at the end of the 1980s to around 410,000 by the year 2000 􏰁Jinkings, 2000).
As far as the sexual division of labor is concerned, as the banking automatization and  ̄exibilization processes developed, more and more women were hired. However, no egalitarian working conditions between men and women in the banks, either in terms of salary or career plan, were observed. A series of social discriminatory mechanisms ± reproduced and intensi®ed in the working place ± established stronger relations of domination and exploitation of female labor, continuously producing inequality and segmentation between genders 􏰁Segnini, 1998; Jinkings, 2000).
The above-mentioned changes related to personal and professional characteristics of bank workers ex- pressing the on-going productive restructuring and labor automation and rationalization. Aiming at adequating its labor force to the present modalities of the produc- tive process, ®nancing institutions require ``new quali- ®cations'' for workers in this sector. Embedded in a context of growing unemployment and facing increas- ingly precarious contracting forms, banking employees are compelled to develop general and multiple skills in order to try to keep their jobs and be promoted in their careers. Under such working conditions, which exclude enormous portions of workers from the labor market, bank workers have to submit themselves to overloaded and extenuating working journeys. In the last decades, these workers' health problems have been aggravated and there has been an unprecedented increase in carpal tunnel syndrome, which reduces muscular strength and impairs movements for those who su􏰀er from its symptoms. The widespread total quality and variable wages programs also recreate strategies of labor domi- nation which seek to obscure labor and capital relations. Bank workers are considered to be ``members'', ``part- ners'', ``collaborators'' of banks and ®nancing institu- tion 􏰁see Jinkings, 2000).
The above examples of banking and automotive productive restructuring processes have, together with many others, signi®cantly altered the labor structure in Brazil. According to Pochmann 􏰁2000), in the 1970s ± at the peak of industrial employment expansion ± Brazil had about 20% of its total job positions in the industrial sector, whereas 20 years later, i.e., in the 1990s, this very same industrial sector absorbed less than 13% of the total national job occupations. As a result of the process of economical reconversion, Brazil, starting in 1990, registered new tendencies in terms of professional oc- cupations: due to ``changes in industrial dynamics in
which the internal market motivation depended on a greater external competitive insertion, the national economy had, for the ®rst time since the 30s, to begin to deal with absolute and relative loss of job positions in manufacturing industry. Within the 1980s and the 1990s, for instance, the Brazilian economy lost approx- imately 1.5 million job positions in the manufacturing sector'' 􏰁see Pochmann, 2000, p. 26). With the retraction of industrial employment between 1970 and 1990, ser- vices increased their relative participation in the occu- pational structure on average by 50%, for the most part it was the informal sector that incorporated large number of workers, above all in commerce, communi- cations and transport. According to Pochmann 􏰁2000, p. 27): ``In the 1990s, services took up more job posts, without taking into account however the destruction of jobs as much in the rural sector as in the industrial sector. Nowadays, the rise in the open unemployment rate re ̄ects, indeed, the incapacity of the Brazilian economy to produce signi®cant new posts, in spite of the fact that the service industry continues to absorb part of the workers that annually enter the job market or are ®red from the industrial and agricultural sectors''.
When compared to the volume of world unemploy- ment, in 1999 Brazil was in third place in the volume of unemployment, representing 5.61% of the total global unemployment, and its active economic population represented 3.12% of the worldwide global active eco- nomic population. In 1986, Brazil ranked 13th in global unemployment, representing 2.75% of the world AEP and 1.68% of world unemployment. 􏰁Pochmann, 2000).
Indeed, during the 1990s, this process intensi®ed so that it now permits assuming that more recent impacts have been more signi®cant. There has been a combina- tion of enormous reduction in the labor force with mutations in the productive process. Flexibilization and deregulation and the new forms of administration of the labor force are present with great intensity, although indications are that Fordism is still dominant and also mixed with the new productive processes. If it is true that low wages for the labor force ± which was always characterized as an attracting factor for the in ̄ux of foreign productive capital in Brazil ± may constitute, in some productive areas, an element that could hinder, in part, technological capitalist advances, in the same way the combination resulting from the super-exploitation of the labor force, with some of the more advanced pro- ductive patterns, constituted a central element of new rounds of investment of capital. In reality, what is of interest for productive capital is the con ̄uence of a ``quali®ed labor force'' prepared to work with micro- electronic equipment, increasingly lower wages and the conditions to place the labor force in a precarious situ- ation.
Countries like Brazil are experiencing moments of rede®nition along with the international division of
R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458	453
454	R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458
Table 1 Number of strikes by worker category, Brazil, urban region, 1978±1986
Worker category	1978
1979	1980	1981
1982
73 4 31 25 11
144
1983	1984
189	317 10	18 85	84 47	62 16 11
347	492
1985	1986	Total
246	534 23	45	154
Industrial 84 Civil construction	8 Middle-range salaried	8 Service 13 Other	5 44 18 34
Total 118
246	144	150
619
1.004
3.264
Source: Noronha apud Antunes 􏰁1994). labor and this will certainly have important conse-
quences for the trade unions and social movement.
3. The ``Response'' from Brazilian trade union
In the 1980s, Brazilian unionism experienced a par- ticularly positive moment. There was a widespread and highly signi®cant strike movement among various seg- ments of the labor force, such as salaried rural workers 􏰁``boias-frias''), public employees, diverse sectors of middle salaried workers, etc. There were, too, general category strikes 􏰁bank employees in 1995), strikes with workers' occupation of the factories 􏰁as in General Motors in S~ao Jos􏰃e dos Campos in 1985 and the Companhia Sideru􏰃rgica Nacional in Volta Redonda in 1989), innumerous strikes in speci®c ®rms, culminating in national general strikes, as in March 1989, which included about 35 million workers, the largest strike to have occurred in the history of the country 􏰁Table 1; see also Antunes, 1994).
There was a substantial union expansion to include mid-level workers and those in service sectors, such as bank employees, teachers, doctors, public employees, etc. that grew signi®cantly during this period. By the end of the 1980s, there was a total of 9833 unions in Brazil, a numberthatwastoreachabout15,972bythemid-1990s 􏰁urban and rural, employers' and workers' trade un- ions). Urban trade unions totaled 10,779. There was also an increase in the number of mid-level salaried workers. In 1996, there were 1335 public employees' unions, 461 unions linked to the so-called ``liberal professions'' and 572 of self-employed workers 􏰁Source: Labor Ministry, Brazil, 1996). Rural unionism continued to advance, rising since the 1970s, permitting an organizational re- structuring of farm workers and, later, the birth of the MST 􏰁The Landless Rural Workers' Movement). In 1996, there were 5193 rural unions, of which 3098 were workers' unions 􏰁Tables 2 and 3).
These points, mentioned above, make it possible to a􏰂rm that there was a real advance in the new unionism during the 1980s. Overall, this decade saw positive re- sults. There was a widespread and highly signi®cant
Table 2 Number of trade
unions ± Urban 􏰁1996)
77	43	41 20	19	7 55	43	48 50	21	20
1.604
211	237	802 125	187	550 14 1 154
Employers Employees Civil service Liberal professional	461 Self-employed	572
2.790 5.621 1.335
Sub-total	10.779
Source: Labor Ministry, Brazil, 1996.
Table 3 Number of trade unions ± Rural 􏰁1996)
Employers	2.095 Employees	3.098
Sub-total	5.193 Total	15.972
Source: Labor Ministry, Brazil, 1996.
strike movement; a notable expansion of trade unions organizing salaried sectors 􏰁teachers, bank workers, public sector workers, etc.); the advance of rural unionism, which had been on the ascent since the 1970s, continued; there was also the rise of the Union Con- gressessuchastheCUT-CentralU􏰃nicadosTrabalha- dores 􏰁Workers Central). Also, although very tentatively, there was an attempt to organize the work- place 􏰁a long-lasting weakness of Brazilian unionism); an e􏰀ective struggle for union autonomy and for free- dom from state intervention; and an increase in the number of trade unions, such as in the public service sector. In all, throughout this decade there was a general increase in membership, creating a favorable context for the new unionism 􏰁see Antunes, 1994).
While during the 1980s, Brazilian unionism went, in good measure, against the current of the critical ten- dencies present in unions in the advanced capitalist countries, in the last years of the decade, however, economic, political and ideological pressures had al- ready began to arise, taking Brazilian trade unionism, in the 1990s, through a regressive movement. The muta-
tions in the productive process and in the restructuring of business, as well as administration and control of the labor force, developed within a context of economic recession, launched a process of casualization of im- portant contingents of workers, and, particularly, in the intensi®cation of the unemployment of the labor force, of which the automobile industry is a good example. While in the ABC Paulista 􏰁the industrial cities sur- rounding the S~ao Paulo City) there were, at the end of the 1980s, approximately 220,000 metalworkers, this contingent diminished by nearly 110,000 by the end of the 1990s. In the industrial region of Campinas, in the stateofS~aoPaulo,therewereapproximately70,000 industrial workers, with this number being reduced to about 34,000 metalworkers in 2000. The number of bank workers also declined, as we have previously no- ted, following the restructuring of banks and the in- creased use of technology.
This new reality made new unionism weaker and more defensive, ®nding itself, on one side, faced with the emergence of neo-liberal unionism, in tune with the conservative wave world-wide, of which the Forßca Sin- dical 􏰁association of unions created in 1991) is the best example. On the other side, it faced directions occurring within CUT, that make it enormously di􏰂cult to have any qualitative advance capable of making the transi- tion from a period of resistance, as in the initial years of the new unionism, to a higher level, that of the elabo- ration of alternative economic proposals, contrary to the capitalist pattern of development existing in Brazil, which would be concerned ®rst and foremost with the range of sectors which compose our working class.
The situation today is di􏰂cult. The unionism of the Forßca Sindical, with its strong political and ideological dimensions, ®lls the union camp of the new right, of the preservation of order, of harmony with the designs of globalized capital, which leaves to Brazil the role of assembler, without our own technology, without scien- ti®c capacity, totally dependent upon external resources. Forßca Sindical has been strongly favorable to the trend of privatization of public businesses and of the restric- tion of social and welfare rights of public employees.
Within CUT, the scene is also one of great appre- hension. Some of the principal leaders are increasingly assuming a posture of abandoning socialist conception, in the name of accepting Order. The cult of negotiation, the creation of ``sectional councils'' 􏰁bargaining between capital and labor) in the automotive sector and in other productive branches at the beginning of the 1990s, the reduction in the work week accompanied by salary re- duction, among other examples, all this is basically in- serted into a project designed by the set of ideas and practices of social-democratic unionism, that has little by little adapted to a bureaucratic vertical structure, with decision-making at the top, that characterized Brazilian unionism in the post-1930s.
In the more left-wing sectors within CUT, the di􏰂- culties are also enormous. How is it possible to elaborate an alternative economic and political program that in- corporates the millions of workers who do not partici- pate in the market and who live in the misery of the informal economy? How is it possible to administer a new economic model that eliminates the super-exploi- tation of labor, that develops a particular Brazilian in- dustrial capitalism, when the monthly minimum wage, at about US$ 80 in 2000, reaches such degrading levels? What are the basic features of this alternative economic model whose logic should be to begin the dismantling of the pattern of accumulation present in the country? How is it possible to think of an action that does not impede technological advance, but makes it on a real basis, with leading edge science and technology devel- oped in the country, in an autonomous way and directed to the most profound needs of the working population? How is it possible to travel an alternative road that does not accept globalization and integration imposed by the logic of capital, integrating outward and disintegrating inward? How is it possible today to articulate values inspired in a project that has to give immediate re- sponses for the misery that ravages the daily lives of those who live o􏰀 work? In other words, how do you ®nd the di􏰂cult yet vital articulation between immediate interests and long-term strategic action, capable of of- fering more worthy conditions to the majority of the Brazilian population?
While during the 1980s, Brazilian trade unionism, as I said previously, went against the tide of the critical tendencies present in trade unionism of the more ad- vanced capitalist countries, by the end of the 1980s and throughout the 1990s, the new unionism emphatically addressed itself to the enormous challenges presented to the larger trade union movement, in a number of countries at the end of the 20th century. To summarize these challenges, which we understand to be present for unionist movements of various countries, we pose the following questions:
Are the unions capable of breaking the enormous social barrier that separates ``stable'' workers, in a dramatic process of reduction, with those part-time workers or those in the so-called ``informal economy'', which is dramatically expanding? Will they be able to assist with the union organization of the disorganized and unemployed, and in this way try to reverse the rates of de-unionization present in the principal capitalist economies? Are they capable of breaking with the new corporatism, which exclusively defends its respective professional categories, abandoning or radically dimin- ishing its more accentuated class concepts? Here, I do not mean a state corporatism, present in recent history, in Brazil since Vargas, in Argentina since Peronism, or even in Mexico since Cardenas, but that of a more re- cent social neo-corporatism which is excluding, biased
R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458	455
456	R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458
and which maintains and accentuates the fragmented character of that class which lives from its labor. Will they be able to break with the growing tendency of ex- cessive institutionalization and bureaucracy, that has so strongly marked the union movement on the global scale and distanced it from its social base, increasing the gap between the union institutions and autonomous social movements? Will they reverse the tendency, de- veloped from Japanese ``Toyotism'', and today ad- vanced on a global scale that consists of restricting the trade union to the exclusive bounds of the factory, the so-called business unionism more vulnerable and linked to business interests and tied to business control? And ®nally, will the trade unions have the force and vitality to break the existing barrier between the unionist and parliamentary actions, between economic and political actions, and instead articulate and join social, extra- parliamentary struggles that give life to class actions, with its actions within the institutional arena, which are important but clearly secondary in relation to the ®rst?
While these are not questions with simple answers, there are new sectors of Brazilian unionism that have sought to respond to some of these challenges. The Steel Trade Union of the Region of Campinas ± an important industrial area in the state of S~ao Paulo where there have been recent installations of Toyota and Honda plants ± has been responsible for a resistance movement and labor organization in both the factories and the employee neighborhoods. In the region of Campinas, Toyota su􏰀ered two strikes within its ®rst two years of installation. The action of the Steel Trade Union of the Region of Campinas is an example of resistance to the multiple forms of involvement and partnership that have been intensely developing within Brazilian unionism. Currently, this union, led by Catholic and Socialist workers, originated from the community bases of the Catholic church, refused to follow the example of the ``sectional councils'' of the ABC region in S~ao Paulo, considering them as a form of subordination and loss of class independence. Similarly, the Steel Trade Union of S~aoJos􏰃edosCampos,S~aoPaulo,anotherimportant industrial site where General Motors of Brazil is cur- rently located, has ful®lled a role of resistance and preservation of workers' rights, leading to union strug- gles and strong confrontations. Together, these two unions are prime examples of the leftist urban syndicates found nowadays in Brazil. The National Union of Pe- troleum Workers 􏰁named Federaß~o 􏰃nica dos Petro- leiros ± FUP) was responsible for one of the most important strikes in Brazil, in 1995, during which workers strongly protested against the privatization of the state-owned company Petrobr􏰃s and the government of Fernado Henrique Cardoso. Other examples can be cited, such as the various strikes and resistance move- ments that broke out during the 1990s. But throughout the decade, it was in the rural areas that the most im-
portant social and political movement of the country emerged: the MST.
4. The meaning of MST 􏰁The landless rural workers' movement) and new social movements in Brazil
Having emerged in 1984 as a consequence of the enormous disparities in land ownership in Brazil and as a result of the agro-industrial modernization process, the MST is illustrative of the possibilities of social movements and even of the new unionism in contem- porary Brazil. It is becoming the most important social and political movement in Brazil, resurrecting, with force and vitality, the struggle of the rural workers that is at the center of the Brazilian political struggle. As the main catalyst and propellant of the recent rural social struggles and being the most important opposition movement to the Fernando Henrique Cardoso govern- ment, the MST is characterized as a social±political movement whose centrality is found in its grassroots action, in democratic decisions in rural settlements, aimed at obtaining possession of land and at agrarian reform, giving greater priority to confrontation than to institutional or parliamentary action. These are also used, but on a secondary level. It is worth remembering that in Brazil about 1% of the population controls ap- proximately 46% of the land, a signi®cant example of agrarian concentration and profound exclusion of rural workers in relation to land ownership.
The MST, although a social±political movement born in the rural world, has increasingly incorporated the excluded urban worker, the urban unemployed, who in the past years or decades had migrated from the coun- tryside to the cities and now, without work, inverts the migratory  ̄ow, returning to the countryside, expelled by the restructuring process of productive capital. This has generated a movement that is rich in experience and cosmopolitan, since it articulates experiences and forms of sociability native to the world of work, both rural and urban.
Founded in the con ̄uence of leftist Catholic action, linked with the Theology of Liberation and organized in grassroots ecclesiastical communities of the Catholic Church, with strongly inspired Marxist and socialist elements, the MST ®nds vitality in its strong grassroots national structure. This gives it dynamism and permits workers, male and female, to imagine a day-to-day life with meaning through obtaining land and through the democratic and popular practices resulting from pro- ductive collective action.
According to Joao Pedro Stedile, a member of the MST National Committee and the movement's main leader, ``The MST was born in practice more than 15 years ago. In our development, we had a ®rst period, from 1979±1983, of the reestablishment of massive
struggles for land, when many land occupations and other mobilizations spread to several regions in the country, however isolated from each other. Only after a long process of mutual knowledge, of articulation be- tween the leaders of these localized struggles, the MST was constituted as a national movement with the real- ization of a Encontro National dos Sem Terra, in Jan- uary 1984, in Cascavel, Parana, with representatives of 16 states'' 􏰁Stedile, 1997, p. 102).
As there are approximately 4.8 million landless fam- ilies in Brazil, the struggle for land has intensi®ed, in particular since the MST was structured nationally. While in 1987, there were 1849 families which partici- pated in the land occupations in Brazil, in 1997 this number had risen to 58.226 􏰁see Table 4).
In the 1990s, the MST became the main catalyst and drive behind the recent social struggle in Brazil and through the strong links they have with social urban sectors ± some of which are linked to syndicates and some not ± they have helped to encourage joint actions between unions, social movements and student move- ments. Its importance originates from the fact that the pivot of its performance is pointed toward the social movement of rural workers, for their social base, not emphasizing its action in the institutional or parlia- mentary scope. The institutional and parliamentary ac- tion realized by the MST is always a consequence of the social-based actions, marked by occupation of lands, sit- ins, and popular public manifestations of great ampli- tude and breadth, ascribing the MST with great force and vitality. Due to the brutal social inequalities of the country, there is an obvious fountain of social force to be organized by the MST.
Having strong ties with the social movement and urban trade unions, the action of the MST had in- creasingly shown itself to be an alternative capable of in ̄uencing the organization of urban workers, as is the case for the Movement to dos Sem-Teto 􏰁Movement of the Homeless). Recently, in August of 2000, the Move- ment of the Homeless in the state of Rio de Janeiro was responsible for an action that caused enormous social
Table 4 Occupation of land ± number of families ± 1987/1997
and political impact in Brazil: dozens of homeless workers and their families ``visited'' an upper middle class shopping center in Rio. A few days later, another ``shopping visit'' followed, this time to a supermarket in the same city: the homeless ``paid'' their expenses with a symbolic cheque to the value of R$ 169,000 reais, an amount corresponding to the claimed sum related to the most recent case of public corruption in Brazil involving the construction of a public building and the judicial branch of the government.
Through such actions, this recent Homeless Move- ment brought out the wastefulness and super ̄uous so- cial wickedness that characterizes Brazilian society. It is important to note that according to information from the IBGE, in 1999 there were 7.6 million unemployed workers, while in 1995 they totaled 4.5 million. The o􏰂cial rate of unemployment increased from 6.1% to 9.6%. If we consider the ®gures given out by an im- portant entity such as DIEESE 􏰁Departamento Inter- sindical ed Estatisticas e Estudos Socio-Economicos), the levels of unemployment are double the o􏰂cial ®g- ures for the principle cities of the country, such as Rio de Janeiro and S~ao Paulo.
Nowadays, according to the data published in 2000, the economically active population in Brazil totals 71 million workers, while only 24 million, or one-third, are found in the formal job market. The majority, totaling 37 million, or the remaining 2/3 of the work force, is found in the informal market, without social rights, without ®xed salaries, working part-time, or on tempo- rary and uncertain jobs. It is known that these indices tend to rise, increasing the uncertainty of workers in the informal market 􏰁Pochmann, 2000).
In a decade of so many transformations and so much poverty ± a consequence of the productive restructuring as much as of the implementation of neoliberal policies ± work precariousness and unemployment have grown signi®cantly. As a result of these previously mentioned processes, the reduction of formal employment and the expansion of informal employment ± de®ning elements in Brazilian economic policy ± the number of unem- ployed workers was remarkably enlarged. If unions are presently undergoing operational di􏰂culties, through their reorganization and retrenchment plans, many so- cial urban movements have been started or revitalized, such as the movement of the homeless workers.
What these new social urban movements denounce is clear: the same society that produces super ̄uous con- sumer goods and at the same time generates and stim- ulates multiple consumer needs, makes it impossible for large contingents of poor or unemployed workers to consume these very same goods. As a participant of the Homeless Movement in Rio de Janeiro clearly stated: ``If it is us that build the shopping centers, why can't we even visit them?'' This question is a clear response to the logic of current society: those who construct and
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
􏰁Fonte: CPT, apud Fernandes, 1999,
11.849 10.515 15.665
8.248 14.720 15.538 19.092 20.516 30.479 63.080 58.266
132).
R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458	457
458	R. Antunes / Geoforum 32 􏰁2001) 449±458
produce wealth in society cannot, even marginally, enjoy its results. They are excluded from consumption as well as from work.
Thus, the new urban and rural social movements that are growing in so many parts of the world begin to show the society its own destructive logic, with its consequent inequalities and wickednesses. It is in this ``disposable society'' ± a producer of the disposable and of the su- per ̄uous in this era of the entertaining society 􏰁with its shopping centers, the true temple of capital consump- tion), men and women without homes and without jobs, the ownerless of the ®elds and cities, take their actions in various parts of Brazil. And strong signs are being given that in the next decade they will be developing, strengthening and enlarging their a􏰂rmative actions.
Recently in Brazil, we are witnessing a blooming of actions that emerge from labor from social forces and from the victims of this destructive logic that only weakens the workers movement and increases unem- ployment. The advancement of the MST, the most sig- ni®cant social and political movement in Brazil during the 1990s, is an example of such actions. So are the new social urban movements that have recently emerged and that argue against the waste and super ̄uidity which characterize contemporary society. The greater their ties with the trade unions and CUT, the more their experi- ences will help in the revival of the trade unions in con- temporary Brazil at the beginning of the 21st century.
References
Alves, G., 2000. O Novo e Prec􏰃ario Mundo do Trabalho. Ed. Boitempo, S􏰄ao Paulo.
Antunes, R., 1994. Recent Strikes in Brazil 􏰁The Main Tendencies of the Strike Movement of the 1980's). Latin American Perspectives, Issue 80, vol. 21, no. 1, Winter. Sage, California.
Antunes, R., 1995. Adeus ao Trabalho? Ensaio sobre as Metamorfoses e a Centralidade do Mundo do Trabalho. Ed. Cortez/Ed. Unicamp, S~ao Paulo.
Bihr, A., 1991. Du ``Grand Soir'' a L'Alternative'' 􏰁Le Mouvement Ouvrier Europ􏰃een en Crise). Les Editions Ouvrieres, Paris.
Carvalho, R.Q., Schmitz, H., 1990. O Fordismo est􏰃a vivo no Brasil. In: Novos Estudos Cebrap, 27, Cebrap, S~ao Paulo.
Coriat, B., 1992. Pensar al Rev􏰃es 􏰁Trabajo y Organizacio􏰃n en la Empresa Japonesa). Siglo XXI, M􏰃exico/Espan~a.
Fernandes, B., 1999. Ocupaßco~es de Terra e Politica de Assentamentos Rurais. In: Lutas Sociais, no. 6, PUC-SP, Xama Editora.
Gitahy, L., Rabelo, F., 1991. Educaßc~ao e Desenvolvimento Tec- nolo􏰃gico: O Caso da Indu􏰃stria de Autopeßcas. Textos para Discuss~ao no. 11, DPCT/IG/UNICAMP, Campinas.
Harvey, D., 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Hirata, H. 􏰁org.), 1993. Sobre o Modelo Japon^es. Edusp, S~ao Paulo. Jinkings, N., 1995. O Mister de Fazer Dinheiro. Ed. Boitempo, S~ao
Paulo. Jinkings, N., 2000. Trabalho e Resist^encia na Fonte Misteriosa. Tese
de Doutorado, IFCJH/UNICAMP, Campinas. Kurz, R., 1992. O Colapso da Modernizaßc~ao Conservadora. Paz e
Terra, S~ao Paulo. M􏰃esz􏰃aros, I., 1995. Beyond Capital 􏰁Towards a Theory of Transition).
Merlin Press, London. Pochmann, M., 2000. Nova Divis~ao Internacional do Trabalho e as
Ocupaßco~es no Brasil. CESIT/UNICAMP, Campinas. Previtalli, F.S., 1996. Reestruturaßc~ao Industrial: Um Estudo de Caso sobre o Processo de Subcontrataßc~ao nos N􏰃iveis Inferiores da Cadeia Produtiva do Setor Automobil􏰃istico. Dissertaßc~ao de Mest-
rado. UNICAMP/IFCH, Campinas. Segnini, L., 1998. As Mulheres no Trabalho Banc􏰃ario. Edusp, S~ao
Paulo. Stedile, J.P. 􏰁Org.), 1997. A luta pela reforma agraria e o MST. In: A
Reforma agraria e a luta do MST. Rio de Janeiro, Editora Vozes.
Ricardo Antunes is a professor in Sociology of Labor at the State University of Campinas 􏰁UNICAMP). He was a Visiting Research Fellow at the School of European Studies of the University of Sussex 􏰁1997/8). He is the Author of several books, including: Os Sentidos do Trabalho: Ensaio sobre a A®rmaß~o e a Negaß~o do Trabalho 􏰁S~ao Paulo: Boitempo, 1999); Adeus ao Trabalho? Ensaio sobre as Meta- morfoses e a Centralidade do Mundo do Trabalho 􏰁S~ao Paulo: Cortez- Unicamp, 1995); O Novo Sindicalismo no Brasil, 􏰁Campinas: Pontes, 1995) and is the Editor of Neoliberalismo, Trabalho e Sindicatos 􏰁Reestruturaß~o Produtica no Brasil e na Inglaterra), 􏰁S~ao Paulo: Boi- tempo, 1997). He is also the Participating Editor of the Latin American Perspectives Journal 􏰁USA), among other publications. Translated by Rosanne Hogan.

2008
Anthropology
Estudos Sociedade e Agricultura
Agrarian Reform in Brazil: a series of missed appointments between social movements and state policies
Eric Sabourin

ABSTRACT
President Luís Ignacio Lula da Silva was elected with the proposal for an important program of agrarian reform, family agriculture support and struggle against poverty. Paradoxically, the support to the agrarian reform seems to have stagnated even with the great influence of landless workers’ movements. How to explain that this seems at first to be a contradiction and, furthermore, how do we evaluate debates within Brazilian society and the federal government on this theme? The article analyzes the tensions, debates, advances and impasses of the past ten years of agrarian reform policy in Brazil looking at the interaction between social movements and public policies.
Key words: Brazil, agrarian reform, Government Lula, public policies, rural development.
INTRODUCTION
The Second National Plan for Agrarian Reform (II Plano Nacional de Reforma Agrária - PNRA), designed by the Worker’s Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores – PT) and the first Lula da Silva administration, was ambitious and aimed at innovation. Its objectives were to rectify property deeds, to make familiar units viable and to support production, instead of limiting itself to distributing land which would take years to be assigned and regulated, which was the main mistake of the Cardoso Administrations’ agrarian policy (Sampaio, 2001; INCRA, 2003). In fact, taking advantage of a depression of the agrarian market in the end of the 1990’s, the Cardoso Administration distributed land to almost 400.000 families, often in precarious conditions of settlement and support to production. Surely, the pace of such distributions was difficult to maintain during the two first years of the Lula Administration.
The agrarian reform plan was entrusted to the Agrarian Reorganization Bureau (Secretaria de Reorganização Agrária – SRA) – notice the disappearance of the word reform – of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (Ministério do Desenvolvimento Agrário – MDA), which houses the National Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e de Reforma Agrária – INCRA). The main debate inside the government around the modalities of agrarian reform was limited to a dispute between granting access to land by means of redistribution (after expropriation) and granting access to land by means of the market (with reimbursement through a special credit line).
1
2
The absence of updated and trustworthy statistics from INCRA doesn’t make the debate any easier. But, apart from the war of numbers between administrations, the opposition and social movements, it is clear that the Lula Administration was not able to implement its Agrarian Reform Plan, in spite of the MDA’s strong alliances with the Landless Workers’ Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Terra –MST) and the National Confederation of the Workers in Agriculture (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores da Agricultura – CONTAG). Actually, more than financing, it were INCRA’s administrative limitations and the legal obstacles to expropriation and distribution of new land which led to the reduction of the government’s predictions.
This article makes a balance of the agrarian reform in Brazil in 2006 by the end of President Lula’s first mandate. The first part comprises a historic account of the struggles for and attempts at agrarian reform since the 1960’s, interpreted as a succession of missed apointments between the State, society and its movements. It presents the evolution of the results of the last ten years of agrarian reform. The second part lays out the current main political and sociological debates on agrarian reform taking place in the Brazilian society and in the Federal government. It analyses the limitations, the consequences of these issues and proposes some alternate pathways regarding public policies and research subjects. The article concludes by indicating the absence of a true debate on the decentralization and redistribution of land.
1. AN HISTORY OF MISSED APPOINTMENTS
1.1. The first attempts
The first organized movements defending agrarian reform were the Peasant Leagues from the Northeast, which spread across most Brazilian states from 1945 on, with the support of the Brazilian Communist Party (Partido Comunista Brasileiro – PCB). At that time, the struggle for land was inserted in a set of demands for elementary rights in work, health, social security, schooling, and the right to autonomous organization.
From the beginning, the leagues brought together paid workers from the sugar cane refineries, local inhabitants, sharecroppers and small tenant farmers of precarious status. All of these classes were, in fact, regularly deprived of the land they worked (Garcia Jr, 1990) or of their source of work, according to the needs of the employers or land owners. This was the first missed appointment.
After the PCB’s interdiction in 1947, the leagues were repressed and only resurfaced in 1954 in the sugar cane zones, in the states of Pernambuco, Paraíba and Alagoas.
The pressure from the peasant leagues from the Northeast led the João Goulart administration to instate the Rural Worker Statute in 1963, theoretically granting the farmers the same rights which had been acquired by the urban workers (job stability, discharge indemnities). These rights weren’t really observed and resulted in massive dismissals by the employers and, in a reaction to that, led to the constitution of local Rural Workers Unions (Sindicatos dos Trabalhadores Rurais – STR) (box 1).
Box 1: Celestino P. da Silva, founder of the STR of Campina Grande and Lagoa Seca, Paraíba
« From the beginning of the peasant leagues in Paraíba, there was a conflict between the Communist Party and the Catholic Church. The idea of creating an STR in the town of Campina Grande came from Don M. Pereira in order to avoid the creation of a union linked to the communists in the Leagues. The communists treated us as «loyal» to the Church. In fact, it was necessary to negotiate a mixed board of directors for the new union in order to establish it, because the members of the league were mostly employees, lawyers and workmen, which didn’t add up to enough farmers, in Campina Grande, to constitute a board with 12 directors. The church had a lot of influence amongst the farmers. The first meetings took place in the parochial room of Campina Grande’s mother church.
But, during the election of the new board of the STR, after the coup d’état, all members linked to the leagues were arrested. Therefore, I left the board. The Military Police persecuted the ex-members of the leagues and the communists with no mercy. The union got together and the Church helped to liberate a few of them in Campina Grande »
3
Interview given on November 10, 1998 – translated.
The second theme of the Base Reforms of the Goulart administration was the Bill of Agrarian Reform. That is when the military coup d‘état took place in 1964, resulting in a second missed apointment between the peasant organizations and the State. In addition to repression, the military State used new forms of peasant organizations: the Official Rural Workers Unions, to administrate social programs and dissuade them of their original functions.
In the same way, the first bill of agrarian reform, the Land Statute, published on November, 1964, provisioned compensation to the land owners in case of expropriation (in cash or in deeds of public loans), as well as a colonization program aimed at the lands of the Cerrados and of the Amazon. This was the third divergence of agrarian reform. The first national plan for agrarian reform was defined only in 1985, with the return of the democratic State. Fought against by the employers’ class and the Democratic Ruralist Union (União Democrática Ruralista – UDR), it was never implemented prior to the new constitution of 1988.
During the conservative modernization phase of the agriculture during the 1970’s and 1980’s, there was a concentration of land. Despite the first distributions of land by the mechanisms of colonization, and therefore, of agrarian reform, this concentration remained unchanged (table 1).
Table 1: Land Distribution Structure in Brazil (2003)
Source: Land Distribution Registry - INCRA (August 2003)
The process was soon taken over again by the creation of the MST in 1985 and its expansion throughout the country, supported by the progressive sector of the catholic church, which, after the end of the base ecclesial communities movement, came together in the shape of the Pastoral Commission of the Land (Comissão Pastoral da Terra – CPT) (Porto Gonçalves, 2005).
1.2. Successes and limitations of the pro-agrarian reform movements
Without a strong and determined collective organization of the «landless» using the mechanism of occupation of unproductive land properties for political reasons, as well as technical and financial, the agrarian reform would never have lifted off. It would have been limited to the colonization of pioneering fronts (the Cerrados of the states of Minas Gerais, Goiás, Maranhão, Piauí, and the Amazon forest) or to the distribution of public land. Nevertheless, if the social movements achieved the distribution of land relatively easily, at least until 1998, it has always been much more difficult to negotiate or organize their productive utilization. There are several reasons for this.
First, the social pressure on obtaining access to land is so strong that it often justifies the allocation of plots of land, even when they have insufficient area to ensure the survival of a family. This kind of
Surface Categories (ha)
Number of rural establishments
% of rural establishments
Total Area (ha)
% Area
A verage Surface (ha)
< 10
1.338.711
31,6
7.616.113
1,8
5,7
10 to 25
1.102.999
26
18.985.869
4,5
17,2
25 to 50
684.237
16,1
24.141.638
5,7
35,3
50 to 100
485.482
11,5
33.630.240
8
69,3
100 to 500
482.677
11,4
100.216.200
23,8
207,6
500 to 1000
75.158
1,8
52.191.003
12,4
694,4
1000 to 2000
36.859
0,9
50.932.790
12,1
1381,8
> to 2000
32.264
0,8
132.631.509
31,6
4110,8
Total
4.238.421
100
420.345.382
100
99,2
4
minimal agrarian reform has even the consent of the beneficiaries and their organizations. On the other hand these are seldom the best lots, usually degraded pastures.
There is in fact a great number of workers and the children of smallholders looking for land in the regions where the employment of agricultural workers is denser. MST’s strategy is exactly that of recruiting as many candidates as possible, including former rural workers and urban workers, in order to constitute a massive organization, capable of enlisting numerous members to put the State under pressure (picture 1 and table 2). According to the agricultural census (IBGE, 1996), there were 2.4 million small land owners with a usable area below the Minimal Settlement Surface (rural module), or in other words 65% of the familiar units. That number jumped to 3.4 million in 1998 (INCRA, 2003: 14).
The second challenge is related to this public’s characteristics and the misunderstandings they face with the INCRA staff, the technicians and even with the directors of the unions and the MST. Most of those who benefit from the agrarian reform are illiterate or have very little formal education. Usually, those of rural origin had been low-pay, temporary workers, such as sugar cane cutters, wranglers or sharecroppers.
Picture 1: Evolution of land occupations between 1998 e 2003 Source: CPT (2005)
Table 2: Land occupation per region (1988-2003) Source: Dataluta, Geography Dept., Unesp.
Usually, they have neither the knowledge nor the practical experience in mixed crop-livestock farming and, even less, in managing a farm. Seldom have they taken part before of a collective organization experience. In the Northeast, many beneficiaries of the agrarian reform among the former workers from the sugar cane plantations, often treated in semi-slavery conditions1 up until the 1990’s, do not
Region
1988-2003
1st year Cardoso Administration
1st year Lula Administration
North
387
11
4
Northeast
1402
58
44
Center-west
639
26
7
Southeast
672
38
30
South
549
16
18
T otal
3649
147
103
1 The women and children more than 7 years old work in the sugar cane harvest in order to ensure the family’s survival.
5
have identification documents and ignore their elementary rights regarding work, social security and justice. The State support to the settlements (credit, technical assistance, and training) comes too late or not at all, due to the lack of human resources and conviction inside the public technical assistance services. Ultimately, there is certain historic collusion between the social movements (particularly the MST) and INCRA, in programming and supporting collective settlements or collective production projects, which are usually predestined to failure.
In fact, the collective dynamic is important. It works relatively well during the stages of vindication, occupation and struggle for obtaining the land, and little or hardly, in the stages of valuation, production, or management of common resources.
This characteristic becomes so determining that in most settlements the issue of the organization’s social cohesion is the first limiting factor, more than technical or financial problems (Cepeda et al., 2002:12; Mello, 2006:20). The technical and financial difficulties and the matter of support and training may be overcome with time. If they aren’t, once the settling credit is gone, the family, usually, has to abandon the given plot and this is passed on, for free or for some compensation, to another militant of the movement, to a neighbour or to a relative.
Such practice, prohibited by the agrarian reform laws, is tolerated by INCRA, because it masks the projects’ failures, and also by the unions and the MST, who have lists of candidates waiting for their turn. In fact, these substitutions of beneficiaries take place in transactions as covert as they are illegal.
Following the same logic, in the Northeastern states, as well as in the Center-west, one finds several settlements in bankrupt farms in which occupation was arranged. Certain land owners contact the “landless” movements and even finance the transportation of the future “occupants” by means of specialized middlemen. Afterwards, the indemnification is also negotiated between INCRA and the owner.
Therefore, among the beneficiaries, apart from the sharecroppers and tenants who lived at the fazenda, it is not uncommon to find the former manager, foreman, or even one of the former owner’s children. Very often, they take the best land, the farm house and the seats as leaders of the settlement’s association or cooperative, and insure the contacts with INCRA and local politicians.
1.3. Evolution of the agrarian reform during the Cardoso and Lula Administrations
The global numbers of the agrarian reform results presented by the MDA must be compared to those by the University of the State of São Paulo (Dataluta, Unesp) and by the social movements (MST e CPT) (tables 3, 4, 5). Those should be considered with the due caution, but they are the most trustworthy in terms of infra-structure and costs.
The number of settled families was important by the end of both Cardoso Administrations and Lula’s first, coinciding with the presidential election campaigns. In the case of the Lula Administration, the main resources were only put to use by 2004 and 2005.
Table 3: Number of settled families per region (1979-2002)
Table 4: Families settled by the agrarian reform between 1985 and 2005
Region
Occupations 1988-2003
Settlements 1979 – 2002 (number of families)
North
387
251.452
Northeast
1402
225.666
Center-west
639
111.865
Southeast
672
38.527
South
549
37919
T otal
3649
665.429
Source : Dataluta, Geography Dept., Unesp, Presidente Prudente
6
Period/Year	Number of families
1985/1989	82.896 1990/1993	42.382 1993/1994	17.946
1995	42.912 1996	43.486 1997	81.944 1998	101.094 1999	85.226 2000	60.521 2002	63.477 2003	36.301 2004	81.254 2005	127.506
Source: INCRA/MDA, 2005
The average number of families settled per year, during the first Cardoso Administration, was 59.500 at an average cost of 28.800 reais per family (at the time of the Lumiar technical assistance project) and 70.000 between 1998 and 2002, at an average cost of 7.180 reais per family (end of the special Procera credit line and of the “Lumiar” training & extension project).
The cost indicated by INCRA ranged, in fact, from 13 to 15000 reais per family, according the type of settlement (expropriation or land credit lines), which is relatively low. However, the figures presented by INCRA regarding the global cost of the agrarian reform in the period of 1995-1998 (R$6.878.000) refer mostly to the financing of the compensation for expropriated land to their owners.
Table 5: Results and costs of the agrarian reform (1995-2005)
Source: Ministry of Agrarian Development, 2005, Brazil
The figure presented by the MDA of an average 75000 families/year during the first three years of the Lula Administration, is also subject to controversy among the social movements and the opposition. The cost would come close to 12000 reais per settled, while the budget allocated in the II PNRA is 30000 reais per family. If there was a global advance during the Lula Administration, it was, above all, in INCRA’s budget for education, credit and technical assistance, but the financings used for infrastructure and direct support of the settled families are much lower than those predicted in the plan for agrarian reform (Porto-Gonçalves, 2005).
This summary allows us to place the problem of the application of the present agrarian reform model in Brazil and its relation to the social movements, firstly, as a social and political issue. It is political in
Y ear
Number of settled families
Costs in Reais
1995
30.716
2.150.000
1996
41.717
1.235.000
1997
66.837
1.940.000
1998
98.740
1.545.000
Total FHC Adm. 1
238.010
6.870.000
1999
99.201
938.000
2000
69.929
406.000
2001
73.754
331.000
2002
43.486
380.000
Total FHC Adm. 2
286.370
2.055.000
2003
28.000
400.000
2004
97.000
1.000.000
2005
127.000
1.330.000
3 years Lula Adm.
226.800
2.730.000
two ways: the process has always been impaired, on one hand, by the interests and alliances of those who shared the power; and on the other hand, due to the insistence on an unfair model, subject to a lot of opposition. The issue is social because, even if in its origin, the agrarian reform project was planned as a response to a situation of great poverty and disparity, to the extreme injustices caused by the concentration of land. Its application cannot be limited to the distribution of plots of land: it also depends on the ways the production is organized and on the social life, the quality of life of its beneficiaries.
2. THE POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL DEBATES AROUND THE AGRARIAN REFORM
2.1. Actors and components of the debate
The debate over the agrarian reform policy in Brazil has to do with more general issues, such as the project of society, the views on rural development, the place of agriculture in the society or the future of family agriculture. The political debate is limited, very often, to the confrontation between groups of interest and it also provokes unexpected alliances.
A majority of the Brazilian political and managerial class, supported by the agrarian oligarchy and by the patronal agriculture sector, is against the agrarian reform, out of principle, out of fear, out of defending its own privileges, or even out of prejudice against the poor. Another part, so much in the left as in the right wing, doesn't believe in the economic success of the agrarian reform, but finds sociopolitical, electoral, ideological interests in the current process. Finally, sectors tied to the land speculation find economic interests in the current system, because, since 1996, the compensation for expropriated land has ensured the existence of a real institutional land market, which benefits, in fine, the proprietors, banks and investors.
A third important tendency is constituted by those who defend the agrarian reform, for social, ideological and economic conviction. It comprises the social movements and the rural workers' unions, the landless organizations, the Catholic Church and the left-wing parties, such as PT. From the years 1990-2000 on, after the emotion raised by the repression of the landless by the police in the States of Rondônia and Pará (dozens killed in 1995), a majority of the public opinion, above all in the middle class, became favorable to the process of agrarian reform, getting even to influence the Cardoso Administration's policies.
MST constitutes a private case in this pro-agrarian reform tendency, its leaders struggle, above all, for a socialist revolution in Brazil (Stedile, 2002), an objective far away from being shared by the rest of the settlers and members of the landless movement or its supporters.
2.2. A model never really put into practice
The academic debate is important for its written production. Even if it utilizes more scientific arguments, it is still very marked by those three tendencies. Two main theses occupy that debate today. First, in a developmental perspective, the agrarian reform constitutes one of the programs in a policy of strengthening the family agriculture (based on the small property and the family’s work) integrated into the capitalist market. Such insertion in the market can take place by the integration into the agri-food chains (grains, meat, milk, fruits, etc.), by the articulation to the national market and by the occupation of segmented market niches, by means of the qualification of the products (organic, agro-ecological, origin, etc). The reference to the European model is very strong (Veiga, 2002; Abramovay, 2002). It is justified by the success of a majority of beneficiaries of the agrarian reform, European descendants, in the states of Paraná, Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina.
For other authors, such as Souza Martins and José Graziano da Silva, the development of the capitalist
7
competition amidst the Brazilian and world agriculture reached such point where the settlement of small farmers without land by means of the agrarian reform would arrive too late. From the point of view of agricultural production, they can never become competitive2. But the agrarian reform can still be justified in Brazil, as a social policy aimed at limiting the rural exodus, fighting against the loss of roots and the marginalization of the rural populations condemned to migration.
Silva (2002:142) pragmatically states that "My position is that, from the point of view of capitalist development, from the point of view of the development of the productive forces in the countryside, the agrarian reform is no longer a need, be it for the bourgeoisie, be it for the producing classes. That doesn't mean that it is not a possibility".
Martins (2003:13) considers that, in Brazil, an alliance between the capital and the work against the land rent - even if irrational, and even from the point of view of the development of capitalism - has always been impossible. On the contrary, the slavery inheritance and the temptation of perpetuating it, sealed an alliance between the capital and land property. The main objective of a distributive agrarian reform would be that of reducing the work relationships linked to the concentration of land and of re- socializing the people left at the margin of the economic and social development (Martins, 2003:33). Like Silva (2002) and Veiga (2001), Martins also sees a Keynesian effect in the agrarian reform: the multiplication of the municipal districts, of the equipments and infrastructures in the rural areas, the re-urbanization and the strengthening of the civil society (Martins, 2003:178). He criticizes, not without reason, the current policy: "the agrarian reform program is a social program treated as if it were an economic program for small business farmers" (Martins, 2003:85), and proposes an extension and a routine work of the agrarian reform as a recurrent process of decentralizing land ownership. Such a policy would not be limited to the simple distribution of land and the multiplication of settlements.
2.3. Access to the land through the market or through distribution: a false debate
The only alternative to the distribution system ever tried, co-financed by the World Bank, is the program of land credit (Crédito Fundiário, former Banco da Terra and Cédula da Terra, in the Cardoso Administration), also described as agrarian reform through the market, having part of it dedicated to the settlement of young farmers (Primeira Terra).
First, the opposition between access to the land through the market or through distribution is very relative. In practice, the distribution of expropriated private land got to depend on the market's logic, as the former proprietors are reimbursed in equivalent or superior amounts to the courses of the local land market. Therefore, such level of compensation encourages the proprietors to negotiate the occupation of their farms by the landless with the complicity of INCRA or through arrangements between those involved.
In fact, the experience of the Banco da Terra, which started in 1999, inherited certain vices from the previous model without maintaining the advantage of the gratuitous access to the land. It is being applied by INCRA, using the same methods. The beneficiaries are set up in collective settlements and the habitations contained in agro-villages in order to reduce the infrastructure costs (roads, electricity, water) (Buanaim, 1999; Pereira, 2004; Barbosa, 2005).
The main difference is that, instead of obtaining the land by a concession of the State, the farmers must pay for their lot, with the help of a land credit line. As another aspect, the support, in terms of infrastructure (habitation), credit and technical assistance (which are due to be paid for after the first
2 This thesis, qualified as pragmatic or realistic, exists among PT and the Lula Administration. It presents the characteristic of coming close to the neoliberal and conservative proposals defended by the financial elite and the oligarchy. In fact, it is the thesis of unified economic thought.
8
two years), is less favorable than that of the classic outline, already reduced in 1999 (INCRA, 1999).
For the World Bank and for the government, the fact of buying the lands from the proprietors who want to sell them should increase the readiness of land, make the procedures more flexible and reduce the cost of the land (eliminating long legal appeals). Also, the reimbursement should impute responsibility and commit the beneficiaries. So, one of the criticisms from the big land owners, even if denied by the statistics (FAO-INCRA, 1996; 2000; Heredia et al, 2004), would be the enormous rate of land abandonment by the beneficiaries of the agrarian reform, or, in other words, the useless expense of public resources (Neto, 2002). In fact, the only change is the compulsoriness of reimbursement of lands, often over-priced and from which it seems difficult to obtain a sufficient return. In the cases visited in the Northeast (State of Paraíba), families of smallholders were settled in lots of 17 ha of degraded pasture land in semi-arid areas. In those conditions, the rate of abandonment can only be the same or superior to that of the classic projects. And afterwards? How to force a poor person, with no income to pay for land that has no value? With imprisonment?
In terms of the availability of land, the system didn't change at all. The processes for expropriation of unproductive lands, already rare and time-consuming3 due to the alliances between the judiciary power and the proprietors or due to corruption, continue the same. Those processes became very difficult after the 1998 ordinance prohibiting the expropriation of occupied land, taking from the social movements its only means of pressure. The legal actions are endless and, in fact, they increase the cost of the agrarian reform. The expropriated and distributed properties are always reimbursed and usually to current market prices.
In summary, the experience of the land credit line risks ending up as an attempt of minimum agrarian reform. Besides the failures in applying it, the model "World Bank-Cardoso Administration" is mainly destined to reduce the rural exodus, to move the poor away from the urban centers, and, additionally, in the great business agriculture zones, to supply a cheap work-force to the farm enterprises or to the firms that work with agro-industrial vertical integration systems: I have been witness to cases aimed at the plantation of eucalyptus for cellulose, sugarcane and castor bean for biodiesel production in the States of Minas Gerais and Piauí. The story is cynical, because it was precisely the system of integration between agriculture and industry, applied to the production of soy, pigs and fowl, which provoked the ruin and the expulsion of thousands of small farmers from their lands in the Southern States of the country (Rio Grande do Sul, Paraná, Santa Catarina). These farmers created the MST.
However, one of the consequences of the programs of agrarian reform through the market is that of having diffused in the media a supposedly economic and social failure of the model of land distribution. That is in spite of all evaluations, governmental or not, that are showing economic results in terms of income and infrastructure equivalent or many times superior to those of the traditional family agriculture in the same areas (FAO-INCRA, 1996 and 2000).
Thus, the agrarian reform, and the social movements that promote it, has lost support from the public opinion, influenced by the press and the intellectuals, particularly, from the middle class.
2.4. The thesis of the attraction of renting the land among the landless
Among the defenders of the agrarian reform, disappointed by the current situation, largely due to the inclinations of the public policies, some researchers, such as Martins (2003:13), reject most of the responsibility over the MST and the social movements.
According to Martins, the ease with which the organizations that struggle for the agrarian reform mobilize masses to assume a temporary identity as "landless", even among the urban population, shows the victory of property over work, as a reference value and guidance of the political behaviors and social aspirations, as a political project and a historical option.
3 In the Northeast, I found reference to this only in the cases of farms expropriated for illicit plantations.
9
This criticism is quite radical, since, in the same book, the author recognizes exactly that, landless or "with land" (after having finally received a plot, even after years of struggle and precarious settlement), that these people’s main characteristic is, precisely, not having any options. It means that they don't have the possibility of choosing, so as to reclaim a beautiful definition of development proposed by Sen (1999).
"This is", Martins (2003: 14) writes, "the hardest kind of latifundium to fight, that of the popular mentalities colonized by the central character of the land rent". According to him, the landless reconstitute an insidious mediation and they frequently adhere to the search for easy profits provided by renting their lands to someone else. Martins (2003:14) qualifies this mechanism as a “retail rentism4 practiced by the poor”.
These observations do not correspond to the results of the main impact evaluations of the Brazilian agrarian reform (Buanaim, 1999; FAO-INCRA, 2000; Heredia et al., 2004) and to the specific studies about evasion and rotation (Mello, 2006; Silveira, 2006; Cepeda et al, 2002), nor to my own observations.
In fact, it is true that, not disposing of means of adding value to their lots themselves, certain settlers rent out a part of their lands to better endowed neighbors or to great land owners in the region5. Such practices are forbidden by the agrarian reform law, but are tolerated by INCRA, by lack of an alternative. But, they are definitely not a majority and, above all, they don't usually come from a calculated choice. Even if it was possible to survive better from renting out a dozen of hectares instead of cultivating them, such practice can hardly be associated to a speculative and calculated option of renting the land. Many times, the beneficiaries have waited for two, three, or even eight years in precarious settlements, under plastic canvases in order to gain access to a plot of land.
In the studies that I have accomplished in settlements in the Northeast and in the Center-west (States of Minas Gerais and Mato Grosso) such behavior may exist, but they are a minority and assimilated by the settlers as failures, even as failures of life and not as land speculation (Sabourin et al, 2006).
The first motivation of the families, who will enroll in the movements of struggle for land, is the quest for survival with dignity and, if possible, with autonomy and safety. They look for safety to escape from the violence of their bosses or of the slums, and later, in the settling and occupation phases, safety to escape from the violence of the police. They look for security, even if sometimes an illusion of it, of being able to feed their families with the product of their work and the fruits of the land; finally, safety of having an alternative in life to be able to send their children to school.
There is, in fact, a dream of autonomy and of social ascension in those who were always subjects (Garcia Jr, 1990). I agree with Martins in one point: the model of the great cattle-raising farm, of the land rent liberating one from the slavery of work has taken roots in the mind of the Brazilian society and, particularly, in the rural population.
It is not, therefore, a surprise if that model influences the behaviors of all the classes of the society. But it doesn't colonize the spirits of the poor any more than those of the others.
How to expect from one of the landless a different or even exemplary behavior, trying to transfer citizen demands to those who have less access to citizenship and to the recognition of others? Some of Martins’ qualifications lead to the tendencies that he himself denounces: the MST leaders' vision which projects a vision of the landless as the vanguard of a socialist revolution, or that of INCRA's ranks which dream of producers inserted in productive projects and cooperative models.
The reality of the agrarian reform's public, not corresponding to any of those profiles, remains hidden,
4 “rentismo de varejo “ in portuguese 5 I have also observed that certain settlers lend to neighbours without demanding rent for the land.
10
11
invisible. Martins (2003) evokes, rightly so, an "invisible or occult subject". Candidates and beneficiaries are forced to implement detour strategies in order to have access to the land and to public support by or inside structures that don't correspond to their profile and aspirations.
If there is a speculative practice, it comes from the great land owners who negotiate with INCRA the expropriation of their lands. It is also the case of the urban ones (paid workers, merchants and employees) or of the local land owners who buy lots abandoned by ruined settlers, illegal practices that are bailed by INCRA and the social movements.
On the other side, if there is certain instrumentalization on the part of the MST and CONTAG, it is more due to the fact that candidates to the agrarian reform have to go through an enlistment in those movements to gain access to land, even if they don't share their methods or ideology6. That clientelist practice was generalized (box 2) because the State didn't offer another solution to select the beneficiaries according to public and transparent rules. Then again, without those movements and their occupations of non-productive areas, there would never have been the application of the agrarian reform law.
Box 2: Opinions of the settlers from Sumé, PB, on the MST (15/09/2005 and Lazaretti, 2007)
« MST started to occupy the lands and, I find this fair, because our landless families never had that possibility. I am not a militant, but I support it because the cause is just and because the families work lands that didn't produce before. That is why I am in favor of the MST, because everything that comes in support to the communities is welcome » (Antonio A F - translated)
« For me, this here in the MST means everything, because before I had never had a piece of land, even less, a house » (Marluce B N- translated)
« The MST is a fighter. It brings improvements and it still continues the fight after settling » (José A L - translated)
« The cause is just, we don't steal from anyone. That land was abandoned. Now, I can say that I am happy, because I have already lived in other people's land and it was very hard. Many times I planted and the boss came and said "Go, pick it fast because I need to put the cattle to graze in this lot". Here, I plant and later I am sure I can harvest peacefully. I don't agree with all the actions of the MST. That story of going to Brasília to break public buildings, I don't agree with that. It should find a more peaceful way of attracting the government's support. I also find it wrong to occupy a farm and to burn everything that's there » (Moacir M. S. - translated)
“Socialism, no, I don't know what very well what that is” (José M. - translated)
« The MST brings a solution and a piece of land to the poor who don't have anywhere to live. Sometimes, I find everything a little disorganized. They have a lot of people of everything kind, including people that don't like this land, so, it is difficult to live in this atmosphere ». (Francisco A L - translated)
« I am proud of being in the MST, of being called landless, but I have already learned how to answer, because today, I am "with land". Landless are those who sell themselves to the land owners » (Pedro, leader - translated).
« I joined the MST out of sympathy, I saw that its work was good and useful; and in the Peasant University, I learned the importance of the social movements and the other side of the MST, because before even I spoke badly of them. Then, I started working in my settlement » (Fabiane, leader - translated)
« I'm proud to be in the MST, I feel comfortable, because want it or not, there is only the MST to fight for us, because we don't have the strength to get to the public organisms alone. The MST speaks for us. Many don't like the MST, OK, but, what the MST does, it does it for us » (Dagmar B, leader - translated)
6 I propose the discussion of this Marxist ideology issue in the next sub-chapter
Presently, in Brazil, the limitations of the agrarian reform are due, more than anything else, to the failure of the public policy instruments or of their application; the successful part, including the fact that it exists, for good or bad, and with globally positive results, can be considered as a conquest by the social movements, including the MST.
3. Discussion, Lesson and perspective
3.1. The limits of the Marxist criticism
The MST associates a Marxist Leninist discourse to an attempt at promoting a modern family agriculture, a project which goes through gaining access to a patrimony, to capital (credit), to public infrastructures, and which depends on the integration into the capitalist exchange market. That position constitutes a first contradiction, revealed by the failure of the Integral Agrarian Production Cooperatives, the CPA, dreams of tropical kolkhozes. In Brazil, as in the rest of the world, settled small farmers confirm that a project of collective production, which turns individual work into anonymity, doesn't make sense in agriculture (Lazzaretti, 2007:324-330).
After that failure, the MST associates itself, in its discourse, not in its practices, to the theses of the Via Campesina of a modern peasant project built around autonomy: the insurance of food and quality of the life. But, once the issue of its articulation with the markets is put aside, the project becomes limited to a discourse.
Of course, the Marxist analysis of man's exploitation by man allows the exposure of the unjust land distribution in Brazil. It can thus contribute to the promotion of the agrarian reform as an attempt of rupturing of the mechanisms of expulsion of the small peasants from their lands and of social exclusion of the landless workers. But, once the land is obtained, that criticism it doesn't apply anymore to proposing a differentiated social and economic model. The settlements are all but a socialist or revolutionary experience. Even if it is not the poor expression of the “retail rentism” denounced by Martins (2003), they reproduce, with the approval of the MST, certain paternalist and clientelist relationships of the Brazilian political class, in other words, structures of unequal reciprocity.
Those structures have taken such deep roots in Brazil's rural collective unconscious, ever since the colonial conquest and the slavery, that they colonized the mentalities, not inefficiently.
Not having the theoretical instruments available to critically analyze such inequity which corresponds to an alienation of the reciprocity systems, the MST persists in the Marxist rhetoric and tries to explain those behaviors by means of mystique, discipline, obedience to the democratic centralism, etc. But, in reality, in relation to the leaders of the MST, the settled reconstitute subordination relationships of paternalist and clientelist nature or, in anthropological terms, structures of asymmetric reciprocity.
On the other hand, how to explain this other contradiction that constitutes an unconscious reproduction, among the landless, of the dominant model of the rural property, individual and familiar: is it the boss' model or that of the class enemy?
Just as it happened with the access to consumer goods of the factory workers in Europe or in the São Paulo urban area, in Brazil, the class enemies in a western capitalist society are, in fact, members of the same system; a system of which the victims are also part. Those victims dream, sometimes, to share the advantages of the system: for example, that everybody may have a "boss" or high employee salary. It could be the case of the employees of the Court of Auditors in France, of the Superior Federal Tribunal or of the members of the National Congress in Brazil. Everyone in such system finds themselves equally alienated, be it for the attraction of profit by means of the logic of exchange, or be it for the privileges of the castes by means of the logic of reciprocity, even if they continue to develop a left-wing speech.
12
That is the case of the judgments of value which, turning against the supporters of the class struggle, may disappear with the critical conscience of the system itself, but not, in fact, with the victory of the oppressed against the oppressors.
The limit of the Marxist criticism in Brazil also comes from the fact that the country still associates exchange structures (capitalist) and reciprocity structures (although partly unequal). There fore, it accumulates alienation forms characteristic to the two systems: the capitalist exploitation for the private accumulation (which in spite of everything, is productive) and the unproductive and parasitic dominance of the great unproductive fazendas and professional politicians. However, the Marxist criticism is inert when faced with the alienation of the reciprocity system, for which a specific critical analysis should still be constructed, as PT's failure in changing the way to do politics in Brazil has demonstrated.
3. 2. Consequences of the false debates: more divergences
In fact, the loss of legitimacy, or simply of sympathy from the public opinion, harms the movement and the future of the land redistribution, well beyond the electoral alternations, which, as demonstrated by the Lula Administration, change very few things. That is precisely what the leaders of the MST can't perceive clearly and what many of the settled interviewed in the Northeast or in Minas Gerais explain in their speech (box 2).
In spite of not sharing the MST ideology, ignoring its project of socialist revolution, or not knowing what socialism means, many beneficiaries of the agrarian reform remain as faithful militants of the movement which granted them access to the land. Therefore, it exists among the settled a strong feeling of reciprocity to the MST around that acquisition, which is at the same time material, human and symbolic, of the land. One has to imagine what it represents, for them, the property of a lot, of a small familiar production unit, in particular, in terms of the possibility of social and economic autonomy. This represents the exact contrary of the conscription into collectivist structures that fuse and mix the efforts of individuals and families. It is the contrary of the structures that deny the honor of each one's name and, above all, don't allow the recognition of the quality of a job well done, very often what constitutes a poor person's only pride, their only distinctive sign of identity.
Silveira (2005), who studied projects of agrarian reform in Rio Grande do Sul, writes that "the invisible subject of the agrarian reform is recomposed in a new peasant and artisan project, associating family, work and land". These are, ironically, words used by the Marxist criticism of the peasant mentality, "the subjectivity of the small production and of the artisan ideology", previously object of denouncements in MST's notebooks (Morais, 1986). The organization and value of the family perfectly coexist with a political mythology symbolically constituted during the struggle for land and for survival. The analysis of the landless' speech demonstrates everything but resignation; the settled build positive images of themselves, including as a fundamental element, the epic symbolism of the hero who overcomes the obstacles with faith, hope and bravery.
It is, therefore, around those values and the relationships that can mobilize and reproduce them, that it is possible to rebuild a positive identity and structures of social cohesion adapted to endow the new smallholders with means to respond to the numerous challenges they must face, as much in the individual and familiar plan, as in the collective and institutional plans.
3.3. What alternatives?
Several alternative proposals have been studied (Silva and del Grossi, 2000) but they were not resumed by the syndical organizations and the MST, who, on the contrary, accepted to negotiate with the last administration, a certain co-management of the agrarian reform.
However, there exists a range of actions which has been very little explored, such as the regulation of land title deeds, facilitated nowadays by survey techniques using remote sensing or geographic
13
informational systems. Another recurrent issue is that of the attribution of deeds to the legitimate occupants in precarious situation such as the land squatters (posseiros7) and the negro-slave descendants (quilombolas), but also to the users of the common grazing (fundos de pasto) or extractive reserves (reservas extrativistas8).
There lacks a true statute of the cooperatives of services for the family agriculture. It would be urgent to dispose of a statute of the land tenant and of the sharecropper (with public control of the land's rent). Certain competences of the agrarian reform could be decentralized to the regional States and municipal districts under Federal control. There could be studies on the constitution of mixed land societies or landowner sindicates, linked to the agrarian credit (such as the Societies for Land Consolidation and Settlement – the Safer in France). There is a need for diverse statutes of group agriculture that could facilitate the transition processes between generations or farmers’ group projects in agrarian reform settlements. Some references exist, such as the Farmers’ Groups for Common Land Management in Europe, or the joint farming arrangements under French law: the Groupements Agricoles d’Exploitation en Commun (GAEC).
There are also alternatives in Brazil, in terms of methods and support structures for settlements, but these are isolated. Those methods and tools present various characteristics adapted to the situations of the beneficiaries of the agrarian reform: - The mechanisms for social construction of partnerships allow complementarity between the logics and the actions of individual, familiar, collective and public nature (Sabourin et al, 2006);
- The methodological approach of the action-research and extension is based on the partnership between the involved actors; - the successful cases usually associate an experience of rural education (Agriculture Family School, Farmer’ s	Field	Schools,	Peasant	University,	pedagogy	of	alternance	etc)	to	an	initiative	of construction and participative divulgation of the innovation (community seed banks, farmers’ experiments or research groups, demonstrative units, etc) (Sabourin, 2006 a and b);
- those initiatives try to build values and competences of responsabilization and autonomy of the actors to break the traditional models of dependence, paternalism, assistentialism and clientelism maintained by the tutelage that occur in the Brazilian rural environment (Tonneau and Sabourin, 2007);
- they are methods which take into account the resources, practices, and knowledge of the small farmers and which thus contribute to strengthen and to subsidize the recovery of their individual dignity and the construction of a positive collective identity so as to prepare them to assume their own development process.
- these actions are always localized and territorialized: they are developed in loco, as close as possible to the places where smallholders and their families live and work, from the conditions, resources and characteristics of their lands and regions, what doesn't exclude it being open to others, by means of study visits to the outside or the invitation of people or organizations from other areas.
Conclusion
In terms of family agriculture and agrarian reform, the Brazilian debate rotates around two theses. Both of them, as I see them, are reductionist and partial, and ignore living alternatives inside the country. One is through the promotion of an innovative family farmer as a small businessman, more and more integrated into the capitalist market, be it through the international chains or through market niches segmented by means of the qualification of the products. The other thesis, considers that the development of the agricultural capitalism and the degree of globalization of the Brazilian agriculture are such that the solutions of agrarian reform and support to family agriculture is obsolete from the point of view of both the capitalist bourgeoisie's interests and those of the productive forces. It would
7 posseiros = settlers with no title deed 8 reservas extrativistas = natural reserve where the population lives off the harvest of non-timber products
14
arrive too late and it wouldn't allow the set up of competitive small producers. However, the agrarian reform can be justified as a social policy of struggle against poverty, of re-socialization of the rural populations which have been uprooted or excluded from the countryside by the modernization of agriculture. This thesis resembles the neoliberal thesis of the defenders of corporate agriculture and could already be found in the rural segment of the Zero Hunger (Fome Zero) program's first phase.
Even if the credit lines for the family agriculture were increased and diversified in the Lula Administration, they represent only 15 to 20% of the total credit lines destined to patronal agriculture. What is worse is that this hegemonic vision of the success of corporate agriculture, politically built by the conservative ruralist representatives, managed to introduce perverse effects of neoliberal inspiration in the main rural programs of the Lula Administration, even though still controlled by the PT: alimentary security (Zero Hunger), agrarian reform and support to family agriculture. Seemingly, the PT and the allied social movements do not have solid alternative proposals to the neoliberal model. This can come from the ignorance of the several realities of family and peasant agriculture in Brazil, as well as of the nature of the agrarian reform's public. This limitation is worsened by two other factors: the subjugation by the easy economic theses of the unique neoliberal thought, and a sometimes irresponsible clientelist behavior towards the rural social movements. That is why, among other reasons, the debates that have encouraged the first Lula Administration towards the agrarian reform have just grazed the real issues.
Bibliographic References
ABRAMOVAY, Ricardo. Desenvolvimento Rural Territorial e Capital Social. In: Planejamento e desenvolvimento dos territórios rurais, Conceitos, controvérsias e experiências, SABOURIN E. & O. TEIXEIRA. Brasília: UFPB, Cirad, Embrapa, 2002.
BARBOSA, Marlon. Programa Banco da Terra – Um estudo de caso no município de Formosa. Brasília: UnB-FAV- Programa Agronegócios, 2005.
BOLETIM DATALUTA, n. 8, agosto de 2008, Presidente Prudente, Núcleo de Estudos, Pesquisas e Projetos de Reforma Agrária, Nera www.fct.unesp.br/nera.
BUANAIM, Antonio. Relatório preliminar de avaliação do projeto de Cédula da terra, Brasília: Unicamp- Nead, MEPF, 1999.
CARVALHO, Horacio M de. O campesinato no século XXI. Possibilidades e condicionantes do desenvolvimento do campesinato no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Vozes, 2005.
CEPEDA, V. A.; MARQUES, A.; SANTO, C. Processo de evasão de assentados – perfil socioeconômico das famílias desistentes. In: VI Congresso Latino-Americano de Sociologia Rural. Porto Alegre: UFRGS-Alasru, v. único, 2002.
FAO-Incra. Perfil da agricultura brasileira. Brasília, 1996.
__________. Novo retrato da agricultura familiar: o Brasil redescoberto. Brasília, 2000.
GARCIA JR., Afrânio. O Sul. Caminho do roçado. Brasília: Marco Zero-Unb-CNPq-MCT, 1990.
GEFFRAY, Christian. A opressão paternalista: cordialidade e brutalidade no cotidiano brasileiro, Rio de Janeiro: Educam, 2007.
GRAMSCI, Antonio. Cadernos do cárcere. Volume 6. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1999-2002. IBGE. Censo Agropecuário, 1995. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação IBGE, 1996. Incra. Novo Mundo Rural, Projeto de reformulação da reforma agrária. Brasília: Incra, 1999. HEREDIA, Beatriz; MEDEIROS, Leonilde e LEITE, Leite, Sérgio (coords.). Impactos dos assentamentos:
um estudo sobre o meio rural brasileiro. Brasília: Instituto Interamericano de Cooperação para Agricultura-Núcleo de Estudos Agrários e Desenvolvimento Rural. São Paulo: Unesp, 2004.
LAZZARETTI, Miguel Angelo. As ações coletivas nos assentamentos do MST relações de poder e subjetividade. Campina Grande: UFCG-Programa de Pós-Graduação em Sociologia. Tese, 2007.
MARTINS, José de Souza. O sujeito oculto: ordem e transgressão na reforma agrária. Porto Alegre: Ed. UFRGS, 2003.
15
MELLO, Paulo Freire. Evasão e Rotatividade em Assentamentos Rurais do Rio Grande do Sul. Porto Alegre: Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, dissertação de mestrado, 2006.
MDA/Incra. II Plano nacional de reforma agrária. Brasília: Gráfica Terra, 2003.
MORAIS, Clodomir Santos de. “Elementos sobre a teoria da organização no campo”, Cadernos de Formação do MST, São Paulo, n. 11, 1986.
NETO, Francisco Graziano. Recolocando a questão agrária. In: A questão agrária hoje. STÉDILE, J. P. (org.). Porto Alegre: Ed. UFRGS, 2002.
PEREIRA, José Maria, O modelo de reforma agrária de mercado do Banco Mundial em questão: o debate internacional e o caso brasileiro. Rio de Janeiro: CPDA, UFRRJ, dissertação de mestrado, 2004; www.fmra.org.
POLANYI, Karl. In: POLANYI, K., ARENSBERG, C.; PEARSON, H. (eds.) Trade and Market in the Early empires. Economies in History and Theory, New-York, Glencoe, The Free Press, Clencoe, 1957.
PORTO-GONÇALVES, Carlos Walter. A nova questão agrária e a reinvenção do campesinato: o caso do MST. In: Reforma agraria y lucha por la tierra en América Latina, Revista del Observatorio Social de América Latina (OSAL, Buenos Aires), n. 16 , 2005.
SABOURIN, Eric. Changements sociaux, organisation des producteurs et intervention externe. In: Paysans du Sertão. CARON, P. e SABOURIN, E. (coord.), Montpellier: Cirad-Repères, 2001.
SABOURIN, Eric. Organizações formais e dispositivos coletivos dos agricultores no Nordeste Semi- árido. In: Associativismo, cooperativismo e economia familiar no meio rural, SABOURIN, Eric (org.). Brasília: UnB- Ceam-Neagri, 2006a.
SABOURIN, Eric. Extensão rural para o ecodesenvolvimento: reflexão sobre métodos e políticas públicas. In: IX Congresso da Faser, Extensão Rural, Ecodesenvolvimento e Sustentabilidade, Aracaju 16- 18 de outubro de 2006b.
SABOURIN, Eric, VALADARES, José Humberto, OLIVEIRA, Marcelo Nascimento. Lógica familiar e lógica coletiva nos assentamentos de reforma agrária do Brasil: o caso do município de Unaí (MG). In: Congresso Latino Americano de Sociologia Rural, Quito: ALASRU, 20-24 de novembro de 2006.
SAMPAIO, Plínio de Arruda. Questão agrária e dilemas da formação nacional. Conferência, São Paulo: UNESP,ncia, e, miliar no meio rural,os TALICO SEGUIDO DA SIGLA GAEC] 20/05/2001 http:// www.mst.org.br/biblioteca/textos/reformaagraria/plininho.html.
SEN, Amartya. Un nouveau modèle économique: développement justice liberté, Paris : O Jacob, 1999. SIDERSKY, Pablo. Reproductibilité de l’agriculture familialedans l’Agreste de l’État de Paraíba, Brésil: Dynamiques sociales, organisations locales, innovations techniques et sociales. Rapport préliminaire - Thèse
de doctorat, University of Wageningen, Rural Communication and Extension, 2006.
SILVA, José Graziano da. O desenvolvimento do capitalismo no campo brasileiro e a reforma agrária. In: A questão agrária hoje. STÉDILE, J. P. (org.). Porto Alegre: Ed. UFRGS, 2002.
__________. Reforma agrária hoje, uma agenda estratégica para a reforma agrária. In: Seminário Desenvolvimento e Questão Agrária no Brasil, 28/06/2007, Brasília, Núcleo de Estudos Agrários e Desenvolvimento Rural (NEAD) do Ministério do Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA), Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp), 2007.
__________. DEL GROSSI, Mauro. Estimativas das famílias sem-terra no Brasil: priorizando o combate à pobreza e ao desemprego, Relatório final, Campinas: Unicamp, Brasília: NEAD, 2000.
SILVEIRA, D. S. Narrativa histórica, etnografia e reforma agrária em um assentamento rural. Porto Alegre: UFRS, dissertação de mestrado, 2006.
TEMPLE, Dominique. Teoria de la Reciprocidad, tomo II: La economía y reciprocidad. La Paz: PADEP-GTZ, 2003.
TONNEAU, Jean Philippe & SABOURIN, Eric (orgs.). Agricultura familiar: interação entre, políticas públicas e dinâmicas locais. Porto Alegre: Ed. da UFRGS, 2007.
VEIGA, José Eli da. O Brasil rural ainda não encontrou seu eixo de desenvolvimento. Revista Estudos Avançados, n. 15 (43), 2001.
__________. Cidades imaginarias: O Brasil é menos urbano do que se calcula São Paulo: Autores Associados, 2002.
16
17
Translated by Giuliano Olivatti Menegazzi Translation from Estudos Sociedade e Agricultura, Rio de Janeiro, vol. 16 no. 2, p. 151-184, Abril 2008.

1997
New Left Review
NA
Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left
James Petras

The Left in Latin America is staging a major comeback. While most publicists, journalists, academics, government and World Bank officials either celebrate or bemoan the triumph of ‘neoliberalism’, opposition is growing which in time could challenge the dominance of the whole free-market power structure. As yet only loosely associated—in forums, seminars, and international gather- ings—this new oppositional force has solid roots in a number of countries and is extending its support from specific regions and classes to the construction of a number of national counter-hegemonic blocs.
To talk about ‘the Left’ in Latin America is misleading because there is more than one, and the older sort remains, like a withering vine, blocking from view the emergence of the new socio-political movements. What many casual observers and not a few journalists and academics refer to as ‘the Left’ includes ‘referents’ who have long abandoned the class struggle and in large part have been assimilated into the liberal political establishment or its ngo periphery.
17
What may explain the confusion is the manner of this conversion: the ex-leftists frequently resort to intellectual posturing in which they label earlier positions ‘conservative’, ‘out-moded’ or ‘orthodox’, and present themselves as the up-to-date, renovated, modernized, post-something- or-other, democratic Left.
To come to terms with the emergence of a new revolutionary Left in Latin America, it is important firstly to identify the different waves of the Left and to differentiate them; secondly, to discuss their spatial and economic focus, social base, style of political action and political per- spective; thirdly, to present data documenting the growth, contradictions and political challenges that confront these burgeoning socio-political movements. Finally, relations between this new Left with past move- ments will be examined, along with the present confrontations with the us-led ‘neoliberal’ power bloc, and the potential for a socialist trans- formation.
Signs and Substance of Leftist Resurgence
The stronghold for the resurgence of the Left is found in the countryside: in a number of countries, the 1990s have been characterized by massive land occupation movements by landless peasantry. The most important of these is the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement in Brazil (mst). With hundreds of peasant organizers and hundreds of thousands of active sup- porters in the countryside, it has forced a national debate among all the political parties on the issue of agrarian reform.1 Most observers of Brazilian politics agree that the mst is the most dynamic, best organized and effective social movement in Brazil today. In Bolivia, the closing of most of the tin mines, and the heavy influx of cheap imports and govern- ment-condoned contraband has weakened the mining and industrial unions. In their place the peasant confederations, particularly the coca farmers, have led major confrontations with the State and their us patrons, cutting highways and spearheading general strikes that have paralyzed the country.2 In Paraguay, the National Peasant Federation is at the core of the political mobilization blocking the return of the mili- tary and forcing agrarian issues into the centre of debate. Together with other peasant organizations, they led 50,000 peasants through the streets of Asunción to the Presidential Palace and National Congress.3 In Mexico, the major popular struggles have taken place in the countryside: Guerrero, Chiapas and Oaxaca have seen large-scale confrontations between peasants and the State.4 In Ecuador, Columbia, and El Salvador, similar processes of peasant mobilizations have emerged to redefine the national political agenda.
Not all the instances of left resurgence are located in the countryside, how- ever; there is also a renewal of civic unions in Columbia, the growing
1 A basic history of the mst is found in João Pedro Stedile and Frei Sergio, A Luta pela Terra No Brazil, São Paulo 1993; and Documento Basico do MST, São Paulo 1994. See the Jornal de Brasil, 23 June 1996, p. 17. 2 Alex Contreras Baspineiro, La Marcha Historica, Cochabamba 1994; Interview with Evo Morales, in Carlos D. Mesa Gisbert, De Cerca, La Paz 1994.
3 Informativo Campesino (Asunción), no. 91, April 1996. 4 La Jornada, 10 August 1996, p. 3; Chiapas, no. 2, 1996.
18
influence of the Chilean Communist Party in the trade unions, urban movements in Venezuela and Argentina, the emergence of an independent, ‘class oriented’ trade unionism in Mexico City and in the north among auto workers; dissident and combative sectors of the National Labour Confederation (cut) in Brazil; militant teachers’ unions increasingly led by Marxists in Bolivia, Paraguay, Chile, Mexico and Brazil. Nevertheless, while organized, urban, working-class movements are not absent from the struggle, and in some instances take centre-stage, the truly revolutionary action and movements in this resurgence of the Left are rural.
Many commentators and analysts, even those as distinguished as Eric Hobsbawm, have written of the political eclipse of the peasantry.5 The obituaries have proved premature. There are a number of reasons why demographic arguments about the shrinking size of the rural labour force do not necessarily translate into political analysis—at least in the bulk of Latin American countries. First, because shrinking percentages do not nullify the fact that tens of millions of families continue to live in the countryside. Second, given the crises affecting urban and industrial areas, particularly growing unemployment and poverty, the cities are no longer an encouraging outlet for young peasants. Third, when land occu- pations are on the agenda, there can be a movement from provincial towns and cities back to the countryside—the ‘re-peasantization’ effect. Fourth, the liberal economy has battered small producers, driving down prices of staples and increasing indebtedness, creating family and social bonds between the mostly young landless sons and daughters involved in the land invasions. Fifth, ‘structural’ considerations apart, a new genera- tion of ‘educated’ (primary or secondary school) peasant leaders has emerged over the last decade with strong organizational capabilities, a sophisticated understanding of national and international politics, and a profound commitment to creating a politically educated set of cadres. Local leaders of both sexes have intervened in regions of conflict, trans- forming previously spontaneous and easily defeated occupations into well planned and executed mass political actions. The combination of structural conditions and the growth of a new political leadership, built around the principle ‘every member an organizer’, has been instrumental in the swift rise of the ‘peasant movements’.
It should be noted, though, that these are not peasant movements in the traditional sense, nor are the rural cultivators who comprise them divorced from urban life or activities. In some instances, the new peas- ants are former workers, particularly miners, displaced because of plant or mine closures, or they were peasants one generation earlier.6 In other cases, they are the ‘excess’ sons and daughters of peasants who entered religious institutions, became involved in the rural struggles, and aban- doned the Church to lead the struggle for land reform.7 In many cases, they are daughters of small peasants with primary or secondary educa- tion, who join and sometimes lead land occupations rather than migrate
5 Eric Hobsbawm The Age of Extremes. The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–1991, New York 1994, pp. 8, 289. 6 Interview with Evo Morales. Many of the names of the peasant unions are taken from mining centres of Oruro.
7 Interview with regional leaders of the mst of Brazil at I Curso Latinoamericano de Formacion, 19–29 March 1995, Instituto Cajamar São Paulo.
19
to the cities to work as domestic servants.8 The ‘new peasantry’, espe- cially those who are leading the struggle, travel to the cities, participate in seminars and leadership training schools, and engage in political debates. In a word, even as they are rooted in the rural struggle, live in land settlements and engage in agricultural cultivation, they have a cosmopolitan vision. The quantity and quality of these new ‘peasant intellectuals’ varies from country to country depending on the resources and maturity of the movement. In Brazil, the mst is well known for its heavy investment in leadership training, with hundreds of its members passing each year through different levels of socio-political and technical education.9 Other movements such as those in Paraguay and Bolivia still rely on a small number of well-informed leaders.
Another point about the ‘new peasantry’ is that it is politically autonomous of any electoral and/or sectarian left parties, even the most radical. It is largely engaged in direct action rather than the electoral process. The mst in Brazil has ‘fraternal’ relations with the Workers’ Party (pt), generally supporting their candidates and occasionally pre- senting its own within the Party.10 But the main strength of the mst is its extra-parliamentary struggle, including land invasions, the block- ing of highways, and sit-ins at the Agrarian Reform Institutes. mst tactics, strategy and ideological debates are decided within the move- ment and are not subordinated to the pt or its parliamentary represen- tatives. On the contrary, the mst’s actions have shaped the commitment of the pt leadership to the agrarian struggle. The recent massacre in Pará is a case in point. When the State Governor sent in the Army to dislodge peaceful protesters marching to the state capital on 19 April 1996, leading to a massacre in which nineteen peasants were killed (and four ‘disappeared’), the mst mounted a national campaign which drew on the support of pt congressmen who formed an investi- gatory committee, and the cut which launched a series of national demonstrations.11 The mst was the catalyst in the protest and followed it up with a new wave of land occupations, while President Cardoso’s popularity plummeted to its lowest level, below 30 per cent—the repressive Governor belonged to Cardoso’s party. Similarly in Bolivia, the militant peasant organizations have largely broken past ties with the nationalist parties and socialist sects, and have been engaging in internal debates about forming their own political movement. In Paraguay, many leaders of the National Federation of Peasants, attempting to provide a national focus for the peasantry, recently launched a new revolutionary socialist movement.
8 Interviews with Brazilian rural women of the mst at a Conference on Peasant Women in Rural Struggles, 22 June 1996, Cajamar, São Paulo. 9 Como Organizar a la Masa, Direccion Nacional mst, São Paulo, September 1991; Documento Basico do MST.
10 Interviews with MST leaders, João Pedro Stedile and Ademar Bobo Egidio Brunetto. 19–29 March 1995. See also Documento Basico do MST, pp. 24–30. 11 In discussion with cut leaders, it was clear that the mst was at the cutting-edge of the struggle. Most trade union leaders readily admitted that the mst was far more cohesive and organized for confrontation than the urban industrial unions. It was clear from the posters plastered on the walls of downtown Rio condemning the massacre in Pará that the rural struggle had became a ‘cause’ for the militant sectors of the cut. Interview with Ina Meireles, President of cut, Rio de Janeiro, 17 May 1996, and Vito Giannotti, Educational Director, Aeronautical Workers, Rio de Janeiro, 16 May 1996.
20
Furthermore, the new peasant movements are strongly influenced by a blend of classical Marxism and, in differing contexts, by ethnic, gender, and ecological considerations. In Paraguay and particularly in Bolivia the questions of social liberation and the rural struggle are strongly infused with a revindication of ethnic, linguistic, cultural and even national claims.12 In Brazil and Bolivia, organized groups of peasant women pres- sure these movements for greater influence and representation.13
The new peasant movements are linked together in a Latin American regional organization, the Congreso Latinoamericano de Organizaciones del Campo (cloc), and are increasingly involved in the international formation called Via Campesino which discusses ideas and experiences pertaining to the rural struggles. Through these links and others, an emerging ‘internationalist’ consciousness and practice is emerging. For example, the militants of the Brazilian mst work across the borders with their counterparts in Paraguay and to a lesser degree, Argentina and Uruguay.
In summary, the resurgence of the peasant movements of the 1990s is not a simple replay of the movements of the 1960s. In many cases the successes and failures of the earlier movements have been studied and discussed. While there is a certain continuity because of the presence of a handful of older militants in the new movements, and some of the leaders are the children of the past generation of activists, a series of important differences both at the tactical, strategical, political and organ- izational level indicate that the new movements are a promising and creative political force.
The Political Context for Peasant Resurgence
The re-emergence of peasant movements takes place in a complex and changing political context. In the first instance, the policies of the neoliberal regimes have hurt a vast array of social groups, including seg- ments of the bourgeoisie.14 Since the late 1980s, the urban movements and trade unions have been in decline in most countries. In this situa- tion, the rise of the peasant movements has been looked upon favourably by the adversely affected groups as a mechanism to delegitimize or weaken the application of neoliberal policies—hence the favourable press and media accounts that have on occasion appeared, particularly in Brazil. Support for the mst by sectors of the bourgeoisie was graphically illustrated while I was in Brazil in May 1996 when a group of entre- preneurs organized a luncheon for the mst to express their support for
12 In Bolivia during a seminar I presented in June 1996 at the training school for mostly coca-growing peasants in La Paz, the relation of class and nation was the central topic of debate. In Paraguay the issue is less clearly defined, though in everyday conversations with peasant leaders it was clear that the Guarani cultural-linguistic universe was central. 13 At a seminar in Cajamar on 21 May 1996 there were over eighty peasant women leaders from all regions of Brazil discussing such issues as gender equality in cooperatives, greater leadership roles, greater acceptance of married women attending cadre schools. In a semi- nar that I presented, the class-gender framework was generally accepted and the debate flowed within the parameters of a rejection of bourgeois (classless) feminism and class reductionist economism.
14 See James Petras, Henry Veltmeyer and Steve Vieux, Neoliberalism and Class Conflict in Latin America, London 1997 forthcoming, especially ch. 2.
21
agrarian reform.15 The peasant movements opposing neoliberalism have filled the political space abandoned by the centre-left electoral coali- tions. The Centre-Left either failed to win elections or turned toward assimilating liberal politics, in some cases joining neoliberal regimes. The ebbing of electoral centre-left opposition was accompanied in many cases by the weakening of the trade unions, partly as a result of anti- labour legislation, mass firings and high unemployment, and partly because of the accommodating attitudes of the trade union leadership. Thus the eruption of class warfare in the countryside became the ‘spark’ to ignite public debate and call into question the overall political project of the regime.
The Left: Three Waves
Over the last twenty-five years, the Left emerged in three district waves. To understand the significance and the nature of the current socio- political movements, it is important to place them in the context of their predecessors.
The first wave of the contemporary Left began in the 1960s and contin- ued into the mid-1970s. It included mass social movements, guerrilla armies and electoral parties. Sometimes class and military activities merged.16 Sometimes electoral and trade union politics combined.17 This was the period of the ‘New Left’—movements and parties that chal- lenged the dominance of the pro-Moscow communist parties. There were Maoists, Fidelistas, those influenced by Trotskyist ideas, and others who grew out of the Christian and Populist movements. The Latin American dictatorships decimated this wave; hundreds of thousands of activists were killed, jailed or forced into exile. As a result of the repres- sion and overseas relations with social-democratic foundations, the great majority who returned to politics did so as social democrats, and some- times as neoliberals.
The second wave of leftists emerged in the dictatorial period and the years following—first in opposition to the authoritarian regimes and later to the ‘neoliberal agenda’. This wave found expression in the Foro of São Paulo and included the fmln of El Salvador, the Sandinistas, the Workers’ Party of Brazil, the Broad Front of Uruguay, Causa R of Venezuela, the Revolutionary Democratic Party of Mexico and the Frente Grande of Argentina.18 These parties, coalitions and ex-guerrilla movements, how- ever, have become sucked into an increasingly electoralist politics and began to accommodate to neoliberal policies on privatization, ‘globaliza- tion’ and other issues. In time, they have begun to lose a good part of their identity as parties of the Left and become more and more divorced from
15 Interview with João Pedro Stedile of the mst, 13 May 1996. 16 This was partly the case at least in some industries and factories in Argentina. The Montoneros and Peoples Revolutionary Army did have influence in certain unions, partic- ularly in Cordoba and Rosario. This was generally not the case in the major metallurgical industries in the Greater Buenos Aires area. 17 Chile was the classic case during the late 1960s and early 1970s. See my Politics and Social Forces in Chilean Development, Berkeley 1968. 18 A typical list of declarations from the foro appears in America Libre (Buenos Aires), no. 7, July 1995, pp. 115–18.
22
the popular struggles in the shanty towns, countryside and factories. Some have been assimilated into the ngo framework, working in the niches of the World Bank’s free-market and anti-statist politics. In most of these parties or movements there remain leftist and activist currents but they are marginalized in the interests of respectability.
The third wave of the movement which is currently emerging overlaps with the second group but demonstrates greater force and resilience. Its leaders tend to be young, in their early twenties to mid thirties, and are drawn from the peasantry, provincial trade unions and school teachers. These activists differ significantly from their predecessors.19 First, many are not from the university—in fact, the intellectuals are still largely ori- ented to the centre-left electoral machines or to their professional careers. Second, the new movements have few financial resources, but tremen- dous élan and ‘mystique’. Their leaders travel to meetings by bus (some- times thirty or forty hours), live on their wages or farm income and have Spartan offices. There are very few full-time paid officials and virtually no bureaucracy. There are no privileges—no cars, office equipment or staff. The leaders are ‘moral persons’, honest and scrupulous in their financial affairs and personal relations. Very few are ‘personalist’ leaders. Rather, they debate in assemblies and are part of collective leaderships. The idea of the new organizations is that each member should be an organizer. To a greater or lesser extent, these leaders are highly critical of the opportunism of the electoral Left and ngo intellectuals who they experience as manipulative outsiders serving external patrons. Those who were previously part of guerrilla struggles are today highly critical of the vertical style of leadership in those organizations and their use as ‘transmission belts’. They reject the call to become cogs in the electoral machines, choosing instead to deepen ties to their social base. Even so, while this third wave represents intransigent opposition to the imposi- tion of neoliberalism, it does not as yet offer a fully articulated plan for the seizure of power.
Brazil: The MST
The mst is not strictly a revolutionary organization, and is not directed towards the seizure of state power. Rather, it is working towards the proper implementation of the Constitution which stipulates that un- cultivated land can be expropriated for social use. Thus it is both ‘legalist’ and oriented to direct-action. The politics of direct action are inserted in the gap between democratic ideology—and progressive clauses of the Constitution—and the ruling-class socio-economic ties of the liberal regime.
The resurgence of the Left takes place in distinct settings and cannot eas- ily be pigeon-holed. The mst has grown from a regional movement based largely in the south-central region to a national movement with organiz-
19 This section as well as other discussions in this essay are based on a series of interviews, informal discussions and seminars that have taken place between 1993–96. In May and August 1996 I led seminars by the mst and cut of Brazil, the Miners’ Union and coca peasant growers in Bolivia, the Peasant Federation in Paraguay, the ezln in Mexico. Much of the discussion in this essay reflects a ‘participant observer’ perspective.
23
ers increasingly active in the north, north-east and western regions of the country.20 Their struggle increasingly draws support from the cities, among trade unions and sectors of the church. They are viewed with respect and sympathy by the bulk of the favelados of Rio and São Paulo. In recent months they have shifted toward organizing large-scale land occupations near provincial cities, both to facilitate the gathering of mass support and to form urban alliances.21 As they move into the inner heart- land of large uncultivated estates, they face increasing violence and in some cases have been forced to set up self-defence committees to prevent marauding pistoleros hired by the landowners driving out the settlers. They have organized over 139,000 families into productive cooperatives, some of whom are engaged in export agriculture. They have ‘expropri- ated’ a total of 7.2 million hectares of land, and have organized 55 rural cooperatives in 12 states. They have established 880 schools with 38,000 pupils.22 Successful cooperatives usually free activists to participate in the support of landless peasants making new occupations, and contribute food to land occupants waiting for government expropriation and credits. The mst Congress in July 1995 drew over 5,000 delegates representing several hundred thousand peasants.23 Each state hired buses and brought their own food and bedding. The leadership training school in Santa Catarina houses about 80 persons in bunk beds. There is bread, cheese and coffee for breakfast, cold showers and rudimentary classrooms. But it all comes together.
Today the countryside in Brazil is a tinderbox. The problem is not orga- nizing land occupations—hundreds of thousands of hungry families are ready, and would respond to an mst appeal—but organizing to win. For that, there needs to be political support prior to any occupation, political organization to resist displacement, and logistical support—food, sup- plies and so forth—while the movement negotiates with the government to finance production.
In 1995 the mst led 92 land occupations. By June 1996, 120 land occu- pations had taken place and there were a total of 168 campamentos (land site occupations) with 40,000 families awaiting government exprop- riation.24 The rightward shift of the pt in 1995 following its defeat in the presidential elections set the stage for the current land occupation offensive. The occupations resulted from a recognition that Cardoso was closely tied to the right-wing landlord parties (the pfl and pmdm) as well as to reactionary sectors of his own party (the psdb). His links with the World Bank and overseas multinational corporations deepened his commitment to privatize strategic industries, promote agro-export sectors and encourage large-scale foreign investment in Brazil under favourable ‘rules of the game’. Another reason for the offensive was growing pressure from a number of mst militants pushing for a more
20 A Luta pela Terra No Brazil, pp. 23–39. 21 Interview with João Pedro Stedile, 13 May 1996. 22 An example of the redistributive and productionist approach of the mst—and a favourable response from the mass media is found in ‘De sem-terra a productor rural’, A Noticia, 31 May 1996, p. 1. On the data, see Brazil Report: Latin American Research Report, 19 September 1996, pp. 6–7. 23 Jornal dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (São Paulo), August 1995. 24 Sem Terra, July 1996, p. 8.
24
aggressive policy outside of and independent of the pt which was cor- rectly perceived as being an increasingly electoral party in which sectors were moving beyond classical social-democratic politics toward ‘social liberal’ policies.25 Finally, it was recognized that ‘objective’ conditions and ‘subjective factors’ in the countryside were increasingly ‘maturing’ for an offensive. The initial response to the first occupations was extremely positive in the areas adjoining them. Spontaneous land occu- pations began to take place. The mst decided to provide organizational leadership and conscious organization to turn these spontaneous local activities into a national movement. Toward the end of 1995 and in early 1996, land invasions became everyday affairs in regions which had previ- ously been bulwarks of the Right. Cardoso responded by threatening to use force and with empty promises to settle squatters in exchange for a moratorium on new occupations. The mst negotiated but pointedly refused to stop the land occupations—knowing that a truce would elimi- nate its main negotiating card, weaken its appeal to the landless and demobilize hundreds of its young leaders and activists.26 So the struggle deepened and extended into the most dangerous regions. The overall climate in Brazil, particularly in São Paulo, is quite favourable to the mst. Following the massacre of 19 April 1996, polls in São Paulo showed huge majorities in favour of agrarian reform (over 65 per cent) and an absolute majority in favour of the mst, including its land occu- pation strategy.
The mst is developing an effective counter-hegemonic strategy and a powerful political bloc integrating city and countryside. How durable the bloc will be, particularly if the mst moves beyond its agenda of land reform to a socialist transformation, remains to be seen. mst leader João Pedro Stedile provides a useful analysis of the national conjunctures that favour the movement’s activities.27 He identifies three moments in recent history: the final stages in the struggle against the military dicta- torship in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the mass struggle to impeach ex-President Collor, and the current phase in which Cardoso is imple- menting the neoliberal agenda. In each period, important sectors of the bourgeoisie and their allies in the mass media and the major political parties were interested in weakening the incumbent power-holders and thus gave ‘conjunctural support’ to the mst. When their ends were accomplished, they withdrew that support. Thus, from the point of view of the mst, the points of internal division within the ruling bloc provide propitious moments to launch activities which at least have the tacit backing of sectors of the elite and the press.
The contemporary upsurge of peasant revolutionaries can also be seen in Bolivia. There the dialectic of capitalist exploitation and restructuring confronts a labour force which resisted, was displaced and then reor- ganized to become a formidable opposition to imperialism and its local apologists.
25 Interviews with regional leaders of the mst, Santa Catarina. 26 ‘Sem-terra nao aceitan a trégua dos ruralistas’, Jornal do Brasil, 4 June 1996, p. 1–b. 27 Interview with João Pedro Stedile, 22 June 1996.
25
Bolivia: The Triangle of Popular Power
In Bolivia there are at least three distinct centres of popular mobiliza- tion: the peasant movements in the south, the mining regions, and the trade unions in La Paz, each formally coordinated by the cob (The Bolivian Workers’ Confederation). In the past, the miners were both strategically and organizationally the decisive force. This was expressed in the statutes of the cob which declared that the first secretary had to be a mining leader. The cob, unlike other labour confederations, is not, strictly speaking, a wage workers’ organization: street vendors, profes- sionals, students, as well as peasants and small producers, women and ecologists are members, but each is allotted a proportion of delegates.28 The peasants are struggling for greater recognition and influence within the cob as a leading, if not hegemonic, force. This was evident in the cob Congress in June of 1996 where the challenge to the miners’ domi- nance was forcefully raised.
In the Bolivian revolution of 1952, armed worker and peasant militias expropriated the mines, lands and factories under the government of the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement. By 1996 every revolutionary change had been reversed or was at least under challenge. The decisive turning point was 1985 when the government of Jaime Paz Zamora under imf tutelage decided to close most of the state tin mines, firing 30,000 miners and effectively undermining the traditional centres of trade union power. Today the miners’ unions, particularly the state sec- tor, have declined substantially—over 50,000 more miners were fired under the restructuring project designed by the imf, the World Bank and us academic advisers. Despite their reduced size—approximately 15,000—now mostly employed by foreign-owned multinationals, the miners still generate nearly 75 per cent of legal foreign exchange.29 Thus they still hold sway over a highly strategic sector of the economy.
While the miners have receded, the peasants, including a contingent of over 30,000 former miners, have emerged as the most dynamic and influential sector in direct confrontation with the regime. One can dis- tinguish two sectors, the coca farmers, made up of peasants who are ex-miners, and traditional peasant producers. The break of the peasants with the traditional nationalist parties was partly a product of the shift by the Centre-Left toward neoliberal policies and outright subordination to us policy-makers, particularly the military, the Drug Enforcement Agency (dea) and the Embassy. The political independence of the peas- ant movement was strengthened by the influx of former miners, led by Filomen Escobar, who have brought a high degree of organization and political experience to the movement. Young leaders like Evo Morales and Alejo Velez Lazo have brought new ideas and political projects from the countryside to the larger Bolivian public. The fusion of two distinct political cultures has created a movement which combines organiza- tional forms, tactics and strategies of confrontation from the advanced sectors of the working class with demands for land, cultural autonomy
28 Los Tiempos (Cochabamba), 12 May 1996, p. a9. 29 Gabriel Tabera Soliz, ‘Mineria boliviana en manos de Comsur e Inti Raymi’, La Razon (La Paz), 21 January 1996, pp. d8, 9.
26
and respect for traditional spiritual values rooted in Indian peasant com- munities. The peasant movements, particularly the coca farmers, have engaged in the largest and most sustained struggle with the neoliberal regime and its us overseers. The result has been a heightening of national consciousness in which the concept of an ‘Indian nation’ has become common currency.30
Like the Mexican Zapatistas, the ‘new peasant movement’ has harnessed the struggle for land and cultural autonomy to the problem of us mili- tary and political incursions. Unlike Mexico, however, the public spokespeople are the Indian peasant leaders themselves: sophisticated, self-taught, militant intellectuals who share the hardships of the rank and file. As in Brazil, their offices are rudimentary; a few old chairs, bat- tered desks and posters of past mobilizations and revolutionary leaders.
Important sectors of the peasant movement have also taken a serious step toward combining direct action with electoral politics through independent political organization. This has raised a debate about the relation between social movements and parties, throwing into doubt the old position that they were distinct elements in social and political struggles. The peasant movement, frustrated by the actions of national- ist and leftist parties, have launched a new political formation, the Assembly for the Sovereignty of the Peoples (asp), and won a dozen local elections in the coca-growing regions. Today the cocaleros are proposing the asp as a national alternative, hoping to give the peasantry a decisive voice in shaping class politics at the national level. The poli- tics of the coca growers involves harnessing ancestral spiritual beliefs to modern forms of class and anti-imperial struggle. Marxist analysis is linked to pre-European values. The cosmology of the past is evoked in support of earning a living in the interstices of a world dominated by multinational capital and overseas banks.31 While the land issue contin- ues to be important for the many coca growers who own land, the main struggle is for free trade against the us-directed attempts to eradicate coca production. The traditional defence of coca revolves around the revindication of the historical Indian nation, a concept that subsumes class into nation. The paradox of a neoliberal regime promoting state intervention, and peasant rebels fighting for unrestricted production of traditional crops highlights the heterodox nature of the peasant move- ment in Bolivia.32
The Indian-peasant movements face a dual challenge: not only the use of the Bolivian military against coca production but the neoliberal regime’s ‘culturalist’ strategies which pay lip-service to Indian demands. These are largely symbolic gratification focusing on token representation—the vice-president is an Indian—and bilingual education. While the cocaleros have made cogent critiques of class-reductionist leftist parties, the rejec- tion of cultural manipulation is based more on ‘empirical factors’: the
30 See H.C.F. Mansilla and Maria Teresa Zegada, Politica, Cultura y Etnicidad en Bolivia, La Paz 1996. 31 Interview with Evo Morales, Cochabamba, 12 June 1996. 32 Ibid. See also Alex Contreras Baspineiro, La Marcha Historica, Cochabamba 1994; Maria Lohman et al., ‘Guerra a las Drogas’: Un Vision desde las Andes, Cochabamba 1994.
27
vice-president, they told me, is not really an Indian since he serves the neoliberal elite.33
The conversion of miners into coca farmers shifted the axis of social power back to the countryside but also toward a quite different type of peasantry: small-scale producers linked to the mining struggles, clearly differentiated from the traditional peasantry. While distinctive in back- ground, class-conscious miners turned peasants have been able to dis- seminate an ideology and form of leadership among the wider peasantry that provides a qualitatively different perspective to the struggle. At the same time, the settlement of the miners in peasant areas, in particular in Indian coca-growing communities, has been accompanied by their acculturation into the traditional spiritual discourses and practices asso- ciated with the coca leaf and the demands for greater Indian autonomy.
In Bolivia one of the principle political opponents of the neoliberal regime of President Sanchez de Losada is the coca farmers of Chaparé— over 90,000 family farmers. Free-market policies led to cheap food imports, lowering the price of traditional crops such as corn below the level at which farmers could subsist. As a result, many of the ex-min- ers—and also ex-factory workers—turned to cultivating the coca leaf which provided income for an adequate diet, clothes and basic family needs. The us government, because of its close ties to the banking and financial elites which launder most of the drug profits, chose to press its anti-drug campaign most heavily against the peasant cultivators of a legal crop, coca. Under the operational leadership of the dea, the Bolivian regime has periodically launched eradication campaigns against the peasant producers, jailing hundreds and killing or injuring scores during marches, general strikes and highway blockades. According to peasant leaders, the much vaunted us funding for alternative crops, esti- mated at $15 million, ends up in the pockets of government officials.34 In early May 1996, the government announced a plan to totally eradicate coca production in excess of that intended for medicinal use. The Bolivian Rural Workers Confederation responded by calling the eradica- tion plan ‘crazy’ and ‘irrational’ and warned the government that if the plan was put into practice the peasants would rise up in arms ‘in defence of our families, our lives and our survival’.35 Evo Morales warned that ‘Chaparé will be a new version of the Mexican state of Chiapas in the heart of South America’.36 The coca farmers are determined to avoid the eradication of coca which would also mean, as they put it, the eradication of their families.
The deepening involvement of the us military advisors and dea agents in basic political decisions—through a nominally Bolivian President who speaks Spanish with an Ivy League accent—that adversely affect the coca farmers has deepened the nationalist, anti-imperialist nature of the struggle. ‘Coca cultivators versus the Empire’ is not a far cry from the reality of Bolivian politics. As the cob becomes entwined in internal
33 Discussion with coca farmers in a leadership training school, La Paz, 6 June 1996. 34 Interview of Evo Morales with Carlos D. Mesa Gisbert, De Cerca (La Paz), 1994. 35 Los Tiempos (Cochabamba), 13 June 1996, pp. a–1, a–9. 36 Ibid.
28
conflicts and its leaders in government negotiations, the initiative for political action has passed to sectoral movements and more specifically to the militant peasant movement.37 The prognosis, however, is that the space for political negotiation is shrinking as the us increases its pressure for immediate eradication. An armed confrontation is not to be excluded.
Peru
In Peru the revolutionary movements went into general retreat in the late 1980s and in particular after 1990. The legal Left, the pum, and the United Left broke up and were in part absorbed by ngos dependent on European, Canadian and us funding. Those activists that remained became immersed in electoral politics and were marginalized by Fujimori’s autogolpe in 1992 by which he dissolved Congress and the court system, reserving for himself something close to dictatorial powers. Sendero Luminoso, the major guerrilla organization, self-destructed. Despite its defence of some Indian communities, through its sectarian violence and fanaticism, its cult-like political leadership and its dictator- ial internal organization, it has destroyed most of its popular support. At its peak, Sendero had a powerful social base in the countryside and within the shantytowns of regional cities and in Lima.38 The capture of ‘Comrade Gonzalo’ and the discovery of names and locations of a network of sup- porters and activists decimated the organization. subsequently, a deep split and the eventual defection of a whole generation of veteran activists further reduced its effectiveness. Following the failure of its spectacular seizure of the Japanese embassy, the other Peruvian guerrilla group, the mrta is also greatly weakened. These guerrilla groups represented a hang-over from earlier phases rather than the resurgence seen elsewhere. While social resistance may take time to recover in Peru, experience sug- gests that Fujimori-style strong men store up trouble for the future.
Paraguay: Recovering the Past to Change the Future
In Paraguay the transition from the Stroessner dictatorship to a conserva- tive electoral regime has been accompanied by a growing mobilization of peasants and workers.39 In the immediate aftermath of the overthrow of the dictator, a wave of peasant land invasions was followed by a counter- attack from the landlord class; paramilitary forces and then the Army intervened to dislodge many families.40 This pattern of invasions and dislodgement has continued under the Wasmosy regime. Nevertheless,
37 The debates and controversies with the Bolivian trade union congress are summarized in Washington Estellano, ‘El Congreso Interrumpido’, Punto Final (Santiago), 15 July 1996. 38 Heraclio Bonilla, ‘Sendero Luminoso: metamorfos de la violencia’, Nariz del Diablo (Quito), 1994.
39 Daniel Campos Ruiz and Dianisio Borda, Las Organizaciones Campesinas en la Decada de los 80, Asunción n.d.; Guia de Organizaciones Campesinas 1992–1993, Asunción 1994; Censo de Organizaciones Campesinas 1992–1993, Asunción 1994; Myriam Cristina Davalos and Jose Carlos Rodriguez, Organizaciones Campesinas de Mugeres 1992–1993, Asunción 1994. 40 In 1990 there were 49 land occupations and 51 evictions—at times the same land is occupied more than once; in 1991, 17 occupations and 23 evictions; in 1992, 16 and 16; in 1993, 14 and 17. In the same period, 1,600 peasants were arrested. The same pattern persists in 1996: in April there were 11 occupied farms and 4 evictions. Monthly data is found in Informative Campesinas (Asunción), December 1993 and April 1996.
29
the cumulative effect of peasant pressure on the land has created a posi- tive outcome: some permanent settlement of occupying families and a growing sympathy for the peasant struggle in Asunción. The centre of the counter-hegemonic bloc is increasingly located in the peasant move- ment which demonstrates a capacity for sustained confrontation.
Peasant militancy is, however, uneven with some regions—such as San Pedro in the north—more prone to direct action than others. Likewise, there is not always a direct correlation between social activism and polit- ical loyalty: many peasants active in the radical National Federation of Peasants also continue to vote for Stroessner’s Colorado Party.41 The appeal of direct action does not obliterate the ties of the past.
The influence of the militant peasant movement in Asunción was brought home to me during my stay in Paraguay. In interviews in the mass media, and in restaurants, taxis and the streets, peasant leaders were greeted warmly with expressions of encouragement and open support. Major demonstrations against government policy were led first and fore- most by peasant groups, and the blunt-speaking peasants leaders are in no mood to be put off. In a recent meeting with President Wasmosy, Albert Areco began the interview in the following fashion: ‘Three months ago you told us that you would immediately deal with the issue of agrarian reform. Nothing has happened. Either you are a liar or incompetent.’42 Wasmosy flushed. Entangling himself in the telephone cord, he tipped the phone off the desk as he walked out, and only returned ten minutes later.
As in the rest of Latin America, any electoral transition is premised on the continuation in power of the economic elite, the impunity of the mil- itary, the deepening of economic liberalization and the repression of social mobilization. A key support for the transition is the us Embassy with its five-block-long installations, the size of a military base. When Wasmosy was threatened by a military coup, even though thousands of Paraguayan pro-democracy demonstrators filled the streets, his first reaction was to run to the us Embassy. The us strategy is to both main- tain the civilian regime and the right-wing military to promote and pro- tect the deepening of liberalization from trade union and peasant movement opposition.
Rapid military intervention reflects the symbiosis between the generals and the landowners: not infrequently fallow land occupied by peasants has been appropriated—often illegally—by high-ranking military offi- cers. In a land squatter settlement I visited in eastern Paraguay, the peas- ants had sought an out-of-the-way plot of land in the ‘monte’.43 They did not know that a general had illegally acquired title to the land. First pri- vate gunmen and bulldozers were sent in, but they were successfully repulsed by the peasant community. Local small farmers contributed
41 Interview with Alfonso Cohere, Vice-President of the fnc, 1 July 1996. 42 Interview with Alberto Areco, member of the executive committee of the National Peasant Federation (fnc), 7 July 1996. 43 The peasant settlement Santa Carmen was in the department of Caguazu, 250 kilo- meters from Asunción. The landowner was the ex-General Roberto Knopfelmacher.
30
food and seeds in support. Organized in a semi-circle, working in collec- tives, the land settlers were prepared to resist the paramilitary but not the army. Shortly after, 200 soldiers with armoured troop-carriers des- troyed the houses and crops and killed the farm animals while driving out a hundred families, beating men, women and children in the process. The electoral regime has a much more democratic face in us press flyers than in the Paraguayan countryside.
The current peasant movement has its roots in the 1970s when blossom- ing peasant leagues were crushed by military repression.44 Those activists who survived began the slow process of clandestine organizing throughout the early 1980s, and by the end of the decade regional orga- nizations were formed which coordinated activities.45 The fall of Stroessner and divisions within the elite were the signal for a large-scale land occupation movement. The outcome is the growing recognition that the peasant movement is no longer a ‘rural issue’ but a major actor in national politics. Despite the shift to an electoral regime, scores of peas- ants are arrested each month, violent military intervention dislodging peasants from unused land is routine, and dozens of peasants are beaten and killed by paramilitary forces working with the state.46 While in Asunción the progressive middle class and public employees debate the scope and depth of liberalization, the crucial rural struggle has gathered steam, held back only by physical force.
To date, the peasant movement is developing on two fronts: through the formation of local and regional organizations, and their growing affilia- tion with national federated structures. The National Peasant Federation is currently made up of thirty regional groups, loosely associ- ated and without formal ‘membership cards’, a practice common throughout Latin America.47 The leaders are themselves working peas- ants. Again, there are no ‘full-time’ paid functionaries, no vehicles (they travel by bus) and few if any professional advisors. Yet they are growing. Once again, the secret is the ‘virtuous’ nature of the leaders: they orga- nize, discuss, and share with their followers both struggles and jails.
In Paraguay, as in Brazil and Bolivia, there is a deep estrangement between intellectuals and peasant activists. The intellectuals are increas- ingly tied to ngos and to projects that are responsive to overseas donors. The peasants are increasingly suspicious of, if not hostile to, organiza- tional competition and manipulation by the ngos—‘who use the move- ment to secure overseas funding’, as one Paraguayan peasant leader put it. The Marxist revolutionary outlook of the peasant militants is in direct conflict with the varieties of ‘post-Marxism’ embraced by the intellectu- als. Very few intellectuals are willing and able to serve as subordinates to the peasant movements. While the peasant leaders are eager and deeply interested in working with committed intellectuals, they reject working together through the ‘institutes’ of the intellectuals.
44 See Daniel Campos Ruis et al., Las Organizaciones Campesinas. 45 Interviews with Eladio Flecha and Alfonso Cohere, 1 July 1996. 46 See Noticias (Asunción), 8 May 1996; 19 June 1996; 9 May 1996. On 8 May 1996 peas- ant leaders walked out of negotiations protesting the jailing of 160 peasants. 47 Interview with Alberto Areco.
31
Apart from the land issue, three discernible strands are embedded in the appeal and growth of the peasant movement. First, there is the incorpora- tion, conscious or not, of Indian traditions. Guarani is the common lan- guage; Paraguay is the only nation in which the ‘country’ linguistically conquered the city. In the countryside, there is a fusion of ‘Indian’ and peasant styles of cultivation—community-based farming and ‘market’ activity. The cohesion, urban orientation and political sophistication of the peasant leaders is combined with a desire to farm in the ‘monte’, to be left to themselves close to nature, and to produce primarily for self-consump- tion and secondarily for the market. Second, among some peasant leaders, socialism has become an important political tendency. Theirs is a socialism remote from theoretical elaboration, rooted in common opposition to capi- talist depredation and embedded in traditional peasant communities. Third, nationalism in the countryside is based on the opposition between Guarani-speaking small cultivators and landless workers, and the wealthy European settlers who own vast tracts of fertile land. Tens of thousands of acres of irrigated land are owned by Mennonites, as well as German, Dutch and us corporate farmers, seasonally employing Guarani-speaking peas- ants. The national-ethnic question is linked to memories of Paraguay’s nineteenth-century nationalist experience. Successful state-directed in- dustrialization had been pioneered in Paraguay and was only destroyed through external intervention during the war of the Triple Alliance. The historical memory remains because of the valour of the fighters, and the success of the experiment as long as it lasted.
During the March days during the threatened military coup, while Wasmosy was shamefully hiding in the us Embassy, the peasants para- lyzed highways and mobilized to march on the capital. Although stu- dents received most of the publicity, it was largely young workers and peasants who stood ready to paralyze the country if the military made its move. A few days after the threat had dissipated, Paraguay experienced the most powerful general strike in over a half century, shutting down all major activity. Tens of thousands of peasants filled the streets and the issue of land was highlighted.
Colombia: The Revolution Advances
Colombia possesses the most developed guerrilla movement in Latin America and most likely in the world. While in the rest of Latin America guerrilla movements were defeated or assimilated into liberal electoral politics, in Columbia the guerrilla movement has increased its influence in new regions, gaining significant popular support among the peasantry while at the same time increasing its military strength. Despite inter- national neglect and disinterest, the guerrillas can count on a high degree of legitimation at the local and regional level. The guerrillas, particularly the Colombian Armed Forces (farc), offer peasants protection against military and landlord depredation and support food cultivation and social services. While the farc, which began its struggle in the 1940s, was influenced by Soviet Marxism, today it is principally engaged in an agrar- ian struggle for land reform and democratic transformation. The farc leadership continues to be strongly influenced by Marxist ideology and is still led by the legendary Manual ‘Tirofigo’ (Sure-shot) Marulanda. They number approximately 13,000 armed guerrillas and several hundred
32
thousand civilian activists, overwhelmingly peasants.48 The other three guerrilla groups are much smaller and number about 4,000 armed fight- ers. Informed observers estimate that the guerrillas have a presence in half of the 1,000 municipalities in the country and are strongly established in the principal productive areas, including the coffee, banana and petro- leum regions.49 The farc has built its power base patiently over time with a precise strategic plan—the accumulation of local power.
Like the other peasant-based movements, the Colombian guerrillas have little or no support from university students or intellectuals, most of whom originally joined a disbanded guerrilla group, mr-19, in an elec- toral coalition. The initial vote of nearly 20 per cent was dissipated when mr-19 entered the neoliberal Gaviria regime. They are now an insignifi- cant political force and Antonio Navarro Wolf, once its candidate for president, is the mayor of a small city near the border with Ecuador.
In September 1996 the guerrillas inflicted their greatest defeat on the Colombian Army in thirty years: a military post—ironically called Las Del- icias—in the jungle province of Putumayo was overrun; 27 soldiers were killed, 19 injured and 67 taken prisoner. The farc and its allies in the eln (National Liberation Army) organized in the Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Movement is in daily combat with the military in 15 of the 32 departments (provinces) of the country. Over the past six years the farc has increased its number of military fronts from 10 to 105. The guerrillas, armed with automatic rifles, grenade launchers and rockets, are attacking military garrisons and airbases; so far, the government concedes that almost 500 sol- diers have been killed or wounded. A press release from the farc announced the first liberated zone in the departments of Guavaire, Meta, Caqueta, Putumayo and Amazonas. Increasingly a dual-power situation is emerging.
While Marulanda is still the undisputed leader, the guerrilla leader in charge of the current offensive and his likely successor is Jorge Briceno— better known as ‘Mono (rubio) Jojoy’. The son of a guerrilla and raised with the farc from birth, he is a protégé of Marulanda. He commands the most powerful guerrilla front, Bloque Oriental, in the eastern cordillera (mountain range). Briceno’s headquarters in Sumarpaz is virtu- ally the doorway to Bogotá.
The war has produced an appalling refugee crisis in which many thous- ands of people, threatened with violence, have been forced to flee their homes, often ending up in shanty towns in the big cities, where the most basic of amenities are lacking.50 Faced with a devastating attack on trad- itional crops by cheap us imports of grains, and under an intense cam- paign to eradicate the cultivation of coca, the only profitable cash-crop for campesinos, thousands of peasants are joining the farc. To counteract peas- ant organization, over 100 paramilitary groups with over 2,000 members have been formed and financed by the military and the landowners.
48 Clarin (Buenos Aires), 30 June 1996. See also Resistencia (the organ of the farc), 15 May 1996. 49 Ibid. 50 See Jeremy Lennard, ‘Fearful Colombians Flee to the Cities’, The Guardian, 31 March 1997.
33
Operating in areas of peasant militancy, they have murdered hundreds of activists. The principal target of the paramilitary and military is Uraba: in the past year more than 500 workers have been killed, including entire executive committees of rural workers’ unions. Where the government and its landowner allies resolve labour disputes with bullets, it is not sur- prising that Uraba has become a centre for guerrilla recruitment.
During late 1995 and 1996 the farc began to encroach upon the major urban centres.51 The spread of the guerrilla struggle from the countryside to the city is evident in the recent attack in Bogotá itself upon the Escuela de Artilleria Francisco Aguilar. This development was the result of several fac- tors. The foremost is the profound divisions within the ruling elite, and between President Ernesto Samper and the us. Washington has launched a full-scale diplomatic and political campaign to force Samper’s resignation, alleging ties with the cocaine cartels. This has divided the Congress, the rul- ing Liberal Party and the Executive. The resulting political weakness has led Samper to launch the coca-eradication campaign. Another factor is that the Petroleum Companies ‘rent’ military units, paying fees to commanding offi- cers to protect oil pipelines from guerrilla attacks.52 The result is that fewer elite army units are available to confront the guerrillas. Furthermore, the break-up of the old drug cartels has led to increased competition between new traffickers, the military and political officers over pay-offs. In this situa- tion, the farc, operating a mere thirty miles from the capital, has been suc- cessful in cutting transport which provides food to Bogotá. This is the furthest guerrilla penetration in the thirty-year war and reflects the growing political and social power of the peasant guerrillas. It is not so far-fetched to believe that Briceno’s goal of ‘entering triumphantly into Plaza Bolivar’ (the centre of Bogotá) could be realized in the near future. Colombia could become the first successful peasant revolution since the Vietnam war.
The Resurgent Left: Chile
Besides these new revolutionary forces, there are other positive develop- ments on the Latin American Left. In Chile, after a series of setbacks result- ing from the dictatorship, the isolation imposed by the collaboration of the Socialists with the ultra-liberal ‘Concertacion’ regime, and the disorienta- tion and defections resulting from the collapse of the ussr, the Communist Party is once again the major force in the trade union movement. In the recent cut union elections, despite desperate last-minute manoeuvres to manipulate voting patterns by the Christian Democrats and Socialists, the Communists emerged with the most delegates even as they agreed to vote for a dissident Socialist as the new president to democratize the union.53 The Communists won elections in three major unions, health, education and coal. They also increased their influence in a number of others unions
51 Interview with farc spokesperson in Buenos Aires, 15 June 1996, and farc commu- niqués, February–April 1996. 52 New York Times, 22 August 1996. 53 The Communist Party increased its representation in the executive committee of the cut by 44 per cent, the Christian Democrats declined by 33 per cent and the Socialists lost 6 per cent. The present executive committee includes 16 Communists (up from 10), 15 Socialists (down from 16), 11 Christian Democrats (down from 17) and 6 others. El Siglo (Santiago) 19–25 April 1996. See also ‘Como Avanzan los Comunistas’, El Mercurio, 26 May 1996, pp. d–1, d–22, d–23.
34
and won the presidency of the student federation. Under the dynamic lead- ership of Gladys Marin—a popular Party Secretary, often to be found in the front line of demonstrations—the cp has opened itself to new debates on the working class and social movements; while retaining a basic Marxist class analysis, it has critically analyzed the Soviet past.54
Chile, despite appearances, is one of the most tightly controlled societies in Latin America. This is evident in the senators ensconced for life, in Pinochet’s control of the military and intelligence services, in the author- itarian Constitution, and the restrictive and unjust electoral laws. The Christian Democratic and Socialist regime and the right-wing opposi- tion together totally control the electoral system, campaign financing and the media to promote their candidates and uphold the electoral laws perpetuating bi-party rule. Control emanates from the tightly inte- grated relationships between the government and big business. The result is the virtual absence of any institution or outlet in the mass media which might criticize neoliberal strategy. Individuals promoting public debate on military atrocities are subject to judicial proceedings. Such a closure of debate is enforced by civilian politicians, namely Christian Democrats and Socialists who control state funds, manage enterprises, direct research institutions and important sectors of the mass media. They are obsessed with gaining the confidence of the corporate dir- ectorates.55 They have opposed efforts to investigate the culpability of notorious military officials identified by survivors and human rights groups. The great bulk of the judiciary are veterans from the military regime or beholden to the new civilian power wielders. The bulk of the Chilean academics and upwardly mobile professionals are embedded in the middle levels of power and increasingly conformist.56 Ministerial ‘Socialists’ celebrate the miracle of the model even as it has produced the worst inequalities in recent Chilean history, and among the most lop- sided of income patterns in Latin America.
Yet there are signs of a left revival, aside from the growth of Communist Party influence in the trade unions, working-class neighbourhoods and the universities. The growing power of the Left reflects the dissatisfac- tion of rank-and-file trade unionists with union officials who have been mere transmission belts of neoliberal policy. As ‘outsiders’, the Comm- unists have been actively defending workers’ interests against the harsh Pinochet labour laws enforced by Socialist and Christian Democratic officials. Virtual exclusion from Parliament has favoured Communist activism in the social movements. A new generation of autonomous trade union and student leaders have joined in forging the growth of Communist Party influence.
Two questions, however, confront the Communist Party. The first is the flight of intellectuals. Most of its economists left for lucrative salaries in the government. Others left for political reasons, claiming that there was no room for open debate. The challenge for the Party is to allow internal
54 Interview with Gladys Marin, 29 March 1996. 55 See James Petras, Fernando Leiva and Henry Veltmeyer, Democracy and Poverty in Chile, Boulder 1994, especially pp. 85–9. 56 Ibid., pp. 46–75.
35
debate and provide autonomy for the new popular leaders. The problem of the intellectuals can only be solved with a new generation attracted to an open party. Secondly, the Party’s continued growth depends on accepting the autonomy of the new trade union and student leaders; cen- tralist attempts to impose a political line will quickly alienate these lead- ers who were not formed in the previous Communist culture.
The Party also needs to develop an analysis of the new conditions of factory work and a better understanding of the class and state relations behind the ‘globalization’ rhetoric, freely and uncritically circulating in Chile. There are other leftist groups such as the network of independent trade unions (co-ordinadores) which are gaining influence in the industrial zones around Santiago. The Democratic Forum—a group of centre-left professionals—a small group of independent political economists and a burgeoning anti-corporate ecology movement could, if they converge, pro- vide the impetus for a significant left-wing political presence in Chile.
Argentina: Between Stagnation and Rebellion
The political struggles in Argentina have been cyclical. There was wide- spread mobilization in the transition from the military regime—following the Malvinas defeat—and during the subsequent attempted military coups. There were six general strikes against the Radical Government in the mid- to late-1980s. In the 1990s there have been widespread provincial riots. More recently, in August 1996, the first successful general strike against the faltering Menem regime could be symptomatic of a new cycle of class conflict. The crucial issue in Argentina is not the periodic outbursts of mass popular protest but its dissociation from any alternative political project. Where politics has been joined to the social struggle, the general strikes of the cgt in the 1980s, the urban protests in the early 1990s, it has been channelled into political projects that have been assimilated to the neoliberal project.57 The cgt helped bring down Alfonsin only to become a vehicle for the ultra-liberal policies of the Menem regime. The dissident trade unionists (cta) of the early 1990s were instrumental in the creation of the Frente Grande which later supported neoliberal stabilization poli- cies. The organized social movements have thus far not been able to create a political instrument expressive of their own social bases.
Another feature of the Left in Argentina is its dissociation from the major spontaneous uprisings in the provinces, with some notable excep- tions in Jujuy. This was brought home to me while I was in Neuquen speaking to a group of trade unionists, academics and professionals. Just fifty miles away, over 20,000 people had blocked a major highway in protest over the Governor’s policies. When I questioned the local orga- nizers of the Neuquen meeting about the leadership of this mass action, they told me that none of the leftist or other organized groups were involved. More generally, the revolt of the provinces has not yet been theorized by any of the Buenos Aires intellectuals, this being their own brand of provincialism—they are well versed, however, in the latest
57 One of the best sources on popular struggles is the monthly Madres de Plaza de Mayo published by the group with the same name. See also ‘El Fuego de Santiago’, America Libre, no. 5, June 1994, pp. 92–100.
36
nuances of postmodern discourses, another example of cultural alien- ation and political dissociation. Similar uprisings have taken place in Salta, Rosario, Cordoba, San Juan, Mendoza and Tierra del Fuego. In some cases, the riots led to the burning of public buildings and large- scale street confrontations with very little to show for it in the way of building a national or regional political alternative. Not infrequently, the demonstrators return to previous client political relations with one or the other of the traditional parties.
On the surface, the Left is divided between the centre-left electoral front in Buenos Aires and the provincial movements involved in direct action. In practice, these differences are subject to severe qualification. The human rights group, the Madres del Plaza de Mayo, has become an important ref- erence point for popular mobilization of young people, dissident trade unionists and neighbourhood organizations, as well as nuclei of university students and academics. Hebe Bonafini, the principal spokesperson, told me of her conception of building an inclusive national movement, inde- pendent of the existing centre-left coalitions.58 There is no question that the Madres have an important political presence due to their intransigent insistence on bringing to justice the military personnel responsible for the deaths of 30,000 people. Beyond that, they have been able to raise militant demonstrations of over 50,000 people, mostly the young. The problem of moving from protest to politics, however, remains to be resolved.
The Marxist Left remains very small, internally divided and socially iso- lated, although individual militants are found in some of the major trade unions. What is lacking is a left-wing movement that has political credi- bility among participants in the urban social struggles. Electoral politics could only have meaning as part of a growing political identity that comes out of the social struggles and polarizations of the direct action movements. In the meantime, as in Mexico, the social decomposition of the corrupt and inept Menem regime is accompanied by a growing mili- tarization of politics.59 During the August general strike, the military packed the streets, blocking public protests.
The general strike of August has an ambiguous character: on the one hand, it was important in defining the further decline of support for Menem and the growing pressure on the cgt bureaucracy; on the other hand, the trade union officials saw it as an escape valve to deflect internal opposition, and had no intention of deepening the struggle. In other words, the Argentine Left stands between the stagnation of the official Left of the Frente Grande and the cgt, and the promising politicization of provincial rebellion as a source of political renewal.
Mexico
In Mexico, the internationally famous Zapatista movement and its leader, Subcommandante ‘Marcos’, is only one of several important peasant movements in Guerrero, Oaxaca and other regions. Nonetheless, what is
58 Interview with Hebe Bonafini, 20 June 1996. 59 Nestor Lopez and Alberto Minujin ‘Nueva Pobreza y exclusion: El caso Argentino’, Nueva Sociedad, no. 131, May-June 1994, pp. 88–105.
37
important about the Zapatista movement is its blend of Marxist analysis and Indian practice, the linkage of national and international strategic thinking and local community-based support. Equally important, since the centre-left party, the prd (Revolutionary Democratic Party), contin- ues to be marginalized from any legislative role, it is the peasant move- ment and in particular the ezln which has established the basis for a national political debate on the issues of nafta, democratization, land reform and social justice. Like its more powerful and numerical counter- parts in Latin America, the ezln combines social struggle with efforts to forge a political instrument to transform the larger society.60
It would be a mistake, however, in discussing the perspectives for revolu- tion in Mexico to focus exclusively on the ezln. The potential for radical change is located in several areas: the eruption of new guerrilla groups, the proliferation of local and regional peasant movements, the radical social base of the prd, and the emergence of significant splits in the offi- cial trade unions, parallel to the emergence of autonomous ‘class oriented unions’ like ‘Ruta 100’. Each component has some overlap: for example, it is clear that the epr (Ejercito Popular Revolucionario), which is com- mitted to seizing state power, has substantial support among at least some peasant communities in Guerrero.61 The radical social activists in the peasant struggle are also part of the left-wing of the prd. These move- ments are not responding to the political space opened by President Zedillo’s ‘electoral reform’. On the contrary, they are creating their own political space despite the growing militarization of the country. Mexico’s political rulers are the product of a marriage between Mexican trustees for Wall Street, narco-capitalists and viceroys from the World Bank and imf. The growth of the politico-social movements is in part the result of a tran- sition from an authoritarian state-capitalism to a police-state kleptocracy which dubs itself ‘free-market liberalism’ and describes its electoral reforms and the assassination of opponents as a ‘transition to democracy’.
A characteristic phenomenon of the new phase has been the wave of freight train heists which followed the privatization of the railways. Until recently, the Mexican rail network was indissolubly linked to the Revolution and the national idea. Over the last year, over a dozen freight trains, often carrying grain, have been stopped by crowds of rural people who proceed to make off with their cargo.
The fundamental point about the extension and deepening of radical opposition, however, is that it lacks a political axis. The movement’s diverse and local character attracts substantial following in search of immediate solutions but has thus far inhibited the creation of a national movement capable of challenging the party-state. Nevertheless, it is clear that the decomposition of the pri and its internal intrigues, power struggles and violent vendettas have loosened its tentacles on the popu-
60 Many books have been written on the ezln. One of the best on-going analytical sources is found in Chiapas, edited by Ana Esther Ceceña (Mexico City). 61 Leticia Hernandez Montoya, ‘Rechazamos el Dialogo; Derrocar al Estado, Nuestro Objetivo: epr’, Excelsior, 10 August 1996, pp. 1, 8, 17, 25; Mexico City Times, 10 August 1996, p. 1. For an analysis of the politics of the epr, and its parallel political party, the pdpr, see Dan La Botz, ‘Mexico at the Turning Point, Part I: Rebellion and Militarization’, Againt the Current, no. 65, November-December 1996, pp. 22–3.
38
lar classes in civil society. At the electoral level, the right-wing pan is the main beneficiary, almost doubling its electoral base over the past six years to almost 15 million voters. The prd is torn between its leftist social base, pressuring it for more active intervention, and its parliamen- tary leaders who want to make it an electoral machine catering to mid- dle-class voters in the large cities of the north. With the election of Obregon Lopez to the presidency of the Party, the prd promises to attempt the difficult exercise of riding both horses.
The growth of revolutionary politics in Mexico should not be any sur- prise to students of revolution. Vice-President Gore compares nafta to the nineteenth-century Louisiana Purchase. As John Saxe Fernandez points out, it is easy to speak of us policy in the late-twentieth century as the ‘Mexico Purchase’.62 With the financial squeeze by the banks on the Mexican debtor, 40-cent-an-hour wages, the massive displacement of peasants by agro-business, there is a revolution waiting to be made.
The EZLN: Arms and Politics
The Zapatista Army of National Liberation has captured the imagin- ation, sympathy and support of a substantial part of the Left in Mexico and throughout the world. This was evident in the international ‘Encuentro’ organized by the Zapatistas in the jungles of Chiapas (27 July to 3 August 1996) in which over 4,000 participants gathered from 41 countries. From interviews and discussion, including one session with Marcos, a complex picture emerges of the evolution and current situation of the ezln.
Since the initial uprising on New Year’s Day 1994, the ezln have gone through substantial shifts in political perspective.63 It is important to note that these changes and the policies of the Zapatistas have signifi- cance far beyond the twenty-five communities in Chiapas influenced by the ezln. From conversations with Marcos and other ezln leaders as well as from published speeches, communiqués and interviews, it is clear firstly that the ezln has narrowed its goals. From the broad focus on basic socio-economic transformation at the beginning (in which Zapatista militants even spoke of a socialist transformation), the over- whelming emphasis today is on ‘democratization’, ‘demilitarization’ and a ‘political transition’. This is in part because of the tightening military encirclement. The intransigence of the government and its ‘salami tac- tics’—isolating, starving and bribing Indian communities to break with the ezln—has heightened the prospects for a direct military assault on the remaining communities.
For the ezln to transform itself from a military to a political structure and to establish corresponding democratic systems of accountability would pose many problems. First and foremost is the immediate military threat; army forces are positioned less than a kilometre from some
62 Interview with John Saxe-Fernandez, 7 August 1996, Mexico City. His forthcoming study in us-Mexican relations draws heavily on nineteenth-century Porfirismo and us annexation policies to explain nafta and the us buy-out of Mexican resources. 63 Ibid.
39
Zapatista communities.64 To prematurely put assembly-type structures at the centre of decision-making would be to ignore the lesson of the lightning invasion of February 1995, and to increase the vulnerability of the leadership who support democratic values. The culture of commu- nity solidarity and survival is a necessary prerequisite for the construc- tion of democracy. The continuance in present circumstances of the Zapatista Army is one guarantee. Marcos is of course aware of the cen- tralist tendency in guerrilla formations and anguishes over the issue. The tension between military defence and democracy cannot be resolved by simply issuing democratic directives—it can only be dealt with in the concrete context of an occupied Chiapas, with helicopters hovering over- head and special airborne troops awaiting orders to strike. In the event of a government attack, the ezln would be separated from their social base and the public image projected by the media would shift from a struggle between Indian communities and the one-party state to a military con- flict between guerrillas and the armed forces. Such a polarization would weaken progressive urban support.
The question of war or peace cannot be resolved by unilateral concessions from Marcos. Any war will be decided in the larger political struggle in which forces outside Chiapas will play a major role. Can the Mexican regime wage a multi-front struggle with guerrillas in Guerrero, peasant mobilization in Oaxaca, and growing trade union discontent—over 300,000 marched on May Day 1996 in Mexico City —a precipitous decline in voter support in the north, and an economy heavily dependent on liquid capital, ready to flee at the least sign of instability? In June elections are scheduled for the mayorship of Mexico City and there is a possibility that the prd candidate, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, will win. This prospect may well have induced both the government and the ezln to act cautiously.
The ezln’s narrowing of goals is accompanied by the broadening of inter- national support. The indefinition of the ezln leadership results in each group reading into the ezln its own political concerns. For example, some French intellectuals praise the Zapatistas as the reincarnation of nine- teenth-century republican citizens.65 Spanish anarchists see them in terms of Durrutti’s peasant armies. While indefinition has its advantages, it also has limitations in building a coherent national movement beyond Chiapas. Moreover, it is not clear if the narrowing of goals is not a reflection of an internal shift among the political currents that make up the ezln.66
The second shift in the ezln approach is away from diffuse appeals to ‘civil society’—which has not led to ‘self-organization’—and to increas- ing collaboration and coordination with specific groups in Mexico which have a demonstrated capacity to resist the government. In June and July 1996, the debtors’ organization barzon, which claims one million affili- ates, held a national conference in Zapatista territory and established links. Shortly thereafter a number of national and regional Indian or- ganizations met in the same terrain. In the same period, the ezln leader-
64 Since the initial uprising, the Mexican government has spent a great deal building roads into the jungles of Chiapas—strictly for counter-insurgency purposes. 65 Alan Touraine, who was at the Encuentro, made this comparison. 66 Interview with Marcos, 29 July 1996.
40
ship participated in a week-long seminar with Mexican intellectuals about reform of the state. These ties with organized groups hold greater promise for building a national political alternative and serve notice to the government that the encirclement strategy is not working. More important, it begins to give substance to the social character of the movement that Marcos envisions.
The third shift in the Zapatista policy is the preponderant if not exclu- sive emphasis on a political solution and the qualified renunciation of armed struggle. In his speech to the Encuentro, Marcos placed the armed struggle in the context of an early ‘phase’ in the struggle—as a means of achieving recognition, opening a political dialogue with the regime and advancing towards a political solution. This is particularly highlighted by the strong overtures to liberal-democratic public opinion and the dis- tant, if not hostile, relation to the new guerrilla movement in Guerrero (epr) that emerged in June 1996.67
In our interview, Marcos articulated the dilemma of choosing between military and political struggle. While he clearly was intent on moving toward legal political activity, the regime was tightening the military cir- cle, increasing the repression of peasants in Chiapas by its support for paramilitary groups, and offering no concessions in ending the strangle- hold that the pri state has over all aspects of political and social life. The real political conditions in Mexico are deeply repressive; an average of two prd leaders or activists are killed every week—over 250 since the election of President Zedillo. One can imagine what would happen to the Zapatistas if they came out of the jungles and began serious organizing.
Marcos emphasized that agrarian reform and cultural autonomy were essential to any peace settlement. For Marcos and the ezln, the issue of land distribution is linked to the self-government of the Indian com- munities. The Mexican government, like its counterparts in Bolivia, Guatemala and Ecuador, attempts to disassociate Indian cultural issues from socio-economic changes and autonomous political power. In any case, the government negotiators are putting no meaningful concessions on the table, hoping through time and a war of attrition to tire outside supporters, wear down the communities through deprivation and then deal a quick military blow.
The Rift Between Old and New Lefts
In Latin America as a whole, what is striking in the current situation is the minimal influence that the ex-leftists of the 1960s have on the third- wave revolutionaries of the 1990s. The ‘halo’ effect of the past no longer holds. The eruption of peasant land occupations, the politics of direct action creates tension between the legalist, electoralist politics of the sec- ond wave and their pragmatic centre-left coalitions. The new revolution- aries call on the Centre-Left to support their struggles, to pass progressive legislation, to resign from repressive regimes even as they develop the strategy of building autonomous centres of popular power in communi- ties, cooperatives and provincial municipalities. It appears to be only a
67 Ibid.
41
question of time until the rightward moving electoral coalitions and the leftward moving new social-political movements will part ways.
Popular disenchantment with Centre Left governments has been provoked by their endemic corruption, and by their resort to austerity, repression and privatization. Thus formerly revolutionary or leftist politicians associated with the governments in, for example, Chile, Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua, have all brought one or another of these types of discredit upon themselves. The insurgent politicians of the 1980s who have failed to win power nationally have been undermined in a different way. Their electoral bids have been defeated and their mystique has gone. With some local exceptions, they have failed to use electoral interventions as a way of build- ing movements and propagating a long-term programme of social transfor- mation. Even the pt in Brazil and the prd in Mexico now lack clear programmes for tackling the crises in their countries, having been out- flanked by agile new forces on the Right (Cardoso and pan) and new extra- parliamentary movements on the Left. They risk being seen as pure politicos awaiting their turn. Nevertheless, if Cárdenas wins election as mayor of Mexico City, activists will hope that a prd administration will clip the wings of the repressive forces and use municipal initiative to strengthen popular movements. Marcos is keenly aware of the pitfalls of the peace accords in Central America and the limited nature of ‘democratization’ under the auspices of the military and the imf in much of the rest of Latin America. Even where the Left advances electorally, this may hide actual retreats. In El Salvador the peace accords of 1992 have allowed for electoral advances by the fmln, with the Left winning control of the capital, San Salvador, for the first time in March 1997. The peasant activists of the Asociación Democratico Campesino naturally welcome the ending of the death squad’s reign of terror and the advent of a local administration which is more likely to be open to pressure. But government policies have hit poor peasants and rural labourers hard while the fmln’s orientation to ‘produc- tive capitalists’ leads to reduced concern for their interests. In these last elec- tions abstentions ran at 60 per cent, with many poorer or rural voters staying at home. Although landlord and employer intimidation is much reduced, nevertheless four activists were killed during the election period.
Politics and Revolutionary Ethics
Marcos offers a new type of leadership in Latin America. The differences between Marcos and the other peasant leaders are obvious: Marcos is an intellectual of urban origins with a literary flair unmatched among his counterparts in Latin America. Yet Marcos is equally concerned with the cultural, subjective and historical dimensions of social revolution; while thinking ‘internationally’, Marcos and the new leadership are deeply grounded in ‘national’ and regional realities with a sensibility for the nuances of local customs, traditions and norms. None of the leaders today follow a ‘model’ extrapolated from other countries, past or present. Most leaders are conscious of the need to avoid personality cults and to be responsive to the rank and file. While the new leaders are excellent orga- nizers and effective leaders, they are not charismatic spell-binders nor apparatchiks. They rule by obeying, at least to some degree, and do not force their ideas on the militants through emotional fervour but seek to convince through discussion.
42
Despite the widely circulated democratic rhetoric and ongoing electoral system, the new leaders are aware of the ongoing risk of assassination directed by the governments through a variety of extra-judicial paramili- tary groups that function with impunity. Marcos, for example, was well aware of the intention of the Mexican government to have him killed. While the constant presence of mortal danger surfaces occasionally, it is not an obsession, nor does it lessen or modify the leaders’ activity. To direct from a bunker would be a sign of weakness or even cowardice. They are always present in the meetings and demonstrations, and in many cases have been beaten, arrested and sent to remote prisons. The militants respect those leaders who share their fight: ‘showing face’ gives courage to the poor. The new leaders have helped to create new movements, but they are also a product of them—in ethics as well as its socio-economic interests. The resurgence of the new peasant and urban movements of the 1990s flows from the fact that they are defending vital interests and that no one ques- tions the personal integrity of their leaders. If they lose these qualities, the movements will dissolve or become fragmented into electoral clienteles.
Such groups are not simply ‘new social movements’. They retain and develop Marxism in new circumstances adapted to new class actors engaged in novel types of struggle with the clear perspective of changing the national, if not international, structure of political and economic power. Ex-miners become coca cultivators, Indian communities linked to urban intellectuals become guerrilla leaders, rural landless workers build anti-liberal power blocs, Guarani-speaking peasants challenge the hege- mony of drug and contraband ‘capitalists’—Marxism can be a creative tool in coming to terms with these new protagonists of social change.
An encouraging feature of the new movements is that, confronting an environmentally rapacious socio-economic system, their resistance is often infused with a strong commitment to the defence of a sustainable ecology. The indigenous people’s identification with their native earth remains a powerful strand of rural radicalism. And since women so often bear the brunt of popular survival strategies, the new movements only thrive when they display a concern for women’s issues and gender equal- ity. While most of the nationally-known leaders are still men, there are increasing numbers of women taking the lead at community level. Where water supplies are polluted or traditional cultivation plots taken over by developers, it is very often the women who are in the forefront of the resulting popular struggles.68
Almost all the new leaders have a ‘religious background’, either directly or through their association with their members. The Zapatistas drew heavily on the consciousness-raising of the progressive Catholics of Chiapas, partic- ularly Bishop Samuel Ruiz. Most of the original organizers of the mst came out of seminaries and rural pastoral movements. Some of the Paraguayan peasant leaders are sons and daughters of earlier militants organized in the Ligas Campesinas promoted by progressive church people; the Bolivian leadership draws on the spiritual traditions of the Indian communities. Popular religiosity can fuse with Marxism in a syncretic fashion. However,
68 See, for example, Cesar Fonseca and Enrique Mayer, Comunidad y Produccion en el Peru, Lima 1988, p. 187.
43
we should beware of simply carrying over 1980s stereotypes. Catholic Liberation theology remains a socially radical force, but in a number of countries its strength has waned somewhat, partly because of the Vatican’s hostility and partly because of its partial recuperation by the ngo culture. Protestant and Pentecostal groups are a dynamic and growing presence in many parts of Latin America, with a special appeal to the rural and urban poor, to women and to Indian and black populations—indeed, it is said that in Latin America there are now more Protestants than Catholics. Latin American Protestantism should be seen as the Left’s keenest rival for the allegiance of the poor, channelling popular hostility to the political estab- lishment into other-worldly directions and stimulating a culture of self- help and self-reform amongst the most deprived. While the established left parties have failed to respond to this challenge, the practical, extra-electoral orientation of the new movements equips them to do so.69
Unions, the City and the Country
Last summer the trade union confederations of Brazil and Argentina organized successful general strikes. In Argentina the strike totally halted industry and almost all commerce.70 In Brazil twelve million strikers shut down industry and most provincial commerce. The massive participation in these actions can be set against their meagre political impact. The deepening unemployment crises—in Argentina over 17 per cent of the labour force, and a quarter of the working class; in Brazil close to 15 per cent in the greater São Paulo region—are the worst in fifty years. Discontent is increasingly directed not just at the Cardoso and Menem regimes but at the official trade union leadership, especially the national leaders in São Paulo and Buenos Aires.71 The convocation of the general strikes by the cgt and cut leaders was essentially meant to deflect this anger. They were ritualistic actions lacking strategic perspec- tive and largely confined to registering protest. The political leaders understood them as such, and made little or no effort to meet any of the demands, let alone modify their neoliberal agenda. Nevertheless, the symbolic meaning of the general strike invokes the spectre of an alliance between urban and rural interests. There are growing bonds between the provinces and the big city proletariat in Argentina, the landless rural workers movement and the São Paulo industrial belts.
While the public-sector workers, particularly in the provinces, have been at the cutting-edge of the new trade union militancy—understandable given the budget cuts in education and health, and the massive lay-offs of public employees to meet World Bank and imf budget goals—the new round of cuts are directed at lowering the labour costs of private-sec- tor capitalists and facilitating ‘no cost’ firings to increase the profits of exporters and attract new investors. The result is an emerging ‘conflu- ence’ of common interest between downwardly mobile public employees and private wage workers threatened with redundancy and the loss of
69 See Michael Löwy, The War of the Gods. Religion and Politics in Latin America, Verso, London 1996; Richard Gott, ‘The Latin Conversion’, The Guardian, 10 June 1995. 70 Correio Sindical (Rio de Janeiro), June 1996, p. 3; Jornal Do Brasil, 22 June 1996, pp. 1, 12. 71 Interview with Ina Merieles, President of cut, Rio de Janeiro, 4 June 1996; seminar meeting with dissident trade unionists São Paulo, 23 May 1996; interviews with dissi- dent trade union leaders of the cta in Rosario, Cordoba, Neuquen and Resistencia.
44
social benefits—family allowances, bonus payments, vacations and so forth. The general strikes are thus only the first indications of this new and potentially destabilizing confluence that, if sustained, could endan- ger the neoliberal regimes. The question is how durable is the re-emer- gence of the trade union struggle and working-class combativity?
The principle feature of the trade union insurgency is a defence of existing social legislation and previous wage gains against the new wave of budget cuts and downward pressures on wages. Their militancy is based on con- serving residual elements from the previous populist and social democratic era. Thus, while the strikes and increasing militancy reflects a growing rejection of ‘neoliberalism’, they have not been accompanied by an alterna- tive strategic conception that converts the periodic paralysis of capitalism into a transition to new forms of socialized production and distribution.
The upsurge of peasant movements has provided examples that have had a significant impact on urban labour, stimulating a new militancy which in turn opens channels for the creation of a ‘new trade unionism’, inde- pendent of the old guard ‘pactism’ and collaborationist leadership. As the centre-left political parties abandon the social movements, the rural movements turn to land occupations, provincial civic associations and the trade unions to general strikes, and armed groups create ‘liberated territories.’ However, organizational fragmentation poses a serious chal- lenge to the success of such movements. It is the single major obstacle to a serious challenge for power. This is most evident in Mexico where hun- dreds of local militant peasant, debtor, Indian and community groups are active, each in limited fashion against the centralized power of the one-party state. In such circumstances, the revival of peasant militancy in the countryside requires a political instrument rooted at least in part in the cities, and ultimately a national political-social organization.
The New Colonialism
The attempt by the us government to give its legislation, the Helms- Burton Law, sway over the entire globe—referred to in legal terms as ‘extra-territoriality’—reflects the growing centrality of imperial interests in defining us foreign policy. This imposition should be seen in the context of de facto us penetration of the higher echelons of the executive, military and intelligence apparatuses of the Latin American states. While most commentators have criticized the financial controls exercised by us banks, particularly throughout the debt crisis, and others the pervasive influence exercised by the us through its shared power in the World Bank and imf, few have given an account of how these powerful economic levers work alongside direct political and military control exercised by us officials. Under the guise of fighting drug traffickers, Washington has organized Latin American military forces under us command, a goal set in the 1960s and 1970s but unattainable until now. In Mexico, Bolivia and Colombia, the us Ambassadors and State Department routinely dictate which mili- tary officials and Cabinet Ministers are acceptable and which are to be dis- missed. And, as a matter of routine, Latin executive officials comply.
The strengthening of us control over Latin American internal security affairs is paralleled by Washington’s policy of pressuring governments to
45
reduce the size of their conventional armed forces while strengthening their internal police and military repressive apparatuses. Even at the tac- tical level, fbi and dea officials direct investigations, calling in their Latin officials to provide intelligence and oversee operations.72 In Chaparé, Bolivia and in the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru, dea officials make no effort to disguise who is in charge of operations. Most Latin American generals and presidents are very self-conscious of the fact that the us labelling them ‘drug trafficker’ can cost them their position. The formidable influence of the us is evident in the eagerness of President Menem to anticipate us foreign policy positions, and of Mexico’s President Zedillo who makes debt payments in advance despite the deepening impoverishment of millions of fellow citizens.
The drug issue is a pretext for increasing us power in Latin America. The use of drug money in financing us trade imbalances by money-laundering through us banks never emerges as an issue in the drug-eradication pro- grammes. At the end of the twentieth century, the Latin American Pur- chase is in full force. All of the major lucrative Latin American public petroleum companies are up for sale. The maquiladora or sweat-shop free- trade zones are becoming emblematic of the new foreign directed indus- trial export strategies. us corporations now control greater shares of the fast-food industry and cultural and media sales.73 us corporations are active in real estate as well as retail outlets and shopping malls. us-spon- sored militarization is directed at safeguarding ‘the Purchase’. The New Imperialism is not ‘neo-colonial’—it is rather a matter of direct and rou- tine executive control.
The New Imperialism attempts to strengthen the global position of the us through greater exploitation of the Latin American economies. The underlying drive of us empire building is determined by the decisive dependence of the largest us multi- nationals on overseas profits, and of the us economy on favourable accounts with Latin America to compensate for deficits in Asia and Germany.74 The us has estab- lished two new vehicles for containing unrest: the ideology of ‘globalization’ and the promotion of non-profit ngos. The first is to mystify intellectuals into submission before the Inevitable Wave of the Future, the second toprovide them with the means to dismantle the national welfare state.75 Nonetheless, the scope and depth of imperial penetration continues to undermine an ever-widening circle of social classes: small and medium firms are forced into bankruptcy, public employees are impoverished, peasants are displaced, factory workers are employed on insecure terms and receive very low pay. In the face of this, even a minority of intellectuals have tentatively begun to revive the notion of imperialism as a central concept for analysis and politics.
72 A visit to Chaparé disabuses any observer of the sovereignty of the Bolivian state. Even everyday operational activities are overseen by the dozen or so dea officials stationed there. 73 Between 1983 and 1993, us media services exports increased by 138 per cent compared to total service exports which grew only 90 per cent. us media goods exports increased 2,143 per cent while total goods exports increased only 110 per cent. us Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the US 1995, Washington, dc 1995; Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, September 1995. pp. 85, 93, 104.
74 James Petras and Todd Cavaluzzi, ‘Lucratives bases arrière pour 1’économie américaine’, Le Monde Diplomatique, February 1995, pp. 6–7. us transfers (rent, interest, profits and favourable trade balances) cover 40 per cent of the negative trade balance with Japan over the last decade. 75 See my ‘Intellectuals: A Marxist Critique of Post-Marxism’ forthcoming in America: Libre.
46
Conclustion
Empire building is about the extraction of interest payments, the pillage of natural resources, and the large-scale transfer of public property to multinationals. Together these forces have put tremendous pressure on the Latin American social system. Since the ‘local power structure’ is located in the central cities, in this process of extraction and appropria- tion, the ‘provinces’ and the rural areas have been especially hard hit.
The logic of the expansion of the new peasant movements is intimately related to the internal transformations of the peasantry—politically, cul- turally and economically—as well as a dialectical resistance to the deep- ening encroachment of imperial demands. The peasantry today is both market- and worker-oriented. Access to credit, markets and technical aid is linked to their increasing class conditions as wage workers. The dis- placement of educated peasants linked to modern urban centres creates a new peasantry with modern organizational and media skills that link agricultural activities to urban class struggle.
It would be a serious mistake to dismiss contemporary peasant move- ments as the last gasp of rebellion. The movements between country and city are no longer one-way. High levels of crime and the decline of social services in the cities have lessened the advantages of urban living. As movements take over land and build communities there could be a stabil- ization, if not reversal, of the rural to urban migration. There is no inher- ent, historical logic that compels that demographic change—it is in large part a political question. Interest payments, the repression of coca farm- ers, the subsidy of agro-export conglomerates are, after all, state directed.
To date, the Empire has flourished as never before: conditions of mineral appropriation, access to markets, low labour costs and influence over gov- ernments and the military were never better. The space for ‘reform’ is almost non-existent within the formula of free markets, electoral regimes and military supervision.76 The dialectical opposite pole of this success, however, is the decay of the urban middle sector and the rapid accumula- tion of increasingly impoverished workers and public employees moving towards direct social action. It is because of this imperial excess that the new rural movements are gaining national political influence and promi- nence.
The fundamental turn that must be made from strictly agrarian issues to social transformation has to be built around the renewal of a socialist praxis that links cultural autonomy and small-scale production with con- trol over the strategic heights of the economy. The Empire has struck and torn asunder the economic, cultural and political fabric of Latin American societies. It has assimilated a few and exploited many. But the Left has struck back—in the villages of Paraguay and Bolivia, in the rural squatter settlements of Brazil, in the jungles of Mexico, a new movement is taking hold that is developing its own theory and writing its own history.
76 For a critique of the ‘reformist’ perspective, see James Petras and Steve Vieux, ‘Prag- matism Unmasked: History and Strategy in Castañeda’s Utopia Unarmed’, Science and Society, vol. 60, no. 2, Summer 1996, pp. 207–19.
47

2007
Journal of Latin American Geography
Geography
Resistance and Social Reform in Latin America: Speaking with João edro Stedile of Brazil’s “O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra” (the MST)
Jeff Garmany

Department of Geography and Regional Development University of Arizona
Flávia Bessa Maia
Departamento de Geografia Universidade de São Paulo
For those concerned with social resistance and civil society, Brazil’s O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST) stands out as one of today’s most intrigu- ing social movements. Having emerged towards the end of Brazil’s military dictatorship period in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the MST was initially formulated to address the concerns of Brazil’s camponês1 population. As Brazil moved towards a more decen- tralized form of state democracy, many on the left doubted whether federal legislation alone would ever sufficiently address the country’s “landless” issue (where millions of agricultural workers lived as peasants, having no ownership of the land on which they lived and worked). The primary objective of those within the movement was not merely to petition, but to force the federal government to implement what was perceived as long overdue agrarian reform measures. The MST quickly gained international fame for their land occupation strategies, in which landless camponês families often squatted on “unused” sections of agricultural land in an effort to obligate federal agencies to enact constitutionally provisioned land reform policies (Fernandes 2000). Currently, as the MST still continues to push for agrarian reform in nearly every region of Latin America’s largest country, the movement has also become deeply involved in a multitude of other political and social debates pertaining to issues of globalization.
The most publicly-recognized figure within the MST today is writer and critic João Pedro Stedile. The author and editor of numerous books regarding agrarian reform and the MST (Stedile 1997, 1999, 2002, 2005), Stedile has become increasingly critical in recent years of neoliberal economic policies, globalization discourses, large-scale agro- industrial practices, and the consolidating networks of global capitalism. We met with Stedile at the MST headquarters in São Paulo in July of 2006 to discuss the contemporary state of the movement. What follows is an expanded excerpt from that conversation, one begun in truncated form in the journal Antipode (Garmany and Maia 2007). That
Journal of Latin American Geography, 6 (2), 2007
138	Journal of Latin American Geography
interview focused upon the spatial politics of the MST in relation to agrarian reform, while this one concerns the MST’s current position within the social, political, and eco- nomic landscape of modern Brazil.
Jeff Garmany and Flávia Bessa Maia: Considering, as you’ve said before, that many of the social problems in Brazil are
interrelated, and that the root causes for social inequality in the country (rural space) are the same as the ones in the city (urban space), then do you think that the MST’s current model of social resistance should also work in the city, that it would be effective?
João Pedro Stedile: Well, the biggest challenge we have in constructing a social movement in the city is
that the traditional forms of urban organization are already insufficient. It’s not that they are disappearing, but that they are insufficient. How do the people organize during this period of industrial capitalism? Unions, neighborhood associations, and political par- ties: these three tools, however, are insufficient to organize the poor people of the city. So our greatest challenge is to find what forms of organization, particularly for young people, will develop a powerful alliance. This appears to be the problem that we have in the camponês movement: we have to unite with the city, but when we come here to the city we find that there is no organization in the city. We have to first help them organize in order for us to join with them.
JG/FBM: Well, the movement is growing enormously today, perhaps because it is so open to
many people. It has even been said that it’s the largest social movement in Latin America, which clearly is a sign of success, but does this not also create problems and have some drawbacks?
JPS:
Well, first, we don’t like this type of adjective: if it’s the largest in the world, the largest in Latin America, this doesn’t do any good. The principal force that we work for overall is in the agricultural sector and the camponês movement. We look for solutions to the problems we face today, and we find that they’re deeply related to the dilemmas that all the componês movements in Latin America and the world face. So in the last five, six years, we have continued to strengthen our relations with other camponês move- ments. Always with the spirit to learn, to trade experiences, to search to discover what are the solutions to these problems that profoundly affect the small agriculturalists in Canada, the United States, Mexico, in Brazil, etc. And they’re the same today, the same problems. And as such, if the problems are the same, the solutions should be very similar even though each group of people has their own culture, their own idiosyncrasies (rarezas), as the Mexicans say. So we have to be open, and we’ve learned that over the years. We’re only going to find a real solution if we exchange ideas with others, if we learn with them and they learn with us.
This is what we are constructing together with the other camponês movements in Latin America; to have regional agroecology schools like the one we’re building here in Paraná na Lapa, we’re working on one in Venezuela,2 our Nicaraguan companheiros are expanding their school for Central America, and we’ll put one together, God willing, in Haiti. All this is creating a network for us to train our militantes3 within another vision, and to train new agronomists with, as Leonardo Boff 4 said, a more holistic vision, where we don’t look at the occupation of land as simply a rational way to produce agricultural
Forum	139
products and earn money. We look at the land as a necessity for production, we respect nature, produce healthy foods, and at the same time reproduce the camponês culture which is important for humanity. And with this we don’t stay trapped in this stupid eco- nomic rationalism of capitalism that only wants to reproduce dollars and more dollars and more dollars regardless of the consequences.
JG/FBM: Returning once again to this question of the struggle between social classes, I’ve
spoken with many working class people here in Brazil who don’t agree with the actions of the MST and don’t like the movement’s ideas. Could you speak a little about this, like how the movement is responding to this sentiment, or how the movement negotiates these debates and problems?
JPS:
First, someone who does not live here in Brazil has to understand the historical context that we’re living in, and with that, our forum for communicating with people in the working class. The history of class struggle here in Brazil is a somewhat recent de- velopment. It was not until nearly the twentieth century when industrial capitalism was implanted and social classes clearly emerged. The real camponês class has existed here for 130 years, since abolition, because before that work was done by slaves. And so the camponês class in Brazil is a relatively young class, it has only 130 years of history, as op- posed to Mexico where campesinos have been around for 500, maybe even 1,000 years.
Here in Brazil the struggle between classes has always, like in other countries, gone in waves. Here there was a period of roughly fifteen to twenty years when the proletariat gained strength, disputing the agenda of the dominant class, and then a subsequent re- flux in the proletariat masses. What’s the period that we’re living in today? It’s the reflux of the proletariat. We had a great rising that was the origin of the MST, the CUT,5 and the PT6 that occurred between 1978 and 1989. The population mobilized, the working class accumulated strength and ideology, and this permitted the removal of the military dictatorship, it permitted us to have a campaign for human rights, and it permitted the construction of Lula’s image in 1989. In ’89 we had a whole series of projects, but they were defeated. And it was then that neoliberalism was implanted, with Collor7 and the two terms of Fernando Henrique Cardoso.8
Well, since 1990 the strength of the working class has declined. The people have become apathetic, they feel defeated. It’s a generation that has historically been de- feated, and the CUT losses strength, the PT loses mysticism, and we don’t know what will happen to the MST. By the logic of class struggle the MST should already have been defeated, like how CONTAG9 was defeated. CONTAG doesn’t count for very much in terms of class struggle today in Brazil. It’s not because it doesn’t exist, CONTAG has, I don’t know, 5,000 unions. It exists, but the bourgeoisie controls it because CONTAG has no ideology. Well, we have ideology, we have an agenda, we want to defeat this economic model and implant another! But with this slump of the proletariat, it’s like you have to row against the current. You have to survive, resist, and this is what The Landless Movement is doing. We’re resisting and holding onto the flag, “agrarian reform is possible, socialism is possible, the land must be distributed!” But we know that we don’t have much strength because of this slump. In this slump who has hegemony in society? The dominant class! And everything it says turns to gold, everything it says becomes the truth, whichever idiot who says some stupid thing on the television is right because they have hegemony. So they convince the others. This is the period that we’re living right now.
140	Journal of Latin American Geography
We’re conscious of the fact that the urban masses where the Brazilian people are concentrated suffer from these perverse ideological influences. They don’t have a clear vision for where to go, they are unorganized, and they are not involved in political debate regarding the future. And evidently, in relation to what they hear about the MST, they always repeat what they hear from the dominant class. It’s not their true sentiment. But the poor young people will one day discover a tool, or maybe the unions will reemerge. It doesn’t matter how, but the young people will organize. And when the youth organize, and the proletariat rises again here in Brazil, they’ll remember that the MST was right. Right now we don’t want to be famous, we’re not worried about what they think of us at this time. We’re concerned with whether or not our proposal is suited for reality and for a better future. The most efficient advertisement we have is in our struggles. When we go to the streets, whether they want to or not, the bourgeoisie has to talk about us. They say bad things, but they talk. They’re obligated to talk about us. When we did the march to Brasilia, over twenty days, they had to talk about us.10	They’re critical, that’s fine, but they have to talk. So in regards to communication and how we’re perceived by the Brazilian people, what we need is to gather our strength again, to unite with the other movements so that the process of communication to the masses is more effective. Doing radio programs, alternative television programs, and using the Internet more effectively really work to strengthen this. Still, our biggest problem today, which is the biggest challenge to the entire left in terms of communication, is the television. Television is the only true instrument of mass communication in modern society today, and it’s expensive. We can’t afford to create an alternative television channel at this time. So this is a real dilemma, a serious dilemma for everyone, not just the MST.
JG/FBM: If indeed we’re currently in, as you say, a period of decline for proletariat mass
movements, then wouldn’t Lula’s victory in 2002 indicate a significant change?
JPS:
The great Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm once made an interesting commen- tary. He said that throughout the twentieth century not one leftist party won an election during a period of decline for the proletariat masses. According to this, the fact that Lula won here in Brazil appears difficult to explain. So what explains it? Was it a change in his discourse? Well, he didn’t introduce any debate or any projects during the election. His platform was of peace and love. The people voted for him looking to the past. They were tired of the neoliberal Cardoso agenda, so they voted for the guy that for twenty years had been fighting with us and for labor. But they forgot to check-in with him! He had already shifted his agenda. And the other thing that’s now evident is that parts of the dominant class in Brazil, the neoliberals, were wary of the revolts in Argentina, so they aligned with Lula. Being so close, the neoliberal crisis in Argentina really scared a lot of people within the dominant Brazilian classes. They were worried the same thing might happen here, and it actually did. If Serra had won the election (in 2002), if he had imbedded Brazil even further in neoliberal economic policies, and that’s exactly what’s happened here in São Paulo with Alckmin,11 the entire country could go the way Argen- tina did. You can write that.
So Lula won the election during this era of a weakened proletariat, but truthfully it’s not the Lula from 1989; now it’s another Lula. Deep down it’s not the left who won the election, you can see it. It’s been transformed into an ambiguous government. Sure, there are leftists within the government, and we support it because it’s better than having
Forum	141
a right-leaning government, but Lula’s administration is not a leftist one. It has some on the left, some on the right, and some in the center.
But now I’ll defend Lula, because it’s short-sighted for us throw the blame on him, saying that Lula’s done nothing. Deep down the government is like a mirror that reflects society. And if in society the working class is weak, if it’s in reflux, a leftist government can’t advance its agenda. Look at Venezuela: why hasn’t Chávez been able to realize his proposed agenda? Because the only real force that he has behind him is the military. The Venezuelan people are still disorganized. So nothing happens when Chávez says “Let’s work for agrarian reform!” Where are the campesinos of Venezuela? Completely disorganized! We’re the ones who are actually there! We’re trying to help the campesinos saying “Look folks, stop waiting for Chávez! Are you going to occupy the land or are you going to wait for Chávez to come here and do it for you?”
So in relation to Lula, of course there’s been an ideological metamorphosis since he’s become a larger political leader. I’m not absolving him of his responsibility, but Lula’s administration hasn’t been able to make changes because of the reflux in the prole- tariat that hasn’t yet reversed. We didn’t count on this. We thought that a simple electoral victory would give a shock to the masses, as it did with our base. During the first year of Lula’s presidency we had 250,000 families set up encampments (assentamentos). We thought this was it, the time had come! And it hadn’t. It was really frustrating. Of the 250,000 families we had encamped, 100,000 left and went home. They saw that things weren’t changing like they had hoped. But if Lula had settled those 250,000 families, then the next year we would have had 500,000, you see? This is the greatest challenge that we face today: we’re waiting around, seeing if the government will do this or that instead of just acting on our own. And of course it’s better that Lula be reelected than to have Alckmin win. Obviously we’ll vote for Lula, but real change will only come with the pro- cess of organization among the people and the rising of the proletariat. This is the only chance we have. You’ll still have plenty to write about before we re-shape Brazil.
JG/FBM: If there really is a slump in proletariat masses today in Brazil, then outside of the
camponês base, where else does the MST find support?
JPS:
The people that are socially conscious in Brazilian society, the same people that at some level understand the importance of organization, they like the MST. They’re actually the only reason that the MST still exists. If it was only our organized base, the pressure from the right would be too strong. Their anger towards us is enormous. But the people that are socially conscious and have some type of organizational skills in the city often defend us, they like us a lot. This helps to create the structural sup- port that defends us. And the intellectuals, the left likes us because, you’ve probably read this in Brava Gente,12 because we’re a novelty in the camponês world. We’re able to incorporate in the camponês movement organizational principals that come from the working class more than anything. The camponês movements that you’ve proba- bly studied a lot, in all of Latin America, were always spontaneous movements-- mass ones, sometimes radical, but without consistent organizational and ideological princi- pals. The novelty of the MST is that it cultivates the generosity of the camponês, that radicalism of the camponês, that spirit of sacrifice that the camponês has. We join this, what comes from our culture, with organizational principals. It gives a tradition to the working class to change capitalism. What traditions? Love, learning, discipline,
142	Journal of Latin American Geography
respect for the collective, always work together, don’t think that you’re more impor- tant than the others, leadership, and freedom. And this is what makes up the MST.
Notes
1 Rural landless worker – analogous to campesino. 2 For further information regarding the Venezuelan program, please go to http://www.
landaction.org/display.php?article=325
3 The “worker bees” within the movement that handle much of the day-to-day organi- zational labor.
4 Influential figure for the MST, particularly for his work regarding liberation theology.
5 Central Única dos Trabalhadores (Unique Workers Center), the chief Brazilian union federation founded in 1983.
6 Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers Party); leftist political party founded in 1980. Elected in 2002, Brazil’s current president Luiz Inácio “Lula” da Silva is the most recog- nizable face of the PT.
7 President of Brazil from 1990-92 who resigned while facing impeachment hearings for charges of corruption.
8 President of Brazil from 1995-2003 who instituted the “Real” economic plan.
9 Confederaão Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura (National Confederation of Agricultural Workers), a confederation of various agricultural unions founded in 1964.
10 March that took place in April and May of 2005, it included 12,726 MST participants who walked over 200 kilometers from Goiânia to Brasilia to raise awareness for agrarian reform.
11 Governor of the state of São Paulo at the time this interview was conducted, and the presidential candidate from the Partido da Social Democracia Brasileira (Brazil Social Democracy Party – the PSDB) in the 2006 election. The PSDB is currently the main political rival of the PT.
12 Book published in 1999 by João Pedro Stedile and Bernardo Manano Fernandes detailing the historical origins and rise of the MST, as well as providing a description of the movement’s characteristics (Editora da Fundaão Perseu Abramo, São Paulo, Brazil; www.fpabramo.org.br).
References
Fernandes, B. M. 2000. A Formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes. Garmany, J. and F. B. Maia. 2007. Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements: An Interview with João Pedro Stedile, a leader within Brazil’s O Movimento dos Traba-
Forum	143 lhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST). Antipode 39(4).
Stedile, J. P. (ed.). 1997. Reforma Agrária e a Luta do MST. Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes. __________ . 2002. A Questão Agrária Hoje (3rd edn.) Porto Alegre, Brazil: Editora
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.
__________ . 2005. A Questão Agraria no Brasil (vols. 1-3). São Paulo, Brazil: Expressão Popular.
Stedile, J. P. and B. M. Fernandes. 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo, Brazil: Editora da Fundaão Perseu Abramo.

2004
Sociology
Latin American Perspectives
Of Land and Labor: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane Plantations of Northeast Brazil
Wendy Wolford 

Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 31, No. 2, Brazilian Northeast: Globalization, Labor, and Poverty (Mar., 2004), pp. 147-170
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3185029 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 18:44
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
OfLandandLabor
AgrarianReformon the SugarcanePlantations of NortheastBrazil
by WendyWolford
The sugarcaneregionof Pernambucoin northeasternBrazil(knownas the
zona da mata, or forest region) has historicallybeen characterizedby pov-
erty,paternalisticpolitics,andrigidsocialhierarchies.1Theregionalsohasa long historyof social mobilizationas ruralworkersandsmallfarmershave
resisted the oppressive conditions of plantationproductionand struggled variouslyforaredefinitionorexpansionof politicalandeconomicrights.In the mid-1990s, when a new social actor,the Movimentodos Trabalhadores
RuraisSem Terra(Movementof RuralLandlessWorkers-MST), beganto
organizeplantationworkersand the ruralpoor in the region to fight for agrarianreform.
It was initially very difficult for the MST to build its membershipin the sugarcaneregion.Ruralworkerswho hadworkedall theirlives on theplanta-
tions had internalized"spatialimaginaries,"or understandingsof the land, that conflicted with the MST's conceptualizationof land as the privileged
spaceof productionandsocialreproduction(Wolford,2003a;2003b).These spatialimaginarieswereproduced,in Lefebvre's(1991) words,throughcon-
ceptions,perceptions,andexperiencesof access to landas signifying stabil- ity and statuswithin the hierarchicalorderingof plantationspace. The rural
workersconceived of full employmentand paternalisticprotectionon the plantationratherthanownershipofasmallplotoflandastheideal.Itwasnot until the early 1990s that an economic crisis in the sugarcaneindustry enabledthe MST to organizeincreasingnumbersof landoccupationsand build a political position in the region.
WendyWolfordis anassistantprofessorof geographyattheUniversityof NorthCarolina,Cha- pel Hill. The researchfor this paperwas fundedby the Social Science ResearchCouncil, the NationalScienceFoundation,theInstituteforInternationaSltudiesattheUniversityofCalifor- nia,Berkeley,andtheInstitutefortheStudyof WorldPolitics.TheauthorthankstheLatinAmer- ican Perspectivesreviewers,AngusWright,AndyPerrin,MeenuTewari,andFeliciaMebanefor their comments.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue 135, Vbl.31 No. 2, March2004	147-170 DOI:10. 177/0094582X03261378 O 2004 LatinAmericanPerspectives
147
148 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
The extreme economic crisis of the 1990s had its immediate roots in Brazil'stransitionto democracy.Beginningin 1989, newly elected civilian governmentsat the state and federallevel began to dismantlethe generous
systemof productionsubsidiesthathaddisproportionatelysupportednorth- easternproducersvis-a-vis moreefficientproducersin the southof the coun-
try(LimaandSilva, 1995). Whilenationalcaneproductionincreasedsignifi- cantly between 1982-1983 and 1994-1995, the Northeast region's contributionfell from 30.1 percentto 19.4 percentduringthe same period (MEPF,1998: 3). At the same time, internationalprices for sugarcanefell steadilyfrom1996to 1999,andsuccessivedroughtsduringthe1990sforced distilleries(usinas)andmills (engenhos)aliketo shutdown.
As theyhadduringpreviouscrisesin sugarcaneproduction,local govern- ment officials discussed the possibility of implementingagrarianreform.2
Thelarge-scaleproducersresistedtheideaoflanddistributionb,uttheyfaced anewpoliticalandsocialmomentinthehistoryof theregion.Withthewith- drawalof the militarygovernmentand direct civil elections in 1985, the demandforagrarianreformwasbackonthepoliticalagenda,andtheMST was increasinglyactivein the sugarcaneregion.As hundredsof thousandsof ruralplantationworkerswerelaidoff becauseof theregionaleconomiccri- sis, the MST organizedgroupsof smallholders,ruralworkers,andthe urban poor andoccupiedplantationsthatwere eithernot producingcane or heavily indebted.Stories aboutMST occupationsand public demonstrationswere featuredregularlyin the state newspapers,and by the mid-1990s the state governmenthadmadeagrarianreformintheregionapriority.Between 1986 and 2001, 2,199 families were settled in 27 former plantation areas.3
Throughouthe coastal sugarcaneregion, temporarysquatterencampments weresetup,andtheMST'sbrightredflagcouldbeseenhangingfromimpro- vised flagpoles. It seemed evidentthata regionaltransformationwas under
way. Inthisarticle,I examinetherelationshipbetweentheMST,theruralwork-
ers, the sugarcaneindustry,andthe statein the largestmunicipalityof the zona da mata,Agua Preta,Pernambuco(see Fig. 1). In the latestagricultural census (2000), Agua Pretawas characterizedby the largestconcentrationof landin theregionandthehighestnumberof landreformsettlements.4One
settlementinparticularF,lora,willbepresentedasacasestudy.5Forty-six familieslivedonFlora,13of whomhadreceivedlandbecausetheyoccupied theareawiththeMSTin 1996and33 of whomhadbeengivenlandbecause of theirpreviousassociationwiththeproperty,whichhadbeenalarge-scale sugarcaneplantationbefore its expropriationin 1997.
I arguethatruralworkersin the sugarcaneregionresistedthe MST's early attemptsat organizationbecause their spatial imaginaries,forged on the
-
r,&~. ..........
Figure 1: Agua Preta, Pernambuco
plantations,did not resonatewith the movement'sideologies or methods. Theyjoinedthemovementonlywhentheeconomicsituationbecametoodif- ficulttonavigatealoneandthemovementestablishedapositionofinfluence with local political leaders, including municipalmayors and state agrarian reformagents. Once on the settlement,MST leaderswere able to persuade thesettlerstomoveawayfromsugarcaneproductiontowardspecialtyitems such as high-valuefruitsandvegetables.
The disjuncturebetween spatialimaginaries,however,made it difficult fortheruralworkerstoadopttheMST'sideology,eitherintheoryorinprac- tice.Thisbecameevidentin2002-2003, whenthesugarcaneindustryinthe
regionmadeadramaticrecoveryandcanewasbeingprocessedagaininthe distilleriessurroundingAguaPreta.Thelocalpriceof sugarcanepertonwas twotothreetimeshigherthanithadbeenin 1999becauseof anincreasein internationalprices and federal deregulationthat removed restrictionson exports. As the distilleries roared back into life, they turned to a new,
supremelyflexible source of sugarcanesupply-the	agrarian-reformset- tlers.Theywereabletolurethesettlersbackintoproductionbecausetheset-
tlerscontinuedto valuewages andpaternalpoliticalprotectionoversubsis- tence agricultural production and what the MST referred to as their "universal"rightto goods and services such as education,healthcare, and
runningwater. The MST was unableto maintaina stronghold in the sugarcaneregion
because the settlers'spatialimaginarieswere shapedby social hierarchies
andreproductionstrategiesfirmlysegmentedin carefullydelineatedliving andworkingspaces.Havingaccesstolandmadeadifferenceinthesettlers'
lives, butthatdifferencewas situatedwithinanunderstandingof landas
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	149
150 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
providingindependencefromoutsiders(includingtheMST)andapaternal-
istic interpretationof politicalrights.Because the governmentwas the ulti- mate overseerof the settlements,the settlersnow turnedto local and state
officials ratherthan the distillery or mill owners when they needed assis-
tance. The settlers willingly sold their sugarcaneat relatively low prices becausetheydidnotsubtractfamilylaborcostsfromtheirexpensesanddid
not demandthe same set of rightsthatplantationworkershad won in the
1960s (Sigaud, 1979). TheargumentsmadeherearebasedonresearchconductedinMSTsettle-
mentsbetween1998and2003.Thebulkofthefieldworktookplacebetween September1998 andOctober1999, when I interviewedapproximately100 settlersin the southernstateof SantaCatarinaand 100 settlersin the north- easternstate of Pernambuco.The settlersinterviewedare not the object of thisstudy;rather,theyprovidethepointof departurefromwhichtoobserve thelargerprocessesof changingsocialrelations(cf. GarciaJr.,1990).
SUGARCANE PRODUCTION IN NORTHEASTERN BRAZIL: ACCOMMODATIONAND CRISIS
Sugarproductionhasdominatedpolitics,economics,society,andculture inPernambucoforalmost500 years(Andrade,1988).WhenthePortuguese first colonized the new territoryof Brazil, sugarcanewas a valuablecom- modity in the Europeanmarket,and productionspreadrapidlyalong the coastalreachesof thenewcolony.By 1570therewerereportedly23 sugar mills in Pernambuco, and by 1580 that number had almost doubled (Schwartz,1987:73). Between 1580and1680,the"landof Brazil,otherwise called America"(Lery,1992), was the most importantsugarproducerin the world.Itwasnotuntilthe 1700sthatDutchproductionintheAntillesbegan
to challengeBrazilianproducers. Sugarproductionin the coastalareasof Pernambucogave rise to a socio-
economic structurethat remains markedlyevident today. The rigid class structureimportedfrom Portugalsimultaneouslysupportedsugarproduc-
tion andwas supportedby the commodity'sneed for largequantitiesof land andlabor(Schwartz,1987).Highoverheadandimmenserisksmadeover-
seeing the process from plantingto shippingexpensive and thereforean activitysuitableonlyfortheveryrich-the senhoresdeengenho,or"masters of the mill."They achievedthe statusof nobility throughplantationowner- ship, and their title was one that "demandedto be heard, obeyed, and
respected"(Pinto,1963:61). Thesugarproducedontheplantationswaspri- marilyintendedfor export.Planterssold some rawsugar(knownas "clayed
sugar"becauseof itsbrowncolorandheavy,wetconsistency)ontheBrazil- ian market,butthe majoritywas shippedto Britainto be distilled.Industrial- izationof thecommodityinEuropemeantthatfew upstreambenefitssuchas alcohol productionand distillationtechnology were capturedlocally.
To run the plantation,the owners depended on a limited number of
employees who understoodthe complicatedmachineryand administrative
issues.Themajorityof thetasks,however,requiredrelativelylittleskilland tremendousexertion.Theseconditionsservedto segmentthelaborforceinto two distinct groups: skilled and unskilled. Because the plantationsrelied heavily on slaves importedfrom the Africancontinent,laborsegmentation was color-codedfrom the outset.
Inthelate 1800s,thePerambuco plantationeconomyexperienceda double- edged crisis. Producersin Cubamodernizedthe industry'sprocessingtech- niques,andthe island'sfavorableaccess to the NorthAmericanmarkethurt Brazil'sexportopportunitiesA.	tthesametime,thegradualdeclineof slavery threatenedBrazil'ssupplyof cheaplabor.6The stratifiedplantationsystem allowedtheownerstorespondtothecrisisbyabsorbinganalternativelabor source-the	subsistence farmerswho had carved out family farms on the edges of the plantations(Eisenberg, 1974). These moradores(residents) were alreadytied into productionthroughnonmarketobligationsandrights thattheownersmanipulatedin orderto engagethemin sugarcaneproduction (Sigaud, 1979). The sugarcaneplantationsrepresentedan entireeconomic, social, and political system that revolved aroundthe Casa Grandeand the workers'quarters(see Freyre,1978).Theplantationownerusuallysoldbasic foodstuffsandworksuppliesto the workers.If the workerslackedthe money topurchasegoodsattheweeklymarketintown,theywereoftenforcedtopay highpricesattheplantationstore,andmanyaccumulatedenormousdebts.
The crisis of the late 1800s also pushedthe sugarcaneplantationowners fartherinto formalpolitics, their survivalbeing heavily dependenton their abilityto acquirestateresources(LimaandSilva, 1995;Wanderley,1978). Early reliance on state protection shaped the industry's future in that it encouragedplantersto increasetheirprofitsby securingstatesubsidies
ratherthanby improvingproductiontechniques(LimaandSilva, 1995:188). The northeasternsugar producerswere very successful in garneringstate support.In the 1930s the federalgovernmentcreatedan ambitiousprogram
to promotethe sugarindustry.Particularemphasiswas placedon protecting
the northeasternproducers from the increasingly competitive southern states. The Institutode Alcool e Aqiucar(Institutefor Alcohol and Sugar- IAA),createdin 1933,maintainedproductionintheNortheastwithacompli- catedset of productionquotasanddifferentialprices,butby theearly 1950s thestateof SaoPaulowasproducingtentimesmoresugarperhectarethan
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	151
152 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
producersin the Northeast(Maybury-Lewis,1994: 65). To boost Brazilian
productivityvis-a-vis Cuba,theIAA modernizedproductionby centralizing plantationswithinindustrialdistilleriesthatintroduceda higherlevel of tech-
nology into the productionprocess and paved the way for superiorethanol productionin the 1970s.
Governmentinterventionc,ombinedwithafavorableexportmarketinthe
early and mid-1900s, breathednew life into the limping plantationsof the Northeast.The plantersrespondedwith a concertedincreasein production andadoptionof newtechniquesthatreducedtheirrelianceonlabor.Between 1950 and 1960 they cut theirpermanentlaborforce in half (Maybury-Lewis, 1994:65). Througha varietyof means,moradoreswereencouraged,moreor less directlydependingon the circumstances,to leave the plantationfor the town.Plantersreliedheavilyon workforcesegmentationto persuadethemto go (Sigaud, 1979). Moradoresaccustomedto doing one job were often orderedtodoanotherforwhichtheywereill suited,andtheyoftenfounditin their best interestto move to town. The capacity to resist or challenge the pressure to leave depended on one's outside family connections and alternativework opportunities.
Resistance to the changing land-laborarrangementswas surprisingly strong.In1955workersoftheGalileiaMill,undertheleadershipoftheplan- tation-bor lawyerFranciscoJuliao,foundedthePeasantLeaguesinprotest over the owner'srefusalto providea coffin for a worker'sburialas tradition required(Pereira,1997).ThePeasantLeagues,madeupprimarilyof small- scalefarmerswhohadbeendrivenofftheplantationsbyreturningownersin the 1950s, grewrapidly.7Ruralunrestattributedto themwas partlyresponsi- ble for the 1964 coup thatturnedthe governmentover to the militaryfor the next21 years.ThemilitarydismantledthePeasantLeagues,althoughaunion structureremained that allowed some branches to continue organizing
among plantation workers who had the proper legal working papers
(Maybury-Lewis,1994). Tighter labor regulations,however, encouraged manyplantationsto use clandestinos(illegal workers)fromthe smalltowns
nearby. At this time, state officials in Pernambucodebated the possibility of
implementinga progressivedistributionof landin the sugarcaneregion.The memoryof peasantandworkerunrestlingeredeventhoughthemilitarygov- ernmenthadbrokenup the PeasantLeaguesandpenetratedthe ruralunions.
At one meetingof agronomists,academics,andpoliticians,those attending recalled the words of Joaquim Nabuco that "abolition without agrarian
reform is only half done." Ultimately, however, discussions of agrarian reformfocused more on addressingthe tendencytowardstructuralcrisis in
sugarcaneproductionthan on alleviating the suffering of the ruralpoor. Agrarianreformwould help the local sugarcaneeconomy by removingthe landless (and discontented)poor to anotherregion where they would find unlimitedresourcesandservetheircountryby colonizingBrazil'sinterior. As theagronomistFranciscoTarginode Siqueira,of theInstitutoNacionalde
Imigraqaoe Colonizagaosaidatthemeeting(Canae reformaagrdria,1970),
Wehavetoo	herein the	and	of manypeople	Northeast, they'redying hunger;
wehavefamiliesanxioustooccupyemptyland,andmeanwhilweedonothing.
[Outside]agitatorscome andorderus to distributelandhere,wherethereis no
land,or if thereis, it's an ungratefulland,an erodedland,a hilly land,a land
with impropertopography.I thinkthatthe agitatorsshould,as patrioticmen, havethespirittooccupyemptyland,astheydidintheUnitedStatesless thana
centuryago.
In the early 1970s, the federalgovernmentbeganto subsidizemigration outof theNortheastintotheless populatedAmazonregion,moving,inPresi- dentMedici's words,"menwithoutlandto a landwithoutmen."Ambitious colonization schemes were established in the Amazonian region and the grasslands of the Center-West.8Between 1964 and 1985, millions of Northeasternersmigratedto the Amazonor to the growingindustrialdevel- opmentpole of Sao Paulo(GarciaJr.,1990).
At the same time, the federal governmentcreated new legislation that wouldprotectandfosterthesugarcaneindustry.In1974asignificantdropin sugarcanepricescoincidedwithhighoil prices,motivatingthemilitarygov- ernmentto searchfor a low-cost fuel alternative.The NationalAlcohol Pro- gram(PROALCOOLw)ascreatedin1975toprovideincentivesforprocess- ing sugarcaneandtherebyreducethecountry'srelianceon foreignimportsof oil. Between 1975 and 1989, the governmentinvested US$10.5 billion in PROALCOOL and ethanol production increased from approximately 500,000 litersin 1975tooverfive-and-a-halfmillionin 1982(Andrade1988: 671). The investmentwas crucialin enablingthe relativelyinefficientpro- ducersof the Northeastto remainin business (Maybury-Lewis,1994: 35).9
Duringthis period,distilleriescontinuedto rationalizetheirproductive
base,rentingoutpartof theirpropertiesto rendeiros(renters)who essentially
oversawthe planting,harvesting,andtransportationfor the distillery.The move fromdirectto indirectcontrolwas experiencedbitterlyon the planta- tions. As one formerruralworkersaid,
InthedistillerywehadourfullrightsT.herewasaregularcestabasica(food
Andattheendof the	wereceived	Nowthedistill- basket).	year,	[ourights]....
eriesarehavingsomedifficulties.... Butevennowtheystillpay,theydon't
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	153
154 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
allatoncebutthen	Butwiththe	no-with the pay	theykeeppaying.	rendeiro,
rendeirwoedon'thave foodbasketsw,edon't the thereisn'ta regular	get tenth,
quartesralarythatispaidbythebankw,hichisarighthathegovernmengtave
totheworkerT.hereisn'ta itdoesn'texist.Wedon't familygiftanymore,	get
weneverdid the The isdifferenbtecauseit anything,	[from renter]. distillery
allofthis-andthesame	thatweusedto tothe pays	obligations	pay	distillery
we to[the	But can't after	because[it'shard]. pay	rendeiro].	you	go	yourights,
After 30 years of relativeprosperity,the Pernambucosugarcaneregion was again hit by economic, political, and ecological crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Andradeand Andrade,2001). The marketfor both sugar- cane andethanolwas rapidlyshrinking,partlybecauseof the increasedpar- ticipationof theindustrializedcountriesinglobalsugarproduction.Between 1975 and 1985, the industrializedcountriesincreasedtheirsugarexports from 20 percentof the world's total to 43 percent(De Souza, Irmao,and Araijo, 1997:2). Atthesametime,theproductionof popularartificialsweet- enersreducedthedemandforrefinedsugar,andworldpricesweresteadily
dropping. The crisis in Perambuco was exacerbatedby the loss of the industry's
main source of support-government funds. In the 1990s the new civilian
governmentderegulatedthe military'ssupportprogramfor sugarcaneand revised regional legislation that had previously protectedthe northeastern producers(Buarque,1997:3). Seriousdroughtsin 1992-1993 and 1997-
1999 also hurtthe industry(Andradeand Andrade,2001), and by 1995 44 percentof thesugarcanerefiningdistilleriesinPernambucowereconsidered
"paralyzedorfunctioningwithdifficulty"(Linsetal., 1996:2). In responseto the crisis, the stategovernmentof Pernambucopinpointed
agrarianreformasoneof theregion'smostviablealternatives.A 1998gov-
ernmentreportread:"Thecrisis of the sugarcaneindustryin the northeastern
tropicalforestregionis acrisisof the[productive]model.Thecrisisprovides
a	to	out	structural	thatwill elimi- uniqueopportunity carry sweeping	changes
natetheconcentrationoflandholdingsandmonoculturaplroduction,inorder to benefit the economic developmentof the region with equalityand social justice"(MEPF,1998: 1).
Between 1986 and 2001, 27 formerplantationsin the sugarcaneregion wereexpropriatedanddistributedamongtheruralworkers.These expropria-
tions representeda revolutionarytransformationof productiveand social relationson the plantationsas rendeiros,administrativeworkers,and ordi- naryworkersalikeweregiventherightstosmallplotsof land.Thenewset- tlers were also providedwith initial grantsfor short-termsubsistenceand materialsto build a house. They were eventuallyprovidedwith investment
funds geared towardthe productionof subsistence and alternativemarket crops such as banana,coconuts, and pineapples.
THE MOVEMENT OF RURAL LANDLESS WORKERS
Foundedin 1984, the MST began in southernBrazil as landless farmers
occupiedidlepropertiestopressurethefederalgovernmenttodistributethe land. The movement's leaders emphasized the importanceof building a nationalorganization,onethatwouldunitepeoplefromaroundthecountry (Fernandes,1999;WrightandWolford,2003). Tobe animportantpolitical actorthemovementneededtobe seennotjustasanexpressionof regional
problemsbut as an expressionof the broaderstrugglefor citizenshipat the nationallevel.?1 By the late 1980s MST was aggressivelybuildingits mem-
bership throughoutthe country and had established local offices in 22 of Brazil's26 states.MSTleadersconsideredtheplantationregionof northeast-
ernBrazilparticularlyimportantfor organizationbecausethe long historyof sugarcaneproductionhad generatedsuch extreme poverty,hunger,and violence (Fernandes,1999).
Butorganizingastrugglearoundthelandwouldprovetobeverydifficult
becausethe landembodieddifferentmeaningsfor differentpeople (Wolford,
2003a;2003b).TheMST'svisionof agrarianreformwasconstructedwithin
theculturaltraditionsandexperiencesof smallfarmersandlandlessworkers
in southernBrazil,a regioncharacterizedby a relativelystrongpeasanttradi-
tion. In the southernstateof SantaCatarina,the sons anddaughtersof small
farmerswhojoinedtheMSTdidso becausetheyvaluedtheirwayof life on
thelandandwerecomingtotheendof thespatialfrontierintheregion.These
peopleacceptedtheMST'smethodsof occupyinglandas legitimatebecause of theirown culturaltraditionsof mobilityandcolonizationof "emptyland"
as the meansto acquiringaccess to theirmost importantproductiveresource. Land was also needed for social reproduction,as new generationsneeded access to theirown landto begin a family.
Ruralworkerswho had spenttheirentirelives workingon the plantation didnotvaluethelandinthesamewayasthoseinsouthernBrazil,anditwas difficultto persuadethemto fightplantationownersfor a piece of land.Most oftheruralworkersinthesugarcaneregionprivilegedaccesstoasalaryover access to land, and there was little in their occupationalhistory that legiti- matedthenotionof occupying"someoneelse's property."Thesettlersrelied
ontheirregularincometopurchasetheirgroceriesattheweeklymarket,pay theirbills, andfeed themselves.AlthoughMST leadershadtriedto organize
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	155
156 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
occupations in 1989 and the early 1990s (Branford and Rocha, 2002;
Fernandes,1999), membershipdid not grow significantlyin the sugarcane region until economic crisis in the early 1990s coincided with expanded
1 political will for reform.
RuralworkersintheforestregionjoinedtheMSTintwodistinctgroups. The firstgroup,usuallyruralworkerswho hadoccupiedthe most insecure
positions on the plantation,joined MST occupationsto fight for access to land.The second group,moradoreswho continuedto live on the plantations
even afterthey stoppedplantingcane,joined the movementonly afterthe InstitutoNacionalde Colonizaqaoe ReformaAgrairia(NationalInstitutefor
Colonizationand AgrarianReform-INCRA)	expropriatedthe plantation forredistributionA.	ccordingto federallaw,themoradoresreceivedfirstpri- ority, although there was usually sufficient land to provide some for the people who occupiedwith the MST.
Ultimately,people accepted the land because they had few other eco-
nomic opportunitiesand membershipat least providedthem with political representationvis-a-vis local governmentandstateagrarianreformofficials.
Accordingto developmentstatisticspublishedby the mayor'soffice in Agua Preta,the level of developmentin the municipalitywas abouthalf thatof the nationas a whole. Withoutsugarcaneproduction,therewere no otherjobs available.Theseverityofthecrisisintheregionmeantthatmostofthepeople associatedwith the plantation,includingthe formerrendeiros,skilledadmin- istrativeworkers,andmoradores,acceptedthe offer of land.The local MST leaderin AguaPretawasanagronomisttappedforhisjob by themayor.He was exceptionallyadroitpoliticallyandmanagedto secureresourcesfor the settlersthatincorporatedthemintoapaternalisticwebof gifts,services,and allegiancesothatmembershipinMSTprovidedmanyofthesamebenefitsas the ruralunions or plantationowner used to: medicines, an occasional food
for	andaccesstothe	ear.Inreturn,set- transportation,	mayor's
basket,money tlersbroughttheMSTleadersgiftssuchasbottlesofrumorahandfuloffresh manioc.
Inspiteof theMST'srapidgrowthinthesugarcaneregion,manyof those whojoined the movementwere ambivalentaboutwhatit represented.Many of the ruralworkershad a difficulttime reconcilingtheirunderstandingof land as privatepropertywith the movement'sconcept of land as a social good. Fortheruralworkers,landon theplantationshadalwaysbelongedto someone-and eventhoughtheyemployedmobilityasasurvivalstrategyin thefaceofcrueltreatmentbytheplantationowners,theydidnotnecessarily envisagefreedomasthecolonizationof openoremptylandinthewaythat farmersfrom southernBrazil did. The ruralworkersdistancedthemselves
from the movement'spracticeand ideology of occupying land. As one for- mer resident who had won land throughthe expropriationprocess said in 2003, "Weall owe what we have today to the movement.I myself, I owe everythingto it, I just don't agree with this business of invadingland. Who wants to have what is theirs and then arriveand see it invaded?I have this house here and I leave, and when I get back, it's invaded?"
Anothersettlerwho had been an administratoron the plantationbefore receivinglanddemonstratedhis ambivalencetowardthe movement:
Researcher(R): Andnowareyoupartof themovement? Settler (S): I am now part[of the movement]because trulyI live on [the settle-
andin	caseI haveto be	of the	becausewhetherI ment]	any	[part	movement]
wanttoornotIhavetobepart[ofthemovement]becausewe arrangethings
within the movement.
R: And do you pay the movementsomething?
S: They[thepeoplefromthemovement]chargeafee, andso Ipaidsomefees and now we arewaitingfor otherchargesfor us to continuepayingagain.
R: Howwasit decidedthatyouwouldpay?
S:Thepresident[oftheassociation]decided.Hegottogetherwiththeagricultural extensionagents[whowereallMSTmilitants]... tomakesomechargesthat would be put into practice...	[with] the settlers.
R: Haveyou everspokenwiththemilitants,theleadersof MST? S: Until now I have neverbeen close to the leadersof MST becauseI trulydon't knowthemwell, no.Ionlyspeakwiththeagronomistswhohavetotalkwith
them.ButIamnotveryclosetotheseleaderosfMSTn,o.Ihardlyknowthem.
R: Do	MST? yousupport
S:IsupporMtST. R: Haveyou participatedin some mobilization,a march,or somethinglike that? S: UntilnownotthatI knowof. R:Doesthemovemenhtelpyoutoday? S: No,uptothispoint,themovemenhtasn'thelpedmewithanything.
In spite of this ambivalence and differing levels of commitment among the two groups of ruralworkers on the settlement, by 1999 many of the settlers in Agua Preta and all of the settlers on Flora had joined the MST and were
respondingto its vigorous call for an end to sugarcane.They were planting bananasandcoconutsin additionto subsistencecrops,andmanyhadplans
for introducingcattleonto the land.These productiondecisions were madein accordancewith the regional"productionplan"formulatedby MST leaders andINCRAofficials.ThesettlersreceivedapproximatelyR$7,500ininvest- mentcreditin 1999-2000, andtheywererequiredto fill outproductionand repaymentschedules with the settlementagronomistbefore receiving the money.Themoneywaseligibleonlyforplantingbananasandcoconutsand buying cattle.
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	157
158 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
SAVINGSUGARCANE: THE INDUSTRY RETURNS
In2000-2001 sugarcanepricesbegantoriseagain.Afterfallingforsix straightyears,internationaplricesincreasedbecauseofreducedproduction
inIndiaandCuba,twoofthelargestexportersglobally.Theextinctionofthe
IAA liberalizedexportquotasandalloweda greaterproportionof production to be orientedtowardthe externalmarket.A droughtin southernBrazil in
2001 alsoincreasedthevalueof productionintheNortheast.Withtherisein
sugarcaneprices, the distilleries in the forest region were planting and
processingsugarcaneagain. In 2003 most of the settlerson Florahadcoveredtheirlandwith sugar-
cane.Theyhadweatheredthesugarcanecrisisby plantingsubsistencecrops
and receiving money from the governmentin the form of both investment
creditandshort-termwelfareassistance.Theyhadactivelyparticipatedin
discussions about alternativecrops and moving away from sugarcane,but
whenhighpricesreturnedtheycouldnotresistthetemptationto havemoney
in theirpocketsagain.In 1999, a formermoradorwho was activein settle-
mentpoliticsasthetreasurerof theassociationandmetoftenwithMSTlead-
ers had said he would never plant cane again: "No, look, you can't make
enough money plantingcane, and now we read in the papersthat cane is
goingtofallby8percent-and itwasalreadycheap!ItisatR$21.70(perton)
nowandsoifitfallsby8percent,thepricewillbeaboutR$14.00.... Canyou
imagine-we plantcaneandsellitforR$14.00?That'salotofwork.... You
haveto stop,reallystop,plantingcane."By 2003, however,thismoradorwas
workingfor a neighboringmill cuttingsugarcaneas well as plantingcane on hisownland.Hearguedthatitwasnotpossibletomakealivingfarming,and
so the settlersfoundworkon the plantations:"Atthis moment,almostevery-
one is workingin one of the mills overthere,Barrad'Ouro.They'recutting
cane, filling bags, doing everything.And then when it's evening, they work on theirown land."
Sugarcaneovertookthe alternativecropspeople hadplantedearlier.The bananaplants and coconut trees were either gone or disappearing.As an MST militantsaid, "Therearea lot of parceleiroswho didn'tplantcane- they planted banana,potato, green corn, vegetables-and	today they are
beginningto plantcane. They arebeginningto give up the potato,to plant less, andtoplantcanebecausethey'reseeingthatthat'stheway-it	isn'tthe
way
out but,	it's been 500	As one settler unfortunately,	years."	said,
Look,thesituationwiththebananaiss this.I wasteda lotof moneywiththat bananaN.ow,IplanteditjusttomaketheboysfromthemovemenhtappyI. said,I amgoingtoplant[this],butIamgoingtolosethemoneyI.thasbeen45
sinceI arrivedin this	is a	It'sa years	place.... [Now,]sugarcane goodcrop.
cropthatis exportedall overtheworld,as sugar.I harvested170tonsof canethisyear.... Ifthedistilleriespaytheproperprice,Godwilling,Iwill keep plantingcane and takingcare of my lavourazinhas(little garden plants).
The sugarcanedistilleriesaroundAgua Pretafacilitatedthe settlers'incor-
porationintotheirproductionsystemby sendingbuyersoutbeforethehar- vest to coordinatethe settlerswho hadcane to sell, offeringto set up accounts
for them at the distillery.When the cane had been harvested,the settlers loadeditontrucksandpaidafee fordeliverytothedistillery.As anMSTmil- itantsaid with some resignation,
it's	to sell	to the	The Nowadays	veryeasy	yoursugarcane	distillery.	distillery
a	this	who	aroundon a	Hecomes assigns person[to	job]	goes	motorcycle.	[to
the	anddoes	Hetakes	takesit to the settlement]	everything.	yourinformation,
Thetruck	the	arriveisnthe	andallof distillery.	[with sugarcane]	distillery	your
informatioins therealready....Beforei,twasmoredifficultohaveanaccount
withthedistillerybecauseyouhadtohaveacertainamounotf cane,youhadto
be a	But	cantakeone littletruckloadand large-scalesupplier. todayyou	go
there[tothedistillerya]ndwhethertheyhaveyourinformatioonrnot,youget thereandtakecareof business.
Thisreorganizationof productionandprioritiesonthesettlementwascar- riedoutwiththeimplicitassistanceof thestategovernment.Evenasthestate
was arguingthatthe sugarcanecrisis of the late 1990s providedthe opportu-
nity for a "dramaticrestructuringof the industry,"it essentiallyreorganized productionin a more efficient mannerfor the sugarcaneindustry.The
"sweepingstructuralchanges"anticipatedwould,however,havebeenvery
difficult to implementgiven that the economic and social structureof the
Pernambucosugarcaneregionwas builtaroundexpectationsof marketpro-
tection, governmentsubsidies, and debt pardons(Lima and Silva, 1995:
188). Even amidstgeneralizedcrisis, few people suggestedthatsugarcane
productionbe entirely abandoned(Andradeand Andrade,2001). Instead,
plansfor diversificationincludedagrarianreformprimarilyas a meansof
occupying land that was inappropriatefor sugar production,employing excess laboron a seasonalbasis, andfosteringsmallholdersuppliersof cane
for the large distilleries (MEPF, 1998: 2). The governmentpledged to
encouragethe modernizationof sugarcanethroughtargetedprogramsthat would "free"more labor for small-scale cane productionand supply the
large-scale distilleries. And this labor would even be provided at a price belowsubsistence,asonesettlementpresidentinAguaPretasaid:"Thereare somany[settlers],myGod,whohavelandand-Idon'tknowwhy-theyhave
Wolfor/dOFLANDANDLABOR 159
160 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
landandthey'redyingof hunger."Whenaskedwhythosesettlershadn't
plantedanythingon theirland,thepresidentresponded,"They'retired,they have to leave the house early to cut cane so they have somethingto eat."A documentpreparedfordiscussionby INCRA(Buarque,1997:9) statesthat agrarianreformin the sugarcaneregion would ideally allow the settlersto plantpartof theirlandin cane andpartof theirlandin goods targeted"above all for the subsistenceof the family in the interharvestperiod."
The returnof sugarcanein Agua Pretacoincided with the virtualdisap- pearanceof theMSTthere.Ithadbeenactiveenoughin 1999toclaimatleast threesettlements,butby 2003 it flew its flag on only one. Even thatsettle- ment was only officially affiliatedwith movementbecause of the settlers' allegiance to their association president,a woman who had occupied the plantationwith the MST and continuedto be faithful. As she preparedto leave the presidency, she believed that the settlers would also leave the movement.
EXPLAINING THE MST'S DISAPPEARANCE FROM THE SUGARCANE REGION
Asimportantasthestructuraclonditionsforsugarcaneproductionarein
explainingthedisappearanceoftheMSTinthezonadamata,theydonottell
the whole story. The apparentfragility of the movement's position as an importantintermediarybetween the settlersand local governmentneeds to
beexplainedinthecontextofhowsocial,economic,andpoliticalrelationson
the plantationshaped a particularperceptionof the value of land and the natureof "rights."Althoughmost of the settlerson Florawere glad to have
landof theirown,theyvalueditbecauseexperiencehadtaughtthemthatland
meant stability,independence,and the freedom from outside intervention
(Sigaud, 1977). As JaimeAmorim,the MST leaderfor Pernambuco,put it,
"There'sthecultureoftheregion-the peopleareindividualistic,theydon't
trustotherpeople, so there'sa strongresistanceto workingcollectively." Theirunderstandingof "rights"was embeddedin the assistanceorientation
of the plantationratherthan in universalisticnotions of "citizenship"or
humanrights. On the plantation,the space of residence was an indicationof occupa-
tionalpositionwithina fairlystricthierarchy(see Fig. 2). Residentialspaces
were clearly distinguishedby proximityto others,qualityof housing, and accesstoland.Theplantationowners,atthetopof thehierarchyl,ivedinthe CasaGrande,setapartfromtherestof theresidentsandgracedwithsuffi- cient space for fruit trees, decorativeplants, and a vegetable garden.The
Figure2:	Spatial Orderon a TypicalPlantation,Agua Preta,1999
owner was the only person who had free run of the plantation; the workers all
kept to the spaces inscribed by their rank. The administrative workers
(empregados) generally had individual houses as well, situated between the
Casa Grande and the common workers' (trabalhadores) houses. The com-
mon workers lived in small, two- or three-room houses connected to each
other in a long row (see Fig. 3). These houses had no proprietary space out-
side, and when the price was high sugarcane would be planted "right up to the door." Another group of workers lived inside the plantation on small farms
(sitios). When the plantation owner wished to show respect or favor to partic- ular workers, he granted them access to a sitio. These workers not only lived apart from the rest of the people on the plantation but also had land on which to grow subsistence crops and fruit trees. Isolation and access to land were privileges accorded to those who did well, and in this way access to land became a signifier of status. At the opposite end of the occupational hierar- chy, undocumented workers (clandestinos) occupied the most insecure posi- tions, both demonstrated and exacerbated by their inability to claim any liv- ing space on the plantation. These workers lived in the nearby towns and cities and sold their labor on a seasonal or daily basis.
In the 1960s and 1970s the increasing numbers of undocumented workers
heightened the sense of competition among plantation workers. The exis- tence of a highly flexible, low-paid workforce in the cities meant that planta-
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	161
162 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Figure3: TheCasaGrande(top)andRowHouses
tion residents had to fight harder to cut enough sugarcane to make the daily quota and a living wage. As the son of an older settler on Flora who had worked under several different owners since 1963 said,
Look,wakingupearlyinthemorningis apriority.Thefightoverthesugarcane meansthatyou haveto leave [yourhouse]earlierthantheothersif you are
goingtogetyourfullsalary.Thosepeoplewhoworkillegallyalsohavetolive offofthesugarcaneharvest,andsowhentheybur partofthecanefield-say, [anareawith]500tonsofcaneplanted-then 400peoplewillgotheretocut this cane. If they were all to do two salaries'worth[of cutting],it wouldn'tbe enough,andso there'sconstantfighting.Eachpersonwantsto get therefirst, beforetheothers,andthismakesitdifficult.Itmeansthattheworkerisobliged
towakeupearly-even sometimesatoneinthemorning,ormidnight,theyare alreadyworking.
Because of the way in which people negotiated access to land within the
hierarchically segregated plantation space, the settlers on Flora valued their new lots because they provided independent spaces where they would be
allowed to live as they pleased. This interpretation of personal freedom went beyond individualism because the histories of hierarchy and competition on the plantation had bred distrust among the workers. One of the MST activists
working in the region put it this way:
First,thepeoplehereleft slaveryandendedupin the [sugarcaneregion].... The people who stayed in the sugarcaneregion were the negros who left the senzalas (slave houses) andthengot into neo-senzalas,which were the shacks theplantationbosses hadforthem,similarto whattheyusedto have....	Now
[they are saying], "I want my land. I want my space."Within [the settler's] spacehe feels his freedom[andsays], 'OnthesetenhectaresI amthemaster,I amfree.IfIdon'twanttodoanything,Iwillsitontheriverbankandstaythere looking at it, but the view is mine."
The desire for land as a space free from the supervision or influence of others was evident when INCRA divided the expropriated land among the settlers. The settlers were very worried that others would gain access to land
unfairly by using political connections or simply by making a better case with the government officials in charge. One settler preemptively cleared a plot of land to stake his claim:
AfteritcameoutinthenewspaperthatthisareawasgoingtobeexpropriatedI, wentthereinsidetheplantationandIsaid,Iamgoingtostartrightawayhere.I plantedsome ...	gardencropsrightaway.I weeded some bananatreesthat were in the valley, and I opened up some streambeds.And so when INCRA cametosurveyeveryone,toexpropriatetheland,thedoctorsaidthatIhadthe righttostaywhereIwas,maybealittlemoretowardsthefront,maybealittle towardsthe back, butI would stay in thatarea.And thankGod, I managedto stay.
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	163
164 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Threeyearsafterthe landhadbeen dividedamongthe settlers,bitterness
remainedbecause,accordingtothesettlers,therewereseveralsuchpreemp- tive plots. As one settlersaid,
Therewasa lotof	andthesonof theformerenterwas	of the fighting,	president
association-the	himthere-hewantedallof thisland	allof this groupput	here,
landinfrontof us.He'ssmarti,sn'the?Thelandwas	andhe's expropriated,
goingtogetallof thebestland?...Buttherewasaresident-whios evenagood person-whosaidtome,"Ifyouhaveabused[ourplan],I amgoingtheretothat
place[youpickedout],I amgoingtoplantandI wantoseeif youcomedown onme."Isaid"No,Iamnotgoingcomedownonyou,no,boy.... Iamnot
goingtofightwithyou,becauseyouaren'gtoingtoplantP.lantwhatyouwant, becauseI amwithinmyrightsI.fthedoctorsaysthatitisformetostay,thenI amstaying.W"esawthatitwasn'tgoingtogowellbecauseifwe[allindividu- ally]askedfortheselittlethingsfromINCRA[wewouldendupwithnothing].
The son of the formerplantationowner did go to the governmentoffices
anddemandhispickof theland,buttheINCRAagentsinchargewentback
to the settlersandnegotiateda mapthateveryonefinally agreedto. The set- tlers resigned themselves to receiving the land that INCRA allocated,
althoughthey protestedloudly when they learnedthatthe governmentwas goingtoallowtheformerownertostayintheCasaGrande.Thesettlersorga- nized two large-scaledemonstrationsin front of the house and sent several delegations to INCRA requesting that the decision be overturned.They arguedthateveryonewasequalonthesettlementnowandthereforetheCasa Grande should be turned over to the settlement association ratherthan remainingin one person'shands.In the end, the formerplantationboss was able to secure his place by appealingto a local judge who happenedto be relatedto his wife. Thejudge orderedthe settlersoff of the landsurrounding theCasaGrande,andtheINCRAofficialsallowedthejudge's orderto stand.
Thesestrugglesoverthedistributionandallocationof landreflectedthe
ongoingperceptionsof spaceashierarchicallyorderedandmadeitdifficult tofosterasenseofcommunityonthesettlement.AsJaimeAmorim,theMST
leaderforPernambuco,said,"Intheforestregionthereis no regionalattach- ment. The [settlers]don't think about themselves as belonging to a settle- ment,let alone a region.Thereis no unitywithinthe settlement."
Once the processof distributingthe landon Florawas completed,most of thesettlerswerepleasedtobelandowners,andmanyofthemattributedtheir newstatusaslandownerstotheMST.Thisgratitude,however,didnotmani- fest itself as allegianceto the movementbecausethe settlerssaw theirlandas themeanstoindependence-even fromthemovement.Thesettlerswillingly "joined"the movementonly when they believed doing so would provide
themwithaccesstocertainbenefits.Theyreservedtherighttoleaveandsub- mit themselvesto a differentpatronwhen they chose. As an MST activistin theregionsaid,"Theresidentswanttobreatheintheirownfreedom.[They say]'nowIwantmypieceofland,Iamgoingtotakecareofmyownlife.'"
The settlers were particularlyresistantto the MST's attemptto claim physicalspaceonthesettlement.In2002-2003 MSTturnedwhathadbeen horsestablesatFlora'smainentranceintoanattractivesmallhouseintended to be used as the movement'snew	All of the settlers
regionalheadquarters. agreedthatthehousewasveryniceandconstitutedanimprovementoverthe
stables,butastheworkcametoanendtheygottogetherandsentagroupof representativesto the INCRA offices in Recife. The settlersprotestedthe movement'sintrusionon theirspace,even thoughtheyhadapparentlysigned an"institutionaalct"agreeingtotheconstruction.TheyarguedthattheMST had trickedthem into signing a documentthey did not understand.They insistedthatit buildits	in the	townratherthan
headquarters	nearby	occupying settlementland.IftheMSTwasabletoclaimspacewithinthesettlement,the
settlersworriedthatit would also be able to claim a set of rightsover them: "Whenevertheycome,theywillwanttoorderusaround."Onesettlerwhoin 2003saidthathestillsupportedtheMSTsaid,"Idon'tevenknowwhattosay aboutthemovement.... [Themovementactivists]onlyvisitedthesettlement when that[investment]money [PROCERA]came out, andthenthey wanted to have the office built [on the settlement],but I think that INCRA con- demnedit....	Manyof thesettlerswenttoINCRA....	several[people]went, they said thatit was going to turninto a rowdy bar."
Thelonghistoryof life andworkontheplantationalsoshapedanunder-
standingof "rights"as a set of goods providedby plantationowners.These rights had been set in Brazilian law in 1963, but because implementation
depended on the relationshipbetween plantationowners and workersthe lawswereopentointerpretationm,anipulation,andnegotiation.Whenthe
plantationswereoperating,ownerswereseenasfulfillingtheirresponsibili- ties if they took careof theirworkers.One formerruralworkerwho received landon Floradescribedhis life as an administratorfor a nearbydistilleryas follows:
[Theland]wasownedbythedistillery-everythinwgaswellorganized[.On
the	therewasfullworkfor	Weallhad	andwe had distillery]	everyone.	papers
our	Weworked	therewasnolackofwork... We properights.	righthrough;
weren'tmissinganythingn,o,theypaidallourproperightscorrectly....
Therewereabout180peoplewiththeirpapersinthedistilleryatthistime,all
the ofthe livedonthe and responsibility	distillery.... Everyone	[plantation]
workedt,herewasn'tanydifficultywithsalaryorwithlackof moneyt,hings
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	165
166 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
wereverydifferent.Wealwayshadabetterlife thanwe havenow,betterthan thelifethatwearestartingnow,butIdon'tknowhowitwillbefromnowon.
Iftheplantationownersdidnotfulfilltheirobligationstotheworkersand were seen as not tryinghardenough, the workersexercisedtheirhistorical rightto leave the plantation.As a formerruralworkersaid, "Atthattime, therewasn'tanythingholdingyouinoneplace.... Iwouldspendtwoorthree yearsinoneplace,andwhenthatstartedtogetbadIwasalreadyleavingfor somewhereelse." On the settlement,the ruralworkersexercised this same rightto exit. One settlerwho becamefrustratedwiththe movement'sinability toprovidehimwithmaterialassistancesaid,"Iwaspartof themovementtoo, along with the boys, but afterwardsI said, 'I am going to get out of this, becauseit'snotgoingtoworkforme,justgoingallovertheplaceandnever gettinganythingtogetherformyself.Iamgoingtodropout.'"Althoughthis settlerhad occupied the plantationwith MST and undergonethe formative experienceoflivinginanencampment,hewithdrewfromsettlementpolitics afterhis firstdisagreementwiththeothersettlers:"Ididn'tvote [atthesettle- ment's second associationmeeting]....	They called everyonetogether,but noteveryonewent,andso [thosewhowent]didwhattheywanted.Imyself, if Ihadbeenthere,Iwouldn'thavevotedforanyone.Iprefertobeworking on my land,battlingslowly, ratherthanalwaysbeing in meetings."
When the movementarrivedin Agua Preta,movementleaderswere able to buildtheirmembershipbecausethey were in a positionto providethe set- tlerswiththesameassistancetheyhadcometoexpectfromtheirformerplan- tationbosses. Althoughthe MST arguesthataccess to land,runningwater, andelectricityarebasicrightsdueanycitizenof thenation,inpracticeitwas difficultfor the settlersto believe in theirrightsas universalgoods. MST leadersandactivistswereableto securethismaterialassistancefortheset- tlersbecauseof theirties to the local mayor'soffice. It was the mayorwho had selected the settlement'sagronomist,and the two maintaineda close workingrelationship.Throughthemayor,themovementwas ableto provide materialassistanceforthesettlers.As aleaderintheregionsaid,"[Atthat time,] we neverneededto go to Recife for a mobilization,for transportation, orevenforfood. [Themayor]alwayswenttomeetings,togivespeeches,he participated in everything .... Whenever settlers affiliated with the MST neededthe mayor'soffice, the doorswere open."
In 2000, Flora'sagronomistworkedlong hourson the mayor'sreelection campaign,passingthroughallof thesettlementsin AguaPretaandencourag- ingpeopletovote.Whenthemayorwasreelected,theagronomistaccepteda full-timepositionashisassistant.Atthesametimeastheagronomistleftthe settlement(althoughhiswifewasstilltechnicallyasettleronFlora),theMST
also rearrangedits regionalleadership,bringingin new leadersandactivists. Peopleconsideredthenewleadershipinconsideratebecauseitwasunableto
provide the sort of resources they had come to expect. Even though they understoodthattherewerefinancialdifficultiescausedbythewithdrawalof agrarianreformresourcesatthefederallevel, theystillbelievedthattheMST leadershipwas not trying hard enough. Their perceptiongained strength when the new leader violated local political norms by supportingan MST candidatefor statedeputyin the 2002 elections ratherthanthe mayor'sson, who was also running.Although the MST candidatebelonged to a party closely allied with the movementat the nationallevel (the Workers'party), even movementmilitantsin Agua Pretacriticizedthe new leaderfor not sup- portingthemayor'ssonbecause,asoneactivistsaid,"afterthislastelection, [oursupport]has diminished."
CONCLUSION
The MST is one of the most importantpoliticalactorsin Braziltodayand the most importantgrassrootssocial movementin the country'shistory.Peo-
ple from across Brazil-including	people in the sugarcaneregion-have
joinedthemovementbyoccupyinglargefarmsorplantationsandpressuring the governmentfor a set of rights defined as those due any citizen of the
nation.Themovementwill,however,havelittleeffectonthesocialstructure
produced and supported by the sugarcane industry unless reforms are enacted with the region's specific history in mind. Functiondoes not auto-
matically follow form-place	matters.The MST constructeda significant presencein the sugarcaneregion,butits mobilizationeffortswere weakened
by the singularconceptionof land:accordingto JaimeAmorim,the move-
mentwassuccessfulinbuildinganationalmembershipbecause"wepicked
an issue thatunitedeveryone-the	land. [Land]is a necessity. Landis the
wordthatunifies.Landbecametheelementofthestruggle.Youofferthe
workerstheopportunitytohaveland-but throughanoccupation[thatthey
participatein]."An analysisof movementmembershipandpolitics in Agua Pretasuggeststhatlandis indeedimportantbutpeopleattachmanydifferent
meaningstoit.A certainsetof valuesordesirescannotbeinferredfromthe actofjoiningtheMST.NotallofthepeoplewhojoinedtheMSTinthesugar- cane regionof Pernambucodid so for the land,andeven those who did want land wanted it for stability ratherthan subsistence and for political status
ratherthanpolitical rights. As the MST continuesto grow,its biggest challengewill be buildingan
organizationthat can representpeople from the many differentregions of
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	167
168 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Brazil who bring with them very different spatial imaginaries. The difficulty
lies in the need for diversity and ideological and methodological coherence. AsanMSTleaderfromtheSouthofBrazilsaid,"Youhavetofightdiversity
with diversity, but how do you do that and maintain a principle?" This strug- gle for inclusive representation has plagued rural social movements around the world, and the MST is no exception.
NOTES
1. A stripof land about 100 kilometerswide runningalong the coast from Sergipeto Rio GrandedoNorte(see Andrade,1988),thezonadamatais ahumidtropicalregionthatusedtobe coveredwithAtlanticforest,aswasmuchof thecountry'seasterncoast.
2.A"partiaalndvoluntary"landdistributionprogramP,ROTERRAw,asinstitutedin1971,
buttheprogramwasneververyeffectiveindistributingood-qualityland,asmillanddistillery ownerswereableto designatethelandavailablefordistributionT.	heprogramlargelycameto a halt when PROALCOOLwas implementedin 1975, offering incentivesfor the productionof ethanolfrom sugarcane(Andrade,1988).
3. This informationis updatedregularlyon MST-PE'sweb site, http://www.mst.org.br/ mstpe/.
4. Accordingto a reportpublishedby the mayor'soffice, in 2001 therewere 24 settlements in Agua Preta, 11 of which were establishedbetween 1973-1978 and 12 of which were estab- lished between 1992-2000.
5. Not the community'sreal name.
6. Slaveryasaninstitutionwasabolishedin 1888.BrazilwasthelastcountryintheWestern
Hemisphereto do so. 7.Martins(1981:77-79) distinguishesbetweentwogroupsofworkersexpelledwiththe
rise of centralizationandmodernization:"peasants"(small-scalefarmers)and"ruralworkers"
(residentsof the plantationswho workedfor the distilleries).Juliaopreferredto workwith the peasantsbecausethey were betterinstrumentsof revolution(see also Forman,1975).
8. The government'sdevelopmentprogramfor the Amazon region, POLONORTE,was designedto attractbothlargeandsmallfarmers,while thedevelopmentprogramfortheCerrado, thegrasslandsoftheCenter-WestP,OLOCENTROw,aslargelydesignedforlarge-scalefarmers whohadthecapitaltopurchasemoder agriculturaelquipment.
9. The cost of fostering the inefficient industryis today conservativelyvalued at over US$6.5 billion(De Souza,Irmao,andAradjo,1997:3). In 1994thecost of producinga tonof sugarin the Northeastwas US$319.12 in comparisonwith US$216.05 in the South (Buarque, 1997: 2).
10.MSTactivistshavecreatedanationalnetworkbyspreadingoutfromtheSouthintothe restof the country.In the mid-1980s,MST sent 20 young activistsfromthe Southto the North- east,andsincethenonlyonehasreturnedtotheSouth.Manyof thosewhoremainedintheNorth- east continueto play key roles in the movement'sleadershipat the statelevels. Perhapsthe best exampleis JaimeAmorim,an activistfromSantaCatarinawho has been the leaderof MST in Pernambucofor 12 years.Leaderssuch as Jaimeareclosely connectedto the mainoffices of the movementandbringa remarkableuniformityto MST'sideology andactionsin differentregions. These activists make it possible for MST to coordinatedemonstrationsand land occupations throughouthe country.
11.Thenumberof occupationsinPernambucorosesteadilyafter1992.Themovementcar- ried out 3 occupationsin 1991, 9 in 1992, 35 in 1996, and 51 in 1997 (see the MST web site for Pernambuco:www.mst-pe.org.br).
REFERENCES
Andrade,ManuelCorreiade 1988 Area do sistema canavieiro. Recife: Superint6ndenciado Desenvolvimento do Nordeste.
Andrade,ManuelCorreiade and SandraCorreiade Andrade 2001 As usinas de Pernambucoe a crise atual. Recife: UNTEPPE.
Branford,Sue andJanRocha 2002 Cuttingthe Wire:TheStoryof theLandlessMovementin Brazil.London:LatinAmeri- can Bureau.
Buarque,Sergio C. 1997 "Propostade reestruturaqadoo setorsucro-alcooleiroe negociaqcode dividaporterra
paraassentamentosde reformaagraria."Paperpreparedfor the workshop"Reestruturaqao do SetorSucro-Alcooleiroe ReformaAgrarianaZonadaMatade Pernamuco,"Recife.
Canae reformaagraria 1970 Recife: InstitutoJoaquimNabucode PesquisasSociais.
De Souza, HerminoR., Jose FerreiraIrmao,andTacisioPatriciode Araijo 1997 "Canade aqiucare cacau:reestruturaqaporodutivae mercadode trabalhona zona da mata do Nordeste," MS, Graduate Program in Economics, Federal University of Pernambuco,Recife, Pernambuco.
Eisenberg,Peter 1974 TheSugarIndustryin Sao Paulo:ModernizationWithoutChange,1840-1910. Berke- ley: Universityof CaliforniaPress.
Fernandes,BernardoMancano 1999MST,Movimentodos TrabalhadoresRuraisSemTerra:Formaqaoe territorializacao. Sao Paulo:EditoraHucitec.
Forman,Shepard 1975 TheBrazilianPeasantry.New York:ColumbiaUniversityPress.
Freyre,Gilberto 1978 TheMastersand the Slaves. New York:Knopf.
GarciaJr.,Raul Afranio
1990 O Sul, caminhodo roqado:Estratdgiasde reproducaocamponesae transformacao social. Sao Paulo:EditoraMarcoZero.
Lefebvre,Henri 1991 TheProductionof Space.Translatedby DonaldNicholson-Smith.Oxford:Blackwell.
Lery,Jeande 1992Historyof a Voyageto theLandof Brazil,OtherwiseCalledAmerica.Berkeley:Uni- versityof CaliforniaPress.
Lima,JoaoPolicarpoR. andGersonVictorSilva 1995 "A economia canavieirade Pernambucoe a reestruturacaonecesaria."Revista de EconomiaNordestede Fortaleza26: 181-203.
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	169
170 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Lins, CarlosJos6 Caldaset al. 1996 Programade acio para o desenvolvimentoda zona da mata do Nordeste. Recife: SUDENE.
Martins,Jose de Sousa 1981OscamponeseseapoliticanoBrasil:Aslutassociaisnocampoeseulugarnoprocesso
polftico. Petr6polis:Vozes. Maybury-Lewis,Biorn
1994 ThePolitics of the Possible: TheBrazilianRural Workers'TradeUnionMovement,
1964-1985. Philadelphia:TempleUniversityPress. MEPF(MinisterioExtraordinarioda PoliticaFundiaria)
1998 Programaintegradode reformana zona da mata nordestina.Recife. Pereira,AnthonyW.
1997TheEndof thePeasantry:TheRuralLaborMovementinNortheastBrazil,1961-1988.
Pittsburgh:Universityof PittsburghPress. Pinto, Estevao
1963"Oproblemaagrarionazonacanvieirade pernambuco."Paperpreparedfortheconfer- ence "OProblemaAgrarionaZonaCanavieirade Pernambuco,"Recife, May.
Schwartz,StuartB. 1987 "Plantationsand peripheries,c. 1580-c. 1750,"pp. 67-144 in Leslie Bethell (ed.), Colonial Brazil.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Sigaud,Lygia 1977 "Aidealizaqaodo passadonumaareade plantation"Contraponto2: 115-126. 1979 Os clandestinose os direitos.Sao Paulo:EditoraDuas Cidades.
WanderleyM,ariadeNazarethBaudel 1978 Capital e propriedadefundiaria: Suas articulao~es na economia asucareira de Pernambuco.Rio de Janeiro:Paze Terra.
Wolford,Wendy 2003a "Families,fields, andfightingfor land:the spatialdynamicsof contentionin rural Brazil."Mobilization8: 201-215. 2003b "Producingcommunity:geographiesof commitmenton landreformsettlementsin Brazil."Journalof AgrarianChange3: 500-520.
Wright,Angus and WendyWolford 2003 ToInherittheEarth:TheLandlessMovementandtheStrugglefor a NewBrazil.Oak- land, CA: Food FirstPublications.

2009
Coordenação de Ciências Humanas
Anthorpology
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
Karin Marita Naase

Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to determine the role of women in the so called caminhada (march) to a land reform project in the State of Pará, Brazil. When a woman decides to join the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) (Landless Workers’ Movement) she may enter into conflict with her social environment. In the light of the changes happening due to her militancy, I want to elucidate the reasons for her involvement, examine female contributions during the settlement process and the changes this process may cause in their lives. The analysis is based upon a fieldwork conducted in a land reform hamlet near the city of Castanhal in northeastern Pará. Three case studies of female militancy are examined. Some of the outcomes of this analysis are that the role of women in this process is prominent because they are its most important support; they are assuming pioneer functions, organizing domestic and public tasks in the settlement and play the role of articulators between the different households. Due to their militancy poor urban and rural women are able to step out of their invisibility, often suffered in Brazilian society, and make an important contribution to the construction of a new life.
Keywords: Amazon. Land reform settlements. Life-cycle. Survival strategies. Women. Peasants.
Resumo: A intenção do artigo é determinar o papel que as mulheres desempenham na chamada ‘caminhada’ para um assentamento da reforma agrária no estado do Pará, Brasil. Quando uma mulher decide participar do Movimento dos Trabalhadores RuraisSemTerra(MST)correoriscodeentraremconflitocomoseuambientesocial.Emrazãodasmudançasverificadas devido à militância, investigo os motivos pelos quais as mulheres se envolvem no Movimento, examino as contribuições femininas durante o processo de assentamento e as mudanças que esse processo pode causar nas suas vidas. A análise está baseada em uma pesquisa de campo realizada em um assentamento da reforma agrária, próximo à cidade de Castanhal, no nordeste paraense. Três estudos de caso de militância feminina são examinados. Alguns dos resultados dessa análise mostram que o papel das mulheres nesse processo é proeminente, pois são os mais importantes suportes; assumem funções pioneiras, organizando tarefas domésticas e públicas no assentamento e articulando os diferentes grupos domésticos. Devido à militância, mulheres pobres das cidades e do campo saem da invisibilidade, situação comum na sociedade brasileira, e dão uma contribuição importante para a construção de uma nova vida.
Palavras-chave: Amazônia. Assentamentos da reforma agrária. Ciclo de vida. Estratégias de sobrevivência. Mulheres. Campesinato.
I	Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi. Coordenação de Ciências Humanas. Belém, PA, Brasil (knaase@gmail.com).
247
1 2
All translations are mine. For a further discussion and empirical examples of institutional change in the view of Institutional Economics see, for example, Acheson (1994) and Alston et al. (1996).
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
The purpose of this paper is to determine the reasons for the active participation of women in the so called caminhada (march) to the João Batista settlement, a land reform colonization project in the State of Pará, Brazil. The Landless Workers’ Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra – MST) uses the term caminhada to summarize the whole land acquisition process, from the convocation of candidates to the granting of land in rural areas, to the concession of land titles by the National Institute for Colonization and Land Reform (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária – INCRA).
When a woman decides to participate in land squatting and protest demonstrations, or decides to take part in other activities pressuring landowners or State agencies, she may enter into conflict with her husband, friends and relatives, as observed in the case studies presented here. Therefore, I will not only discuss the reasons for female participation in the squatting process, but also examine what are the outcomes of such caminhadas for the women themselves and their families, and what changes this process may cause in their lives. I will proceed by reviewing concepts and theoretical elements used as guidelines in the analysis. I will consider socialmovements,specificallytheMST,theissueofpoor families, migration processes and the situation of poor women in suburban areas in Brazil.
LANDLESS WORKERS’ MOVEMENT (MST)
According to the Movement’s own description,
The MST emerged from claims of farmers and non- farmers with the support of the Catholic Church, claims of the Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), of unions and also claims of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and claims of ecclesiastic agencies abroad (Andrae, 1998, p. 99 and following; Leite, 1997). The Movement’s motto was “occupy, resist, produce”1 (Andrae, 1998, p. 103). Squatting and encampments constitute its main instruments, together with political training of squatters and new settlers and with the strengthening of the organization itself (Andrae, 1998, p. 103). The MST owns national, state and regional offices, from which militants organize and monitor activities held in encampments and settlements.
One of the pillars of MST philosophy is collectivism. It refers to collective land titles that were ‘conquered’ and to collective work pattern supposedly organized inside the settlements’ productive units, as associations or cooperatives. Regarded as a strategy to access governmental funds such as credit facilities, the idea of collectivism suffers from criticism both inside and outside the organization. In southern Brazil a majority of militants opted for individual rights on agricultural land, obtained by theMST(Andrae,1998,p.146),eventhoughtheideology of collectivism is continually stressed by the MST.
Though the MST defines itself as a mass movement inside the larger syndicated movement (Andrae, 1998, p. 107), I consider MST more as a representative of New Social Movements. The contribution of the New Social Movements consists in conquering social services for all citizens or for certain groups, which until then were excluded from a series of public services. Their action tries to reformulate relations between citizens and the State, as observed by Paoli (apud Andrae, 1998, p. 97; see also Martins, 1997). In that way MST action contributes towards redefining the rules of the game and the power balance in society2.
The MST is a national movement organized in 23 Brazilian States. Since 1984, the MST has been able to win land for approximately 250 thousand families, who live in 1,600 settlements. Ours is a reality in which landownership is highly concentrated: 1% of landowners own half of the land, while 4.8 million families are destitute of land. In this scenario, MST is also articulating 70,000 families who survive into 500 encampments scattered in Brazil (MST, 2002).
248
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
THE POOR FAMILY AND THE HOuSEHOLD
My intention is not to review and debate the vast literature available on poor family issues and households. I will merely present basic definitions used in this study. I follow Woortmann’s definition of ‘family’, who mentions that “for the urban poor, ‘family’ signifies the domestic family or it may be a part of the ‘kindred’ (...)” (Woortmann, 1987, p. 60). As for domestic family, Woortmann follows Smith’s view, who regards it as “a group of relatives and their dependants which constitutes a household” (Woortmann, 1987, p. 60). I myself will use the term ‘household’ as a group of individuals, whether or not they are related to each other, which live under the same roof and share and exchange goods and services (Wilk, 1989). These interchanges can also occur between interrelated social units. Individuals who normally form a social unit can be temporarily separated, in case of, for example, migration. After a period of separation, the former members of a unit can be reintegrated to it or form a new household, related to or independent from the original one.
Intimately linked to the concepts of household and family is the concept of the household cycle. This concept refers to the different stages of constitution, consolidation, aggregation, segmentation and separation of households. This process is characterized – among other aspects – by different ratios between producers and consumers inside the domestic unit. This last paradigm significantly influences decision making inside the household (Chayanov, 1977; Greenhalgh, 1985).
In areas of urban invasion (the case of Bahia, Northeastern State of Brazil) – meaning illegally occupied urban areas – a strong tendency toward matri- focality is observed, and in many cases households are constituted of maternal dyads (Woortmann, 1987)3. The preponderance of women is linked to their importance for household subsistence activities and in decision making related to family issues within the domestic group. Female dominance is also true in conjugal families because it is
not necessarily the male who is responsible for household income and he is not necessarily the house owner (Woortmann, 1987, p. 64-65). Women in general and mothers in particular are focal points of kinship systems and of the household (Woortmann, 1987, p. 288). The same statement is made by Wagley (1957) in his pioneer study of an Amazonian community. Wagley confirms the inconsistency of the “idealistic” assumption where the male assumes a chief or dominating position, as in many occasions it is the woman who is the central figure in the household and in kinship network. He explains this situation by the fact – among others – that in poor families, the husband is frequently absent, due to migration and other facts (Wagley, 1957, p. 231).
Another characteristic of conjugal unions among urban peripheral residents is their instability. Woortmann explains conjugal instability in regard to the difficult situation of poor men, who generally cannot reach the ideal of a husband-father and family provider (Woortmann, 1987, p. 66-67). Besides, Woortmann asserts that “(...) conjugal instability is correlated to a lack of broader implications in marital status and to female independence: more than independence, to its prevalence in the kinship system” (Woortmann, 1987, p. 115). According to the same author a correlation between conjugal stability and male occupational stability seems to exist (Woortmann, 1987, p. 138). A partner who does not satisfactorily develop his role runs the risk of being abandoned. Frequently it is not the woman who is abandoned; rather it is she who frees herself, with the support of relatives, from the “dead weight” of a “free-loading” companion (Woortmann, 1987, p. 303). Wagley points out that this weakness of marital unions also affects poor populations in Amazonian communities (Wagley, 1957, p. 256-257).
In the case of fisher families in eastern Amazonian communities described by Maneschy (2001, p. 177), the possibility for one or more group members’ migrating is
3	I suppose that this reality is spread all over Brazil in poor urban populations. As will be evident this assumption verifies.
249
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
strongly linked to the life cycle stage of the nuclear family. The migration of poor rural population to urban centers or rural-rural migration in Brazil takes the form of a step migration. This type of migration is characterized by different moments in which families disperse and re-group. Maneschy (2001) describes this process in the following way: in a first moment of dispersion, children entering adulthood, apt to create their own families, leave the household, migrating to other places. Then, in a second moment parents integrate the newly established household of their children. Brothers, sisters and other relatives of the spouses can later follow the same paths, congregating with the relatives who are already established in the city (or other place in the countryside) (Maneschy, 2001, p. 177).
Above all, migration is a strategy to alleviate poverty and is an attempt to extend the economic bases of a given household, even though the spouses may not always re-encounter. According to Simonian (2001, p. 38), the fathers, brothers and husbands who migrate, hardly come back to their homes, leaving their wives abandoned. Simonian (2001, p. 38) evidences this reality in many of the Brazilian Amazon micro-regions, above all when men leave their families to prospect gold. In this context, Simonian (2001, p. 37) speaks of a feminization of poverty.
As main traits of poor families we may summarize: a certain tendency toward matri-focality and flexible household morphology, submitted to constant migratory movements between agricultural regions and cities. These migratory processes can, but may not always result in the reconstruction of the original household.
FEMALE ROLES
Despite a certain female preponderance, especially in poor urban populations, women are far from being valued in the public space. In the case of Amazonian fishing communities
female labor is seen as a supplement to masculine income and is hardly accepted as work, even in ideological terms (Maneschy, 2001, p. 167-168). The inferiority and dependence of women in relation to men originate in symbolic spheres where women are considered a source of danger and disorder, which is the background for social control over her (Motta-Maués, 1993, p. 181). This dangerous potentiality and its symbolic signification are related to the stages of the female reproductive cycle, and must be controlled. Even so, Motta-Maués (1993, p. 184, 192) confirms that all female dependence upon men is to be related to the exclusion of women in fishing, which constitutes the main economic activity of the community. The invisible character of female labor and the subordinated condition of women in fishing and agriculture4 (Maneschy, 2001; Wagley, 1957) contrasts with the female superiority pointed out by Woortmann (1987) in urban invasions.
Although social practices in fisher communities are described to be discriminatory against women, some women, such as widows or post-menopause females, are ideologically considered as men. These women, within certain limits, ‘behave’ as men and benefit from a series of liberties they had no access to in the past (Motta-Maués, 1993, p. 89-90). Woortmann (1987, p. 108) comments a similar phenomenon observed in urban peripheries. Middle aged women tend to gain visibility as their dependence upon men decreases. This state of dependence is related to procreation and to reduced female participation in salaried activities, when they depend in great measure upon relatives or neighbors willing to watch for small children (Woortmann, 1987, p. 63).
In recent years, women’s social position progressed considerably in rural areas as well as in suburban neighborhoods. Beyond improvements in access to schooling, professional integration and employment,
4	Lourdes Furtado, anthropologist of the Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, agrees with the invisibility of women in Amazonian fishing communities and their subsequent devaluation. She qualifies that women take actively part in decision making in household economy. It is them who transgress household frontiers and it is them who articulate with the community. This takes place in Mother’s Clubs in Fisher Movements and in women’s participation in social movements (personal communication).
250
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
empowerment agents developed specific actions directed to female population. Among others the Basic Ecclesiastic Communities (Comunidades Eclesiásticas de Base – CEBs) strongly influenced by the Liberation Theology in Brazil, played an important role in the so called awareness-building process for women. As observed by Adriance (1996, p. 215 and following) women many times entered into conflict with their husbands when they attended CEB meetings. Within the CEB program for awareness-building processes for women, one of the major themes was women’s social position, which contributed to an increase in self-esteem and to women’s capacity to confront their husbands in case of conflicts (Adriance, 1996, p. 234).
THE caminhada
FROM THE BACuRI FARM TO THE JOãO BATISTA SETTLEMENT In the Amazon State of Pará are living approximately 13% of the beneficiaries of the Land Reform in Brazil and therefore Pará is the Brazilian State most affected by colonization in the Amazon with different outcomes (Abelém and Hébette, 1998; Moran, 1990). South and the Southeast of Brazil are historical MST focus points, and the movement has repeatedly tried to expand northward to the Amazon frontier. The MST has been present in Pará State since 1989 (Fernandes, 2000). Initially, its activities were concentrated in southern and southeastern Pará. Since 1992 the MST has tried to establish itself in the capital (Belém), but there were certain difficulties in the beginning.
For strategic reasons, the city of Castanhal, in the northeast of Pará State, was chosen as a MST base for action in the ancient colonization zone of the Bragantina region. Action began with meetings in popular and suburban neighborhoods of the city. The MST started by gathering data on individuals interested in obtaining land. Simultaneously, it listed farms that had dispossession potential in the region. Among others, the Bacuri Farm was identified. Preference was given to that farm because of
greater probabilities of success: it was common knowledge that the land title was a fake, and that its debts with banks were high.
The MST follows standard procedures used in almost all cases of occupancy and settlement, which were also adopted in this case. After having carried out the registrations, temporary encampments in Castanhal and Ananindeua were created. Ananindeua is a neighboring city of Belém, a common destination for rural migrants. Protests and marches were organized in Belém to pressure authorities to grant an area for the participants to settle. They were temporarily provided with food by churches, unions, and other sympathizers. Through support from relatives or their own resources, such as indemnities or occasional incomes, the occupants had to finance this phase of the caminhada by themselves.
On November 15 of 1998, occupation of the Bacuri farm was effected. Some 466 registered occupants and their families encamped on the grounds of the former Bacuri farm, that was baptized João Batista Settlement. There were moments of tension during the process; but no violent confrontations with the owner and his staff occurred. Inside the encampment were established mechanisms of coexistence according to MST pattern. Groups were created, composed of several occupants and their families. Each group chose its respective coordinator, who later joined the encampment council, sharing important information and making decisions related to every day life in the camp. Rules of coexistence and an internal code of behavior were implemented. The process is a selective one; only the individuals who comply with internal regulations succeed in fitting in. The others are expelled or leave on their own initiative.
Finally, after a period of uncertainty and instability, the proclamation of the Bacuri Farm dispossession (a part of it) was published on June 3rd of 2000 in the State Official Journal. In November 2000 the INCRA transferred to the João Batista Settlers Association a term of concession for the land, putting an end to the encampment phase and stabilizing the occupants’
251
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
situation. Later on, social and administrative structures were created inside the settlement by the 156 families who had remained. Only after having transferred the term of concession did the INCRA authorize distribution of food baskets for the families. The INCRA also granted resources for housing construction, under pressure from the Movement. Instead of contracting an enterprise to construct houses – as it occurs in conventional settlements – the community of the João Batista settlement bought the necessary materials collectively and built houses in mutirão (form of collective work). The registered participants and their respective families regrouped in nuclei composed of between five and ten families. A great majority of the families live close to each other and supposedly produce together. Each household disposes of 12.3 hectares (in theory), but the majority of the participants decided to transfer 80% of the land to the nucleus and to assign 20% to semi-collective use (euphemism for individual use). A formal association was created in order to – among other purposes – obtain government funding and set bases for a cooperative that would commercialize future settlement productions. Moreover, health, finances, gender, leisure, youth, communication and environmental commissions were created. At the head of each commission a settler was elected chairperson.
PROFILE OF THE JOãO BATISTA SETTLEMENT POPuLATION The following information is mainly based upon interviews conducted by the author, which are complemented with some data extracted from the Development Plan of João Batista Settlement Project (Cardoso, 2001). During several weeks the author did fieldwork in the João Batista settlement, focusing initially on social institutions and dynamics in the settler community. After perceiving the importance of settler women’s contribution to the community life, in-depth-interviews were made with several women. As the life stories of three settler women permit especially interesting insides into the relation between militancy and life-cycle-decisions, they were chosen as the data base for the following analysis.
More than 70% of the settlers come from the State of Pará, and approximately 10% from Maranhão and Ceará (Brazilian states). The remaining part originates from Amazonian and north-eastern States (Cardoso, 2001, p. 16).
The population is a highly mobile one. A large part of it has (remote) agricultural origins – at least until childhood – and later lived in different places, such as the State Capital (Belém) or its neighboring city Ananindeua, which turned itself into a sort of central destination for rural migrants. Before joining the João Batista Project most of the participants lived in suburban neighborhoods, characterized by high criminality and insecurity rates, and by deficient infrastructure.
Few of the later registered participants were, before settling in João Batista, working as farmers or rural workforce, however, frustrated experiences of agricultural settling were observed. When individuals return to rural life in agricultural areas, it is generally not in their original location. Internal state migration and state-to-state migration is constantly observed. Migration takes place in stages (step-migration).
A family can disperse itself in several locations, within articulated households. These units are not fixed. Their composition can temporarily or definitively change; they can re-group, add new members later on, or even disintegrate. There is a tendency toward matri-focality among the settler’s original households (above all in urban neighborhoods).
Among and between households circulate resources, goods and services. There is a strong tendency toward inter-generational reciprocity. Children are indebted to the parents, especially when these are aged and ill. A strong familial solidarity exists, that exceeds the limits of the proper household or domestic family. In some cases the financial resources of households are extremely limited. Even the bus fare to send children to school can be out of the parents’ reach. Even so, adaptability to hostile circumstances can be observed in the population. Space mobility as well as intra- and inter-group solidarity are strategic factors to ensure survival.
When employed in cities, participants work in the informal sector (retailers, occasional jobs, domestic work,
252
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
janitors) or in the formal sector (security agents, sale’s clerks in supermarkets or warehouses). Whatever the position is, in a majority of cases, employment instability is high and pay is low, and everyone is exposed to the threat of quick layoff and unemployment. In all interviews, a strong desire to return to the rural world was noted (“o sonho de voltar para terra” or “the dream of making a living from the land”). According to observations, retirement or forced resignation become stimuli to look for alternatives to urban life.
According to observations, a majority of settlers in the João Batista settlement project were affiliated to one political party, or were active in a church (catholic as well as evangelical).
A condition for registering to the INCRA list is unemployment, either in the public or private sector; people often work in the informal sector. This condition led various candidates for an allotment of land reform to leave their (formal) jobs. After having settled officially in the countryside in an official encampment or land reform settlement, the participants are allowed to be formally employed.
In the following, to enlighten womens’ role in land reform and Landless Workers’ Movement, the process from the point of view of three women who participated in the caminhada from the outset will be analyzed.
THREE WOMEN’S caminhada TO THE JOãO BATISTA SETTLEMENT Female occupants played an active role in the caminhada to the João Batista settlement. These women took the initiative to join the Movement on their own and participated in occupations against the will of their respective companions. I chose three women between 41 and 51 years of age, at the end of their reproductive cycle but still with strong commitments to their children, to analyze the reasons for and the consequences of their participation in the caminhada.
One initial question was what the reasons were for these women to join the Movement. To answer
that question, I analyze their past situations, before their involvement in the Movement. The aim is to determine whether there were objective reasons for their involvement, and if their situation suffered changes after the settlement, in the context of the theoretical considerations previously outlined. The focus is on household morphology, matri- focality in poor urban families, and on women’s special situation when reaching the end of their reproductive cycle. When outlining women’s motives for participation in the caminhada to the João Batista settlement, I sought to establish in what measure they corresponded to “the dream of making a living from the land” and what the other connotations to that desire there may be. Concerning eventual changes, attempted to relate women’s participation in the caminhada to ulterior modifications observed in their lives. In addition, the a priori situation of these women and the original household morphology is compared with the morphology of the new established households in the João Batista settlement.
INITIAL SITuATION OF THE THREE WOMEN: LIFE-CYCLE, HOuSEHOLD SITuATION, INCOME AND HOuSING Dona Dora is 51 years old. She is illiterate and left the Catholic Church for the (evangelical) Universal Church. She is from Maranhão State and is mother of ten children. Her children are between 15 and 32 years old. The oldest daughter, when adolescent, was the first family member to move to Ananindeua5. She followed the steps of her maternal aunt, sister of Dora, who was already living in Pará. Years later Dora’s parents and eight of the ten children went to live in Ananindeua.
When the caminhada began, Dora was married. Dora and her husband were farmers their whole lives. They owned land and a house in the Maranhão countryside, where Dora was additionally running a small
5	For many people of the Maranhão countryside, Belém (capital of the state of Pará) and the neighbour Ananindeua are more points of reference than São Luis (capital of the state of Maranhão).
253
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
commercial point. Because of illness and of the absence of her children, Dora decided to move to Ananindeua and join them6. At first she lived in her oldest daughter’s house, where some of the children, who had migrated to Pará, were already living. The older children were guaranteeing the subsistence of the household. When she left, it was decided that Dora’s husband was to stay in Maranhão, in order to sell the property and later join the rest of the family in Ananindeua.
Dona Carmem is 46 years old and comes from the rural area of Manaus, but lived in Belém since she was eleven. She is mother of five children of between 16 and 28 years of age whom she raised alone. They all live together in her house in Belém. She has had an agitated life trajectory. She likes to comment about her own life, saying that her father was a Brazilian Indian and her mother a Peruvian Indian, that she had done almost everything in her life, that she has been housekeeper, slave, and stevedore in Belém’s main market place, in short: she has worked in a series of activities, but “never prostituted herself”. She had two husbands with whom she had her children. At the beginning of the occupation she had a companion, but they were not living together.
Because of her very mobile lifestyle, she repeated her first high-school years three times. She had several jobs, until finally fixing as retailer in one of Belém’s open markets, where she owns three stalls that sustain her family. Among other activities, she participates in the organization of small retailers in Belém and is a political party activist.
Dona Andréia is 42 years old and comes from a Quilombo (Afro Brazilian community)7 located in the rural area of Castanhal. Her parents were farmers. At the age of ten she migrated with her parents to Belém, where she studied and worked in several places. She did not complete her senior high-school year and could not obtain her health technician graduation certificate.
She is married and has three children of between four and 12 years of age. The youngest daughter lives with her in the settlement, and her two sons live in her mother’s house in Belém. Her last job took her to work together with Dona Carmem in a open market in Belém. Her husband worked as refrigeration technician in occasional jobs.
In these three cases the women have completed their reproductive cycle. One of them (Andréia) is still fully responsible for all of her children. She relies on her mother’s support, who lives in Belém and takes care of her grandchildren. Her older children look after the younger ones.
Comparing the three case studies, it is obvious that in all of them the children live together outside the encampment. In terms of elementary nucleus family status, Dona Dora hoped to reconstitute her household and once again live with her children, who reside in Belém. This was one of the reasons why she moved from Maranhão to the city of Ananindeua. Dona Carmem’s household was under her leadership almost all of its existence. She points out that even when her successive husbands integrated the group, she was the one leading economic matters. Andréia together with her husband and children integrated an extensive family, commanded by her mother. The comparison of the three cases in terms of profession and income reveals: Dora is a farmer with no urban labor experience and 100% dependent upon her children from the moment on she moved to Ananindeua. Carmem already was a micro-entrepreneur and head of the domestic family. She had financial independence, but needed and still needs her children’s workforce. Andréia contributed to the family income selling in an open market. Andréia’s domestic family, as well as Dora’s, is – economically speaking – in a vulnerable situation.
6	The lack of appropriate medical care is a common reason to move from the countryside to the capital in the North of Brazil. Therefore it is important to dispose of a solid social (kinship) network.
7	Quilombo denominates a former refuge of slaves, whose inhabitants nowadays enjoy special (land) rights.
254
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
THE PROCESS OF INTEGRATION INTO THE MOVEMENT AND IN THE ENCAMPMENT: MOTIVATION, CONTACT, CHANGES Dora’s motivation to join the movement is understood as a consequence of her husband’s non-adaptation to life in Ananindeua. As it had been planned, he left Maranhão and regrouped with the rest of the family in Ananindeua. Even though they had built a house in Ananindeua, he decided to go back to his homeland in Maranhão because he could not adapt to urban life. As a result of that situation, Dora decided to integrate the Movement during an enrolment campaign the MST promoted in Ananindeua. Dora’s oldest son pushed her to enroll during his own registration. Together, they participated in encampments and MST actions. The expectations she had that her husband would come back were frustrated when he condemned the MST’s actions, after having occupied a land together with Dora over a period of three days. He traveled back to Maranhão and afterwards met another woman. Dora, after consulting her children, decided to keep on her “fight for land” with the MST, and remained in the squatting process of the former Bacuri Farm.
Carmem became aware of MST actions by chance. She was present at a meeting organized on Labor Day at the open market of Belém. A year passed before this first contact gave way to a deeper involvement, when she was invited, as political activist, to visit an urban encampment organized by the Movement. She then registered to the land candidates list, provoking discussions and arguments with her companion. Her motives for enrolling were political (identification with the Movement’s claims) and financial, for she apprehended her involvement as an opportunity to expand her economical activities. During the process of occupation, she and her companion separated because of diverging opinions related to land occupation and associated actions.
Andréia was stimulated to enroll in the Movement by Carmem and another friend, with whom she had worked at the open market. She joined the Movement without the support of her husband or relatives. During the encampment
phase and the initial moments of the settlement, she and her husband argued intensely about her participation in the caminhada. Her motives were existential, related to extreme economic conditions. She felt her household had no other choice than to follow whatever way out of extreme poverty.
It is interesting to observe that in these three cases the women were the ones who contacted the Movement and that the respective husbands or companions disapproved or were opposed to their involvement. Besides, it appears clearly that personalized contacts favored the integration to the Movement. It seems all three of them were pursuing their “dream of making a living from the land”, with high expectations of better days. We can also notice that in the three cases presented great autonomy was demonstrated, the women participating alone in the caminhada, without jeopardizing the rest of the family. Even though Dona Carmem enjoys a more comfortable position, all three of them hope to find security and economic well-being. Differently from Dona Carmem’s case, Andréia and Dora’s family economic bases are extremely weak, and their survival depends upon strong familial solidarity and personal ethics. In their case the MST proposal is promising even though it implies great sacrifices, especially during the phase of squatting. Two out of the three women separated from their companions because of their insertion in the Movement and because of their participation in the caminhada for land. Even so Andréia took a risk in her matrimonial life, but her husband, unlike the others, joined her in the settlement. Participation in the caminhada constitutes a turning point in all of their lives.
LIFE IN THE SETTLEMENT: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WOMEN AND THE HOuSEHOLD Given the proximity of two important urban centers such as the Greater Belém (including Ananindeua) and Castanhal, once permanently settled in João Batista, women try to conciliate settlement related tasks with obligations linked to their households of origin in the city. This is a widespread characteristic shared by the majority of the women living in the João Batista settlement. An important proportion of
255
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
women constantly travel to the city to visit their households of origin, which aggregates their relatives, parents or children. Because of the settlement’s short lifetime production has not yet reached large scales. Production is still mainly for subsistence. The settlers are also involved in extractive activities. Part of the group, such as the women presented here, share responsibilities within the settlement or within the Movement. A year after the settlement had been established, the participants were still surviving through financial support from urban relatives or through occasional jobs out of the settled area. If we consider that the occupation and the encampment process lasted two years, it becomes evident that settler had to endure a total of three years of difficulties hoping for better days. This fact required great motivation and capacity to take risks on the part of the occupants and later settlers. I will now analyze
what where the outcomes of this process. Even though Dora and her husband separated during
the occupation process, she proceeded in the caminhada with her children’s consent and with the support of her eldest son, who settled together with her. He became an MST activist while participating in the caminhada. As a result he was transferred to another settlement project in Tocantins, leaving behind wife and children. The couple broke up. As a consequence his former wife, who did not wish to stay in João Batista, abandoned their house and lost their land reform registration. Dora, after her son and her daughter-in-law had left, remained in the settlement without any relatives. In the following, she assumed the position of secretary of her nucleus. Apart from that function, she does not assume other public responsibilities in the settlement. Her children continue living in Ananindeua, where she constantly goes to visit. In the settlement she sustains herself with local resources, aiming at making a living from local productions (in great part derived from extractivism). From time to time she brings her produce to her children in the city.
Although she wanted to re-aggregate her former household and bring her husband to Pará, she had to take
note of the failure of her project. She then gave a new direction to her life and personal development meeting a settler of her age and built a new home together with him and his children. Despite all difficulties, she is satisfied with her new condition in the settlement, and persists in pursuing her options, dedicating most of her time to farming and – in the future – to a small retail store. Her younger children are in an awkward situation, sustained by the good will of their elder brothers and through occasional jobs. Dora provides, whenever she can, products from farming and from her extractivist activities. But generally they have to survive on their own. The oldest daughter, as well as the younger children, believes living in João Batista offers no future, because they would have to become farmers, which, in their eyes, is not an attractive perspective: they value much more urban jobs. The double or multiple residence pattern of Dora and her family will prevail in these circumstances.
In the MST-hamlet Dona Carmem assumes the position of health commissioner. As a consequence she travels constantly, participating in courses and giving orientation in MST-encampments. Because of her political activist background, she successfully fitted into the Movement. On a personal level, as previously mentioned, she separated from her husband during the occupation phase. He refused to live with her and did not assume financial or emotional responsibilities within the family, which probably also led her to opt for separation.
Because of her settlement in João Batista, her oldest daughter, her son-in-law and their children moved in and integrated her household. Nowadays, they are settled in the nearby MST Roseli Nunes encampment. When Carmem travels or needs occasional assistance, her son- in-law assumes her daily tasks. Carmem in exchange offers financial support. None of her other children wanted to come to João Batista. Nowadays she is living alone in the settlement, enjoying constant visits of her grandchildren.
She regularly travels to the city, orientating her children and supervising her businesses. The three stalls she owns at the open market of Belém are still
256
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
functioning. She is still committed to the small retailers association of the open market, of which she used to be President. Because of her activities in the city, she and her household of origin benefit from continuous income. Even so she expects good farming opportunities in João Batista and is thinking of developing commercial projects in the settlement. She believes the settlement represents a means of expanding her economic bases. It appears clearly that Carmem is much more aware of the economic possibilities within the settlement than the other two women presented. This can be explained by her past – and present – activities as small entrepreneur.
Because of Dona Andréia’s formal education (junior undergraduate with health specialization), she assumed the position of health counselor in the settlement and receives a minimum wage. She entered a nursing school training promoted by the City of Castanhal. In addition, she is treasurer for the Settlers Association, which means that when someone or a group in João Batista is granted governmental aid, she or her substitute has to accompany the process in Castanhal. She dedicates a great deal of her time to that activity and occasionally cannot fulfill her duties in her nucleus. Usually, she is excused of fulfilling her working obligation by her nucleus in compensation for her dedication to the settlement. Sometimes her husband takes over her tasks in the nucleus. She also travels to participate in other MST meetings, which at first provoked innumerous discussions with her husband, who finally accepted the situation.
Inside the household she is the one taking initiatives, even though she is a calm and thoughtful individual. She participated in the occupation together with her small daughter. Only subsequently, when the situation in the settlement had stabilized, did her husband leave his urban position and join them. Today, Andréia, her daughter and her husband live together in João Batista. The elder sons
live in the city with their grandmother. Andréia does not want them to live permanently in João Batista until a high- school is built in the settlement, because good education for her children is fundamental for her.
Some of Andréia’s relatives successively moved in to João Batista. Her older brother incorporated Andréia’s nucleus and lives next to her house (in her old shelter) with his wife and children. They were accepted by the nucleus because of his knowledge in breeding cattle, a future income generating project of the João Batista settlement. But as aggregated elements to his sister’s household, and like all newcomers, he does not have rights on the land; for that reason he is thinking in settling in the nearby MST project Roseli Nunes. As an officially registered participant, there he may obtain rights to some land. In addition to her brother, Andréia wishes to draw in her nephew and his family, in the hope that he could give up his drinking habit8.
For the time the family subsistence is sustained through Andréia’s wage, by means of extractivism in the settlement and through her husband’s occasional income, her brother is hired inside or outside the settlement as agricultural workforce. Andréia confesses that she would not be living in João Batista if she had had alternatives, such as a full graduation and a good urban position. She believes that only really needy people are willing to settle in the harsh conditions she has experienced. She is convinced that the future of her children will be ensured by a good education.
In all three cases we note that invariably household re-composition in the encampment and subsequently in the settlement brought changes to the women and their relatives. They respond to those changes with high capacity of adaptation. The migration strategies observed are characterized by individual initiatives, reconstituting the household only when the situation in the settlement is stabilized. What draws the attention was the fact that women more than men, in these special cases, put
8	Alcoholism seems to be very high among volunteers at the beginning of the caminhada. As the consumption of alcohol is completely forbidden during the occupation period and controlled afterwards, several settlers succeeded in abandoning alcohol.
257
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
themselves at risk and confronted unknown situations. In previously collected examples from João Batista settlement, husbands, fathers and brothers were the ones who would take the decision to migrate, leaving their women to look after the household. It also seems that assuming responsibilities inside the Movement facilitated the insertion of the three women and their identification to it. Dona Carmem did not use the word ‘grow’ randomly when she referred to her situation inside the settlement. Assuming functions inside the settlement and inside the Movement helps women to improve their possibilities.
The three women presented here name the Movement’s slogan – “the dream of making a living from the land” – to justify their involvement in the caminhada. As a common characteristic, all three have terminated their reproductive cycle, but all of them are, more or less, still economically and socially responsible for their children. As the children are now becoming of age, the women’s dependence on them lessens and vice versa and their extra-household-activities increase. All three of them jeopardized their marital status by participating in the caminhada. They had to face conflicts within their social environment, which sometimes did not approve of their involvement in the MST. Let us now review the elements that answer the initial questions referring to the reasons for the women’s engagement and to the changes it brought to them and to their family.
FINAL REMARKS
We must highlight, in this context, the MST and the conditions it creates for changes to occur in the women’s lives. The MST represents a chance, an opportunity and a guarantee during the whole process. From the participants’ point of view, at the start of the process, the MST, before being a conscious political option, offers easy access to land and housing in rural areas. The ideological option is constructed during the course of the process by the participants of the caminhada. The MST, during the initial stages of the migration as in other moments of transition
and insecurity, constitutes a guarantee. This role is usually assumed, in conventional migrations, only by relatives and friends. Woortmann (1987, p. 30) evokes in this context a sort of “anticipatory socialization” done by formerly migrated relatives. In addition, as demonstrated, the MST and the João Batista settlement project offer institutionalized solutions for oncoming relatives, once the registered participants have definitely settled.
In the first phase of the João Batista settlement described here the success of the model is explained by an accommodation between necessities and aspirations of women, and emerging structures of the settlement as there are the organization in nucleus, collective land titles, collective working patterns and the pooling of credits. Through collective action, reciprocal support in agricultural activities should be guaranteed within each nucleus. The individual is not solely responsible for the production. It is an important point to remember that the majority of the settlers do not originate from rural areas, but come from urban environments and therefore need to improve their agricultural knowledge. Collective working patterns allow mobility, which, in the case of women with children in the city, is important. Pooling credits in the nucleus alleviates situations where participants have no capital, as occurs in a majority of cases. Since the analysis details only the first moments of the settlement, when agricultural production is just beginning, it is still too early to assess the sustainability of this model. In the future the settlement will have to address problems related to accountancy of working days, distribution of profits, and commitment in credit payment. Without supportive action from the State – such as food baskets, housing financed by the INCRA, and credits for payment of production means, obtained on the pressure from the MST – most of the participants would not have had the possibility or the motivation to settle in a rural area. In that way the MST redefines the rules of the game, as mentioned earlier in this text. The participants of the caminhada learned to claim their rights and to make use of their citizenship.
258
Bol. Mus. Para. Emílio Goeldi. Cienc. Hum., Belém, v. 4, n. 2, p. 247-260, maio-ago. 2009
Let us return to the reasons for women’s participation in the caminhada. One of the most important motives why women participate in the Movement is their responsibility toward their families. Prolonged female responsibility for their domestic family is due to economic and social vulnerability, as a consequence of the adverse living conditions in the urban centers and, as mentioned earlier, male absence and their – if present – economic weakness. Thus, we can identify differentiated motives among the cases we presented. Andréia, for example, joined the caminhada because of a lack of economic opportunities in the city. To her, living in the settlement represents elaborating and conducting a personal professional project, something she could not do in the city. On the other hand Carmem considers the settlement as an economic opportunity. She wants to expand her existing urban economic bases. Dora wants to reestablish her status as a farmer and live again with her husband, but, as we have seen, her plans failed. Her motivation was in that sense very ‘conservative’. The “dream of making a living from the land” appears to hide diverse meanings, and cannot be restricted merely to a desire to become a farmer or as the late Lygia Sigaud, from the National Museum of Rio de Janeiro, interpreted this request, as a desire for independence9.
Because as the children of these three women are grown up, the women gained certain independence. Even so, to participate in the caminhada and settle is only possible if the maternal family or the children themselves support the initiative. In Andréia’s case, it is her mother who takes care of the children who still study in the urban high-school. In Dona Carmem’s case, the children take care of her business in the city. Even so, she feels responsible for their well-being and constantly travels to visit them. In Dona Dora’s case, the older children take care of the younger ones.
In the particular case of these three women, as in the case of most of the settlers of the João Batista settlement, we noticed that the families are to be analyzed in their rural-urban-relationship. Reconstruction of the household,
9	Personal communication.
in the presented cases, invariably leads to changes in its composition. New couples establish themselves and in the case of Andréia, a new matri-focal unit was created. We witnessed systems of double residency pattern (rural and urban), linked to responsibilities toward children and to economical necessities. From an epistemological point of view, the reality of households in the settlement cannot be understood if the supra-local familial network and the articulation in-between household are not taken into consideration. Analyzing the reality of the settlers’ families as a whole, only from inside the settlement only reveals the tip of the iceberg of the social networking of the settlers.
During the installation of relatives in the settlement, a step migration model is repeated; in fact, the MST elaborated and institutionalized a new formula. The registered participant’s relatives move in and are aggregated to her/his household, and later on join the nearby encampment. It is a way to manage land scarcity and avoid eventual conflicts resulting from the fact that the newcomers did not participate in the caminhada, and did not participate in the collective socialization process.
We can observe changes in various aspects of the roles of these women. In fact all of them are women who already had important roles in their respective families before the caminhada began. In that sense the MST and the João Batista settlement gave them a chance to express and strengthen their potentialities. These potentialities can be expressed for example through the public responsibilities they now assume, such as nucleus secretary, health counselor or Movement activist, traveling around the State and participating in meetings.
I believe that one of the most important outcomes of (female) participation in popular social movements is the improvement of self-esteem. In this regard the result of this enquiry coincides with the outcomes of a former research undertaken in a shantytown of Santiago de Chile, where women declared to feel more self-confident due to participation in a community development initiative (Naase, 1990). In this case, activities were supported by a private
259
“The dream of making a living from the land”: Amazon settler women as change agents
initiative, lacking the ideological framework provided by the MST, in the Brazilian case. Maybe, after all, the ideological framework plays not that prominent role, militants of the MST are presuming. The role of women in this process is prominent because they are its focal point, assuming pioneer functions, organizing domestic and public tasks in the settlement, assuming the role of articulators among households. In this way women are able to step out of the invisibility mentioned at the beginning of this paper. In addition, women are the ones who bear the weight of insecurity during the process, bound to the harshness of the caminhada. Women are the ones who attempt to conciliate the double residency imposed by the process, responding to multiple demands that call for enlarging economic bases, satisfactory education for the children, and maintaining urban bases, as a means of alleviating the difficult living conditions urban and rural poor suffer in the Amazon.
REFERENCES
ABELÉM, Auriléia Gomes; HÉBETTE, Jean. Assentamentos da reforma agrária na fronteira amazônica. In: SCHMIDT, Benício Viero; MARINHO, Danilo Nolasco C.; COUTO, Sueli L. (Orgs.). Os assentamentos de reforma agrária no Brasil. Brasília: Editora Universidade de Brasília, 1998. p. 237-255.
ACHESON, James M. (Org.). Anthropology and Institutional Economics. Lanham: University Press of America, 1994. (Monographs in Economic Anthropology, 12).
ADRIANCE, Madeleine Cousineau. Terra Prometida: as Comunidades Eclesiais de Base e os conflitos rurais. São Paulo: Paulinas, 1996.
ALSTON, Lee J.; EGGERTSSON, Thrainn; NORTH, Douglas (Eds.). Empirical Studies in Institutional Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
ANDRAE, Silvio. Land in Sicht? Ländliche Entwicklung und Agrarstrukturen unter dem Einfluß der Landlosenbewegung in Rio Grande do Sul / Brasilien. Mettingen: Brasilienkunde-Verlag / Institut für Brasilienkunde, 1998.
CARDOSO, Antônio (Coord.). Plano de Desenvolvimento do Projeto de Assentamento João Batista, Castanhal – PA. Belém: INCRA/FADESP/UFPA, 2001. Unpublished Report.
CHAYANOV, Alexander V. On the Theory of Non-Capitalist Economic Systems. In: HALPERIN, Rhoda; DOW, James (Eds.). Peasant livelihood: studies in economic anthropology and cultural ecology. New York: Saint Martin’s Press, 1977. p. 257-268.
FERNANDES, Bernardo Mançano. Formação e territorialização do MST no Pará. Revista Cultura Vozes, n. 94, p. 3-18, 2000.
GREENHALGH, Susan. Is inequality demographically induced? The family cycle and the distribution of income in Taiwan. American Anthropologist, n. 87, p. 571-593, 1985.
LEITE, Sérgio. Assentamentos rurais no Brasil: impactos, dimensões e significados. In: STÉDILE, João Pedro (Org.). A Reforma Agrária e a Luta do MST. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes, 1997. p. 157-176.
MANESCHY, Maria Cristina. Múltiplas atividades femininas nas estratégias de reprodução social de famílias de pescadores. In: JACKSON, Maria José Costa (Org.). Sociologia na Amazônia: debates teóricos e experiências de pesquisa. Belém: EDUFPA, 2001. p. 165-196.
MARTINS, José de Souza. A questão agrária brasileira e o papel do MST. In: STÉDILE, João Pedro (Org.). A Reforma Agrária e a Luta do MST. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes, 1997. p. 11-76.
MORAN, Emilio. Private and Public Colonisation Schemes in Amazonia. In: GOODMAN, D.; HALL, A. (Eds.). The Future of Amazonia: Destruction or Sustainable Development? Houndmills: Macmillan Press, 1990. p. 70-89.
MOTTA-MAUÉS, Maria Angélica. “Trabalhadeiras” & “Camarados”: relações de gênero, simbolismo e ritualização numa comunidade amazônica. Belém: EDUFPA / Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária, 1993.
MOVIMENTO DOS TRABALHADORES RURAIS SEM TERRA (MST). Social Projects. Disponível em: <http://www.mstbrazil.org/summary. htm>. Acesso em: 19 mai. 2002.
NAASE, Karin Marita. Más persona, la experiencia del Centro Integral de Desarrollo Comunitário en la comuna de Conchalí, Santiago de Chile. Santiago de Chile: Unicef, 1990.
SIMONIAN, Ligia T. L. Mulheres, gênero e desenvolvimento na Amazônia Brasileira: resistências, contradições e avanços. In: SIMONIAN, Ligia T. L. Mulheres da floresta amazônica: entre o trabalho e a cultura. Belém: UFPA/NAEA, 2001. p. 33-68.
WAGLEY, Charles. uma comunidade amazônica. São Paulo: Companhia Editorial Nacional, 1957.
WILK, Richard (Ed.). The Household Economy: Reconsidering the Domestic Mode of Production. Boulder: Westview Press, 1989.
WOORTMANN, Klaas. A família das mulheres. Brasília: Coleção Tempo Brasileiro, 1987.
Recebido: 03/11/2008 Aprovado: 05/08/2009
260

2007
Political Science
World Politics
The Normalization of an Anomaly: The Workers' Party in Brazil
Hunter, Wendy

Published by The Johns Hopkins University Press
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/wp/summary/v059/59.3hunter.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/15/11 10:46PM GMT
THE NORMALIZATION OF AN ANOMALY The Workers’ Party in Brazil
By WENDY HUNTER*
DEFYING early expectations, the Workers’ Party has become a leading contender in Brazilian politics. The once small and radical Partido dos Trabalhadores (pt) moderated considerably and expanded its electoral base greatly as it went from opposition to government be- tween 1989 and 2002. The party’s delegation grew to constitute the largest bloc in the lower house of Congress. pt mayors took office across an array of Brazilian cities. And finally in 2002, after winning progressively greater first-round vote shares in every presidential elec- tion since 1989, Luis Inácio Lula da Silva captured national executive office for the first time. He was reelected in October 2006. Indeed, the pt’s growth is one of the most remarkable phenomena of Brazil’s postauthoritarian democracy (see the appendix for the party’s growth at different levels of government between 1989 and 2002). Its moderation is one of the most striking instances in the post–cold war era of a far- left party adapting to constraints stemming from structural economic changes abroad and politics at home.
Notwithstanding the dramatic changes the pt underwent between 1989 and 2002, notable too are ways in which it preserved features that distinguished it in critical ways from most other Brazilian parties. Even as the pt moderated its ideological program and made other modifi- cations designed to boost its electoral standing, it continued to stand out for the high levels of cohesion, discipline, and loyalty commanded among its political ranks. While the pt’s collective profile increasingly
* I am deeply grateful for the excellent feedback provided by Andy Baker, Zoltan Barany, Dan Brinks, Jason Brownlee, John Carey, Michael Coppedge, Ken Greene, Frances Hagopian, Mala Htun, Raúl Madrid, Scott Mainwaring, Robert Moser, Timothy Power, Ken Roberts, three anonymous re- viewers, and especially Kurt Weyland. Thanks are due also to Oswaldo Amaral, Barry Ames, Juliana Estrella, David Fleischer, John Higley, Paulo Roberto Figueira Leal, Rachel Meneguello, Rodrigo Nunes, Celso Roma, David Samuels, William Smith, Andrew Stein, Natasha Borges Sugiyama and Jeremy Teigen. I acknowledge appreciatively the Kellogg Institute for International Studies at the University of Notre Dame, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the College of Liberal Arts and the Teresa Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies at the University of Texas at Austin.
World Politics 59 (April 2007), 440–75
normalization of an anomaly	441
came to resemble that of a typical “catchall” party,1 individual pt poli- ticians remained highly committed to their organization and did not start to behave like the self-interested careerists found in abundance in other Brazilian parties. What accounts for the unevenness of the pt’s adaptation, that is, for the enactment of marked changes alongside the perpetuation of important continuities?
This article analyzes the factors that shaped the pt’s evolution be- tween 1989 and 2002. Its primary purpose is to explain why the once radical party moderated its programmatic position and adopted other aspects of a more catchall electoral strategy. At the same time, it seeks to shed light on why some of the pt’s distinctive normative commit- ments and organizational practices endured. The broader theoretical objective is to reflect upon how changes within the pt speak to ana- lytical debates about whether, under what conditions, and to what ex- tent ideological parties undergo strategic adaptations. To understand patterns of change and continuity in the party, the analysis draws on insights from rational choice and historical institutionalism, thereby taking up the challenge raised by various authors to combine the two creatively and harness the strengths of each approach.2 The goal is not to downplay the distinctions between them but rather to make the most of them to gain analytical leverage on complex outcomes reflect- ing both adaptation and resistance to change.
By telling the story of the pt through explicitly theoretical lines of reasoning, as encouraged by Robert Bates and others,3 the analy- sis brings together parsimony and a systematization of detail, one of the key benefits of strategic frameworks, with a sensitivity to context more traditionally associated with historical institutionalism. Mobi- lizing a rational choice framework facilitates explanation of the pt’s adjustment to external inducements and constraints, while referencing historical institutionalism elucidates how historical legacies preserved some of the party’s uniqueness and limited its transformation. Neither approach alone can account for the pt’s profile of partial transformation.
1 For a discussion of catchall parties and their characteristics, see Otto Kirchheimer, “The Trans- formation of the Western European Party Systems,” in Joseph LaPalombara and Myron Weiner, eds., Political Parties and Political Development (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966).
2 Peter A. Hall and Rosemary C. R. Taylor, “Political Science and the Three New Institutional- isms,” Political Studies 44 (December 1996); Ira Katznelson and Barry R. Weingast, “Intersections between Historical and Rational Choice Institutionalism,” in Katznelson and Weingast, eds., Prefer- ences and Situations: Points of Intersection between Historical and Rational Choice Institutionalism (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005); Kathleen Thelen, “Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics,” Annual Review of Political Science 2 ( June 1999).
3 Robert H. Bates, Avner Greif, Margaret Levi, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, and Barry R. Weingast, Analytic Narratives (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), 10–13.
442	world politics
While an exclusively strategic framework overpredicts change, reliance on historical institutionalism underpredicts it. Moreover, invoking both frameworks to show how the party sometimes found itself caught between opposing logics illuminates important aspects of its behavior that have puzzled observers heretofore. In its application to the pt, a prominent example of party adaptation, the analysis seeks to demon- strate in more general terms how the two frameworks can be combined systematically to understand complex patterns of change and continu- ity within a single organization.
The pt is a critical case to examine for these debates since it began as a highly ideological party and resisted the adoption of vote-maximizing measures for quite some time. Although singularly poised to retain its programmatic identity, it succumbed eventually to pressures stemming from two sources: the international political economy and Brazil’s politi- cal institutions. That even the pt could not resist these forces is powerful testament to their strength. This overarching story is well told from a rational choice perspective. The structural economic reforms that Bra- zil adopted in the 1990s and the largely favorable attitude of the Bra- zilian public toward them imposed clear limits on the pt’s aspirations for far-reaching state-led change. So too did the growing institutional strength of the state and the party system. Abandoning its transforma- tive project in favor of more conventional electoral goals rendered the pt more susceptible to the institutional incentives for building electoral support in Brazil. And thus, it began to adopt many of the vote-getting tactics typical of non–programmatically oriented parties in Brazil.
And yet the pt did not adapt entirely. Insights from historical insti- tutionalism add a crucial layer of complexity to the story. The party’s history conditioned how it met external challenges or whether in some instances it did at all. Indeed, the pt responded to a dense and complex mix of incentives that at times pulled it in conflicting directions. A full account of the party’s evolution requires explaining important aspects of continuity as well as certain distortions in its efforts at adaptation. In general, continuity prevailed vis-à-vis the internal front (for exam- ple, internal party organization, relations between the party leadership and militants, norms and rules concerning the party’s expectations of pt candidates and officeholders). By contrast, the changes that took place did so mostly on the external front (for example, listening more to voters via opinion polls, forging alliances with nonleft forces, and instituting other measures more directly related to boosting the par- ty’s vote share). Points of contact between historical institutionalism and rational choice can shed light on aspects of the pt’s conduct that
normalization of an anomaly	443
reflect neither full adaptation nor complete stasis, such as the party’s questionable fund-raising activities. Rather than conforming fully to the expectations of a strategic framework, the party’s conduct was in- fluenced by enduring historical commitments and norms. These com- plexities help account for the unevenness of the party’s adaptation.
To date, there are few systematic and theoretically informed analy- ses of the pt’s post-1989 evolution at the national level.4 The litera- ture concentrates instead on other issues, most prominently, the local governments and social movements associated with the party.5 David Samuels provides an interesting and compelling analysis of the party’s post-1995 evolution.6 His account focuses on endogenous sources of change, namely, the flexibility permitted by specific internal rules and the rise of pragmatists following the party’s success in mayoral elec- tions. Yet the attention paid to internal flexibility emphasizes a facili- tating condition and not a driving cause of the party’s moderation. And while pragmatists were indeed more likely to win mayoral elections, it is unclear how much influence they exerted within the party. On the whole, pt mayors have not tended to occupy powerful party positions. In any event, Samuels’s account does not explain why those who did hold top and ongoing leadership roles moderated their prior views.
The point of departure for the present article is that there is more to be said about factors exogenous to the party that militated in favor of moderation during the 1990s. Focusing on key developments both in the global economy and in Brazilian politics, the present analysis sheds light on the driving causes of change.7 Its argument is not that moder- ation stemmed from the gradual rise of new forces within the party but rather that ongoing leaders revised their views quite dramatically. By emphasizing how the core pt leadership assessed the impact of global
4 Excellent analyses of the pt in the first decade of its existence remain Rachel Meneguello, pt: A Formação de um Partido, 1979–1982 [The Workers’ Party: The Formation of a Party, 1979–1982] (São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 1989); Margaret Keck, The Workers’ Party and Democratization in Brazil (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
5 pt governance in cities was characterized by a participatory governing style and a unique array of social programs, such as participatory budgeting, school scholarship funds, microcredit, and family health programs. See Rebecca Abers, Inventing Local Democracy: Grassroots Politics in Brazil (Boul- der, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 2000); Gianpaulo Baiocchi, ed., Radicals in Power: The Workers’ Party and Experiments in Urban Democracy in Brazil (London and New York: Zed Books, 2003); Tarso Genro and Ubiratan de Souza, Orçamento Participativo: A Experiência de Porto Alegre [Participatory Budget- ing: The Experience of Porto Alegre] (São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1997); William R. Nylen, Participatory Democracy versus Elitist Democracy: Lessons from Brazil (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003).
6 Samuels, “From Socialism to Social Democracy: Party Organization and the Transformation of the Workers’ Party in Brazil,” Comparative Political Studies 37 (November 2004).
7 The organizational determinants of strategic flexibility are important to consider, but space con- straints preclude treatment of the issue here.
444	world politics
economic developments on the viability of the party’s program and electoral standing—a discussion that Lula’s painful 1994 defeat by Fer- nando Henrique Cardoso brought to a head—the present analysis tries to come to grips with the timing and sharpness of the party’s ideologi- cal turn toward the center.
Section I introduces the theoretical debates about party change that the present article assesses. It lays out the expectations of rational choice and historical institutionalism, against which the case of the pt will be assessed. Moreover, it demonstrates more generally how the two frameworks can be applied to understand both change and continuity within a single organization. The central debate turns on whether and why externally mobilized parties like the pt will remain ideological and policy seeking or will moderate and become vote maximizing. If rational choice institutionalism suggests that most parties eventually experience a strong pull toward vote maximization and that they tend to converge in a fairly uniform fashion around systemic incentives, histori- cal institutionalism predicts greater variability: even parties that undergo some strategic modification will continue to bear important traces of their past. Adaptation, when it occurs, may well be halting and uneven, perhaps even leaving a political party in awkward in-between positions.
Section II establishes the starting point by analyzing the pt’s dis- tinctiveness prior to the mid-1990s. It describes key ways in which the pt differed from its catchall counterparts and analyzes why a pol- icy-seeking rather than a vote-maximizing approach made sense at the time. Underlying the party’s radicalism was a belief that socialism was possible. pt leaders looked to Brazil’s large and diverse economy as an advantageous base for its construction. They hoped that the politi- cal fluidity that existed at the time would help them transform high levels of poverty and inequality among Brazilians into support for this project. The constraints posed by Brazil’s political institutions did not weigh on party leaders’ minds as much as they would with the subse- quent shift to vote maximization.
Section III investigates the motives for the pt to become less radical and more vote maximizing in the second half of the decade. In light of major changes in the economic landscape, together with the growing in- stitutional strength of the state and party system, pt leaders came to doubt the viability of their socialist program and reassessed their electoral stand- ing. Once the core leadership decided that far-reaching redistribution was outside the realm of reason, its outlook became more electoral. Setting its sights on winning the absolute majority of votes necessary to secure the presidency, the pt began to behave more like a catchall Brazilian party.
normalization of an anomaly	445
Section IV returns to the analytical frameworks raised earlier and assesses the pt’s overall profile accordingly: by 2002 the party had changed more along some dimensions than along others. Indeed, the party evolved through a process that preserved core features inherited from the past while assuming new ones more in sync with develop- ments in the broader political and economic environment. Moreover, there were certain distortions in the pt’s efforts at adaptation. While the pt responded to institutional incentives after deciding to abandon its transformative project and pursue vote maximization, it did not shed its ideological past altogether. Historical legacies informed the extent to which party leaders were willing or even able to adapt. In short, while the pt became more susceptible to institutional pressures, its radical roots shaped the precise manner in which it met these chal- lenges. Adaptation took place but with a petista twist.
Section V embeds the analysis of the pt in a comparative context. In its ideological moderation the pt resembles the left in Chile and Uruguay and not populist Hugo Chávez in Venezuela and Evo Morales in Bolivia, who ascended to the presidency with a radical discourse. The respective pressures felt by countries to undergo or sustain market reforms, together with state and party system institutionalization, helps account for these divergent groupings. The obvious advantages to Chile and Uruguay of global economic integration, coupled with the comparative strength of the state and party systems there, foreclosed extremist or populist op- tions. In Brazil support for the market and economic openness (despite a larger and more diverse economy than Chile or Uruguay) and a party system and state that have gained stability impose similar constraints to radical populism. By contrast, the rentier economies of Venezuela and Bolivia have given citizens and left-leaning governments alike a percep- tion of latitude to resist global economic trends. That Hugo Chávez and Evo Morales arose in party systems that had basically collapsed widened their room for maneuver. Section VI advances a conclusion.
i. political parties and their motivations
Do parties with highly ideological origins remain principled and policy seeking or do they undergo strategic adaptation and become vote max- imizing over time? Under what conditions do such parties shift their goals and behavior? How much does their past constrain decision mak- ing about the future? These are central questions in the literature on political party formation and change, to which historical institutional- ists and rational choice institutionalists give quite different answers.
446	world politics historical institutionalist perspectives
The idea most fundamental to the historical institutionalist perspective concerns the importance of the founding moment of institutions. Ar- ticulated originally by Weber, 8 this idea has been adopted, elaborated, and modified by a subsequent line of sociologists. Focusing on issues of internal organizational power, Panebianco maintains, “[T]he crucial political choices made by its founding fathers, the first struggles for orga- nizational control, and the way in which the organization was formed, will leave an indelible mark.”9 Emphasizing the lasting role played by a party’s original following, Lipset and Rokkan assert that even changes in electoral rules are unlikely to alter the nature of established par- ties. “[P]arties once established develop their own internal structure and build up long-term commitments among core supporters. . . . [O] nce [a party] has been established and entrenched, it will prove difficult to change its character simply through variations in the conditions of electoral aggregation.”10
Shefter’s notion of an “externally mobilized party” further exempli- fies the historical institutionalist perspective. In his definition, “Exter- nally mobilized parties are established by leaders who do not occupy positions of power in the prevailing regime and who seek to bludgeon their way into the political system by mobilizing and organizing a mass constituency.”11 Most often, they orient their energies toward long- term organization building rather than toward short-term vote maxi- mization. Because such parties are led by individuals with strong ideo- logical commitments, they will not turn readily into catchall parties willing to get ahead by blowing with the political winds. Instead, the origins of externally mobilized parties will shape their future orienta- tion and organization, imbuing them with an ideological policy-seeking cast.12 Reinforcing the propensity for continuity over change is the bu- reaucratic element of the mass organizations created through previous periods of mobilization, widely thought to produce inertia and limit the strategic flexibility of such parties.13
8 Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gessellschaft [Economy and Society], 5th ed. (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1976).
9 Angelo Panebianco, Political Parties: Organization and Power (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), xiii.
10 Seymour M. Lipset and Stein Rokkan, Party Systems and Voter Alignments: Cross-National Per- spectives (New York: Free Press, 1967), 30.
11 Martin Shefter, Political Parties and the State: The American Historical Experience (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 5.
12 Ibid., 33.
13 For an excellent summary of the literature, see Steven Levitsky, Transforming Labor-Based Par- ties in Latin America: Argentine Peronism in Comparative Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- sity Press, 2003), 13–15.
normalization of an anomaly	447
The pt’s origins conform well to Shefter’s conception of an exter- nally mobilized party. Formed in 1980 by a grassroots coalition of labor activists, Christian base communities, and leftist intellectuals, the pt struggled from outside the official political system against the military dictatorship of 1964–85.14 Growing out of a labor movement that chal- lenged Brazil’s system of corporatist regulations, the pt soon thereafter helped found a landless movement that eventually became the largest and best organized of its kind in Latin America; it also mobilized citi- zens in favor of direct presidential elections to usher in the country’s new democracy. Indeed, the pt is often described as the only Brazilian party to have truly formed through societal mobilization rather than through elite politics.15 Its organizational structure is that of a mass bureaucratic party.
While a historical institutionalist perspective would expect such an organization to face difficulty in adapting to new circumstances, it would make allowance for some change. Indeed, the very survival of an institution generally depends on being able to exercise some degree of flexibility and adaptability. Innovation may occur either in a punctu- ated fashion in response to exogenous shocks16 or in a more evolution- ary and bounded manner.17 Yet regardless of which specific model of change is envisioned, historical analyses stress institutional stickiness and path dependency more than do strategic frameworks. The empha- sis on continuity is greater. A party like the pt would be expected to maintain important traces of its former profile, with residues from the past impeding adaptation to a changing external environment offering new opportunities and challenges.
strategic frameworks
Rational actor frameworks regard politicians and their parties as un- equivocally strategic and therefore likely to adjust to the electoral and economic environments in which they operate. The best-known en- capsulation of this viewpoint is that “election is the goal of those par-
14 Keck (fn. 4); Meneguello (fn. 4).
15 Scott P. Mainwaring, Rethinking Party Systems in the Third Wave of Democratization: The Case of Brazil (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999), 100.
16 See Stephen D. Krasner, “Sovereignty: An Institutional Perspective,” Comparative Political Stud- ies 21 (April 1988).
17 Paul Pierson, “Big, Slow-Moving, and . . . Invisible: Macrosocial Processes in the Study of Comparative Politics,” in James Mahoney and Dietrich Rueschemeyer, eds., Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003); Eric Schickler, Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional Innovation and the Development of the U.S. Congress (Princ- eton: Princeton University Press, 2001); Kathleen Thelen, “How Institutions Evolve: Insights from Comparative Historical Analysis,” in Mahoney and Rueschemeyer; idem, How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
448	world politics
ties now out of power” and “parties formulate policies in order to win elections, rather than win elections in order to formulate policies.”18 In a similar vein, Duverger and Kirchheimer agree that most parties even- tually seek to capture as large a share of the electoral market as they can and are willing to dilute their ideological platforms for this purpose.19 The literature is rife with examples of political parties that underwent transformations in response to external pressures of various kinds.20
For rational choice institutionalism, the opportunities and con- straints presented by given institutional arrangements (for example, electoral rules, the system of government, degree of state centraliza- tion) shape the strategies and actions of political actors whose overrid- ing priority is to win elections.21 Institutions are seen to induce prefer- ences. The expectation is that vote-maximizing parties will converge in adopting dominant strategies that conform to institutional incentives.
What are the features that characterize the institutional context of competition in Brazil and what predictions about party strategies can be derived from them? Brazilian politicians face a landscape of high party-system fragmentation, low partisan identification, and strong orientations toward personalism and pork barrel. The open-list fea- ture of Brazil’s system of proportional representation for lower house elections, a feature that weakens parties as collective organizations, ag- gravates these characteristics.22 Moreover, the system encourages the pursuit of executive over legislative office.23 Carrying extensive prerog- atives, the presidency is the most coveted political position.24
18 Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (New York: Harper and Row, 1957), 11, 28.
19 Maurice Duverger, Political Parties: Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State (Lon- don: Metheun, 1954); Kirchheimer (fn. 1).
20 See, for example, Herbert Kitschelt, The Transformation of European Social Democracy (Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994); Levitsky (fn. 13); Adam Przeworski and John Sprague, Paper Stones: A History of Electoral Socialism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986).
21 Gary Cox, Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordination in the World’s Electoral Systems (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
22 See Barry Ames, The Deadlock of Democracy in Brazil: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in Com- parative Perspective (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2001); Mainwaring (fn. 15). Other factors thought to contribute to party fragmentation include runoff elections, low barriers for party registration, and easy access to radio and television advertising. These are discussed by Barbara Geddes and Artur Ri- beiro Neto, “Institutional Sources of Corruption in Brazil,” Third World Quarterly 13 (December 1992).
23 Octavio Amorim Neto, “O Poder Executivo, Centro De Gravidade Do Sistema Político Brasil- eiro,” in Lúcia Avelar and Antônio Octávio Cintra, eds., Sistema Político Brasileiro: uma Introdução [The Brazilian Political System: An Introduction] (Rio de Janeiro: Konrad Adenauer Foundation, 2005); David Samuels, Ambition, Federalism, and Legislative Politics in Brazil (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
24 Scott Mainwaring, “Multipartism, Robust Federalism, and Presidentialism in Brazil,” in Scott P. Mainwaring and Matthew Soberg Shugart, eds., Presidentialism and Democracy in Latin America (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997); Matthew Soberg Shugart and John M. Carey, Presi- dents and Assemblies: Constitutional Design and Electoral Dynamics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 155.
normalization of an anomaly	449
Winning Brazil’s presidency requires that a candidate capture a majority of votes in a direct popular election, at least in a runoff. In general, such a requirement puts at greatest disadvantage those candidates who are furthest from the political center.25 The special challenge facing presi- dential candidates in Brazil is to surmount such a high threshold in a system of such pronounced party fragmentation and fluidity. Given the low rates of partisan identification and the weak ideological roots of parties in society, presidential candidates have few constituencies on which they can consistently rely. Especially within this broader con- text, the majoritarian feature of presidential elections suggests a domi- nant strategy for parties whose foremost goal is vote seeking. Such par- ties will (1) adhere to watered-down mainstream messages rather than promote ideological programs; (2) pursue alliances across the political spectrum; (3) put forth candidates with widespread personal appeal; (4) closely track and conform to trends in public opinion; and (5) base political campaigns on the projection of slick images and distribution of material benefits rather than on substantive ideas and platforms, a strategy that requires ample financing. In short, faced with the insti- tutional constraints described above, vote-maximizing parties can be expected to moderate their policy positions and adopt other aspects of a catchall strategy.
How has this played out in Brazil? Is the pt’s evolution closer to the image portrayed by historical institutionalism or rational choice?
ii. policy seeking and difference how the pt used to Be distinctive
Resisting the pull of these institutional incentives, the pt until the mid- 1990s pursued a radical leftist program and concentrated on building a strong organization rather than on maximizing votes. Even the most pragmatic elements within the party—the Articulação faction linked to Lula and his fellow trade unionists—rejected adaptation to the in- centives of the political environment as the pt’s catchall competitors understood them. In fact, Lula cautioned repeatedly, “We must not
25 There is a clear trend in the region away from plurality and toward runoff systems, albeit with reduced thresholds in some instances. See Mark J. Payne, Daniel Zovatto, and Mercedes Mateo Díaz, Politics Matters: Democracy and Development in Latin America (Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank and the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, 2007), 23. Jorge Lanzaro argues that the establishment of a majority runoff in Uruguay in 1996 was intended to induce the radical left to moderate or impede it from coming to power if it did not. See Jorge Lanzaro,”La Reforma Electoral de 1996 en el Uruguay”(Manuscript, Instituto de Ciencia Política, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, April 2007).
450	world politics
let electoral concerns take over the party’s agenda.”26 He insisted that electoral losses were not necessarily political defeats so long as the pt managed to get its name out and promote its programs.
The pt developed a distinctive profile along two dimensions that anchored Brazilian parties and differentiated them from one another. The first dimension, ideological in nature, concerns parties’ positioning on the question of market-led versus state-led economic development. The second, organizational in character, concerns whether parties em- phasized programs and internal discipline/cohesion or patronage distri- bution and the development of personal bases of support. Central to the pt’s emergence as a leading opposition party was a unique identity that combined statist economics and party-oriented politics. (See Figure 1.)
the economic dimension
Beginning in the 1980s international trends coupled with Brazil’s poor economic performance and fiscal crisis prompted politicians to debate the country’s future economic orientation. The crux of this discussion hinged on whether the market or the state would be the primary agent of economic development and management. Market advocates favored privatization, deregulation, liberalization, and state shrinking. Their detractors opposed privatizing state enterprises and public services and rejected measures designed to make labor laws more “flexible” and to enhance fiscal efficiency in the social sectors.
The pt consistently projected a far-reaching statist orientation. It adopted prolabor, anti–foreign capital positions in the Constituent As- sembly (1987–88), called for socialism in Lula’s 1989 and 1994 presi- dential bids (even proposing a complete nationalization of the financial sector in 1989), fiercely opposed President Fernando Collor’s pursuit of market reforms (1990–92), and rejected many of the neoliberal reform proposals ultimately implemented under the first government of Presi- dent Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1994–98).
the political dimension
Key features of Brazilian politics also fueled public discussion by the late 1980s and early 1990s. Signs of opportunism among politicians from Brazil’s catchall parties were ongoing and rife. They included de- fying the directives of party leaders, outmaneuvering those within their own ranks, switching parties at will, and forging coalitions in line with shifting political calculations. The twin maladies of clientelism and
26 João Machado and Paulo Vannuchi, “Lula: Mãos À Obra,” Teoria e Debate 13 ( January/Febru- ary/March 1991), 6, my translation.
normalization of an anomaly	451 Economic Liberalism
Promarket
Statist
PFL (1989)
PPB	(1991)	PPB
PDT	PDT (2002)	(1989)
(2002) (2002)
(1991)
(1989)
PFL
PMDB
PSDB (2002)
PTB
PSDB (1989)
PT (2002)
(1994)
(1998)	PT (1989)
figure 1
Brazil’s political landscape (1989–2002)
corruption also drew public attention through numerous high-profile scandals. The media highlighted these practices and their deleterious effects on governability and citizen well-being, thereby giving politi- cians from more institutionalized parties—especially the pt—a perfect way to separate themselves from the crowd.
The pt’s classification as party oriented is rooted in the exceptionally high rates of cohesion, discipline, and loyalty displayed by its legislative delegation.27 The pt also observed a very restrictive alliance policy, join- ing exclusively with parties on the left in the 1989 and 1994 elections. This differentiated the pt not only from major parties on its right,
27 Frances Hagopian, “Economic Liberalization, Party Competition, and Political Representation: Brazil in Comparative (Latin American) Perspective” (Manuscript, 2005); Paulo Roberto Figueira Leal, O pt e o Dilema da Representação Política [The Workers’ Party and Dilemmas of Political Rep- resentation] (Rio de Janeiro: Editora da Fundação Getúlio Vargas, 2005); Scott P. Mainwaring and Aníbal Pérez Liñán, “Party Discipline in the Brazilian Constitutional Congress,” Legislative Studies Quarterly 22 (November 1997); Carlos Ranulfo Felix de Melo, “Partidos e Migração Partidária na Câ- mara dos Deputados,” Dados 43 (April–June 2000); Celso Roma, “Atores, Preferências E Instituição Na Câmara Dos Deputados” (Ph.D. diss., University of São Paulo, 2004); Amaury de Souza, “Politi- cal Reform in Brazil, Promises and Pitfalls,” Policy Papers on the Américas, XV, no. 3 (Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2004).
Political Programmatism Policy / Party Oriented	Clientelistic / Personalistic
452	world politics
such as the pfl (Liberal Front Party), but also from its main center-left competitor, the psdB (Party of Brazilian Social Democracy), and its leftist rival, the pdt (Democratic Labor Party). Efforts to combat clien- telism and corruption contributed further to the pt’s unique profile. While the party sought zealously to expose and hold guilty parties accountable in national corruption scandals, pt policies at the municipal level aimed to make governmental decision making more transparent to the public.28
understanding the pt’s distinctiveness
Why did party leaders initially follow a policy-seeking approach, man- ifested most visibly in the special niche of statist economics and party- oriented politics that they carved out and defended? Why did they ad- vocate raising public consciousness and promoting the party’s label and programs instead of conforming to preexisting public opinion, making strategic alliances with nonleft parties, and turning toward patronage? No doubt these were individuals with strong ideological commitments, motivated enough to have risked life and limb defying the military re- gime but a few years earlier. All indications are that most petistas be- lieved firmly in the developmental and redistributive task of the state and opposed vehemently the clientelistic and personalistic orientation of Brazilian politics.
Yet what made them think that radical change would be possible in Brazil, a new democracy that was dominated by the civilian heirs of the military regime and that was born precisely when socialism was falter- ing internationally?
a Belief in the viaBility of socialism
Party leaders did not immediately regard the fall of socialism in Eastern Europe as signaling the end of their transformative project. They were not altogether daunted by the international developments of the late 1980s in part because the pt’s socialist aspirations had never followed the Soviet model anyway. A focus on the many advantages Brazil en- joyed with respect to an inward-looking development strategy—a large population, diverse resource endowment, and a well-developed state sec- tor—helped sustain such hopes. Moreover, the exceedingly poor macro- economic performance of 1987 to 1993 and the precarious governability
28 Leonardo Avritzer and Zander Navarro, eds., A Inovação Democrática: O Orçamento Participa- tivo No Brasil [Democratic Innovation: Participatory Budgeting in Brazil] (São Paulo: Cortez, 2002); Gianpaulo Baiocchi, Militants and Citizens: The Politics of Participatory Democracy in Porto Alegre (Stan- ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2005); Brian Wampler, “Expanding Accountability through Participatory Institutions: Mayors, Citizens, and Budgeting in Three Brazilian Municipalities,” Latin American Politics and Society 46 (Summer 2004).
normalization of an anomaly	453 that accompanied it created an atmosphere of volatility that seemed to
leave the door open for a major reorientation of economic policy.29
a quest for political transformation
Party leaders also had faith in the intrinsic appeal that their redistrib- utive platform would have in a country of record socioeconomic in- equality. Their hope was to impart the pt’s message and outlook to the poor,30 who by virtue of sheer numbers exert a greater impact on elec- toral results than do their more economically privileged counterparts. While aware that the party’s core support base rested with organized interests, intellectuals, and progressive middle-class urbanites in the industrial states of the South and Southeast, the leadership hoped that the uncompromising advocacy of equity-enhancing structural reforms would eventually pry voters away from patronage-wielding politicians and help the party penetrate the poorer regions of the country.
The loose attachment of citizens to other parties, a sign of weak in- stitutionalization in the party system, might help them gather support for their radical program. Far less than half the electorate expressed a preference for any party in 1989. Among voters with a primary school education, that number was closer to 30 percent.31 Brazil’s dense civil society promised to facilitate the pt’s goal of collective empowerment.32 Party militants viewed their links to preexisting organizational networks as a way to reach large numbers of people. Groups whom the social movements of the 1960s and 1970s had mobilized, such as Christian base communities, trade unions, and urban neighborhood organizations, held particular potential in this regard. Party leaders hoped that such organized networks would give the pt a reliable support base.33
29 Much of the information in this paragraph was gleaned from an interview with Luiz Gushiken, former party president (1988–90) and close adviser to Lula until 2006. Author interview, Luiz Gu- shiken, Brasília, August 14, 2006.
30 Plínio de Arruda Sampaio, “Sucessão Presidencial—Depende Da Gente,” Teoria e Debate 6 (April/May/June 1989).
31 Yan de Souza Carreirão and Maria D’Alva G. Kinzo, “Partidos Políticos, Preferência Partidária E Decisão Eleitoral No Brasil (1989/2002),” Dados 47, no. 1 (2004), 141.
32 Brazilian society is considered relatively well organized, as discussed by Omar G. Encarnación, The Myth of Civil Society: Social Capital and Democratic Consolidation in Spain and Brazil (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2003). Rates of church affiliation are comparatively high. See Frances Hago- pian, “Latin American Catholicism in an Age of Religious and Political Pluralism: A Framework for Analysis,” Comparative Politics (forthcoming); Peter McDonough, Doh C. Shin, and José Alvaro Moisés, “Democratization and Participation: Comparing Spain, Brazil, and Korea,” Journal of Politics 60 (November 1998). Trade union membership has remained steadier than in other countries that have undergone market reform. See Kenneth M. Roberts, Changing Course: Party System Change in Latin America’s Neoliberal Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming). Neighborhood organizations abound in a cross-section of the country’s cities.
33 Many of the insights in this paragraph come from an interview with a long established pt mem- ber and close associate of Lula. Author interview with Paulo Vannuchi, Brasília, August 17, 2006.
454	world politics
Beyond the leadership’s belief in the possibility of social transfor- mation, spatial dynamics constrained the party’s room for maneuver. The solid presence and social democratic character of the psdB until the mid-1990s made it difficult for the pt to fashion itself success- fully in center-left terms. The occupation of the center-left by a party full of experienced high-profile politicians and reputable technocrats constituted additional rationale for the pt to stay further to the left. Paraphrasing one pt senator, “Competing against credible centrist op- ponents put us in a difficult situation. We preferred polarized races in which we faced an openly right-wing competitor.”34 From another per- spective, “There was more possibility for Fernando Henrique Cardoso (fhc) to attract potential followers of Lula than for Lula to grow into the electorate of fhc.”35
The pt leadership was obviously aware that garnering a majority of votes to win the presidency on a radical platform would be a tall order. Yet politics in Brazil was still quite fluid in the late 1980s and early 1990s, reinforcing the party’s “anything is possible” outlook. Party volatility and other signs of weak institutionalization abounded amidst a broader climate of social mobilization. Party strategists regarded Lu- la’s strong showing against Fernando Collor in the 1989 presidential contest as evidence that it was possible to capture executive power by promising Brazilian voters far-reaching change. In that runoff Lula se- cured 47 percent of all valid votes. Only subsequently did they attribute Lula’s performance to circumstances particular to that campaign, namely, the fact that Brazilian voters faced two polar alternatives and many who would not ordinarily have been attracted to Lula found themselves hard pressed to endorse his populist right-wing competitor who was a politi- cal heir of the military regime.36 Considering that Lula’s first-round vote share was only 17.2 percent, his core support was quite low.
pt leaders also took some heart in the party’s incremental growth in the Chamber of Deputies. The system of proportional representation in dis- tricts of high magnitude for seats in the lower house made a policy-seeking strategy minimally viable. Low thresholds for representation permitted the party to gain a foothold in national politics. The party’s legislative delega- tion advanced from 3.3 percent of all seats in 1986 to 7.0 percent in 1990, 9.6 percent in 1994, 11.3 percent in 1998, and 17.7 percent in 2002.37
34 Author interview with pt senator Ana Júlia Carepa, Brasília, August 14, 2003. 35 Jorge Almeida, Como Vota o Brasileiro [How Brazilians Vote] (São Paulo: Casa Amarela, 1996), 87. 36 Interview with Gushiken (fn. 29). 37 Compatible with this institutional arrangement is the fact that pt politicians with more radical
views are to the present day more likely to be found in the Chamber than in positions requiring an electoral majority (namely, the presidency, mayorships of cities with more than two hundred thousand registered voters, and senatorial and gubernatorial positions).
normalization of an anomaly	455
Notably, however, representatives came disproportionally from the populous states of Brazil’s developed Southeast and South. For all of these reasons, the pt maintained its profile of difference.
the Benefits of differentiation
What impact did the pt’s strategy of differentiation have on the elec- torate? At the very least, it helped make the pt a household name and gave Brazilians a sense of what the party stood for. A survey conducted in February 1994 shows that more people expressed a familiarity with Lula than with any other contemporary politician, including Fernando Henrique Cardoso.38 The same survey put forth a list of parties and for each party asked respondents to say whether they favored it, opposed it, or had no basis for an opinion. The pt elicited the clearest opinions (positive and negative) second only to the pmdB.
Polls conducted around the time of the 1989 and 1994 elections also suggest that the pt was building a committed core electoral following, a process no doubt enhanced by its distinctiveness. Surveys of specific groups, such as Catholics linked to Christian base communities,39 union affiliates (especially those from the labor confederation most closely associated with the pt),40 and members of the landless rural workers’ movement41 reveal overwhelming support for Lula in these years. A poll conducted just before the 1994 presidential election shows that 88 percent of those expressing a partisan preference for the pt intended to vote for Lula. That they supported Lula strongly over Cardoso even in an election that the latter was able to sweep due to the wildly successful stabilization plan (Plano Real) he had devised as finance minister testi- fies powerfully to their loyalty.It is highly doubtful that a more watered down pt could have consolidated such a following.
Moreover, the pt’s emphasis on social equity resonated among peo- ple who were not necessarily petistas but who reported voting for the party in 1989 and 1994. In one survey, respondents who expressed a vote intention for the pt in the 1989 presidential election ranked as their highest motivation Lula’s commitment to social goals, such as bettering the lives of workers and the poor.42 A similar pattern shows
38 iBope poll, no. 339, February 1994.
39 Catholics in organized base communities showed nearly universal support for Lula in the 1994 presidential election. Unorganized Catholics showed an average propensity to vote for Lula in that election. See Antônio Flávio Pierucci and Reginaldo Prandi, “Religões E Voto: A Eleição Presidencial De 1994,” Opinião Pública 3 (May 1995).
40 datafolha poll, no. 00730, August 1997. 41 datafolha poll, no. 00806, February 1997. 42 Yan de Souza Carreirão, A Decisão do Voto nas Eleições Presidencias Brasileiras [Vote Choice in Bra-
zilian Presidential Elections] (Florianópolis/Rio de Janeiro: Editora da ufsc/Editora fgv, 2002), 89.
456	world politics
up for the 1994 election. Lula voters regarded issues like hunger and unemployment as more problematic than did supporters of other can- didates43 and noted “Lula’s concern for socioeconomic problems” as one of the principal reasons for selecting him.44
From these perspectives there was indeed a logic to difference. The pt was making steady albeit slow electoral progress by uniting behind clear alternative positions on major economic and political cleavages, building strong networks, and restricting its alliances to the left. By forgoing a more meteoric political ascendance, the party managed to retain a core identity and to avoid being sucked into the corrupting whirlpool of Brazilian politics. Some observers even went so far as to argue that the pt was inducing other parties to become more program- matic, especially with regard to the state/market dimension.45
iii.the shift to vote maximization and normalization
Yet in the mid-1990s the party began to change course. Its emphasis shifted from organization building and policy seeking to vote maxi- mization. José Genoino, future party president (2002–5), encapsulated the leadership’s new outlook in his statement, “It’s now time to win, not just to stake out our ground.”46 As part of this new priority on winning elections, especially presidential contests, the pt went to great lengths to moderate its platform and soften its public image.47 It also began to adopt other characteristics and strategies of catchall parties.
Why did Lula’s faction, moderate within the pt but decidedly on the left of the political spectrum, undertake such a move to the center in the mid-1990s? The Articulação had led the party at various times before, including in the late 1980s, but had charted quite a radical course then.
factors motivating change
A systematic set of factors motivated the pt to shift directions, pursue vote maximization, and become more like other Brazilian parties in the second half of the 1990s. The timing and deliberate nature of the pt’s ideological moderation and adoption of other catchall behaviors con-
43 Almeida (fn. 35), 192–93. 44 Carreirão (fn. 42), 130. 45 Guillermo Rosas and Elizabeth Zechmeister, “Ideological Dimensions and Left-Right Seman-
tics in Latin America” (Paper presented at the Latin American Studies Association Congress, Miami, Fla., March 16–18, 2000).
46 ”Em busca do bilionário liberal,” Veja on-line, February 27, 2002.
47 Oswaldo E. do Amaral, A Estrela não é Mais Vermelha: as Mudanças do Programa Petista nos Anos 90 [The Star Is No Longer Red: Programmatic Changes in the Workers’ Party in the 1990s] (São Paulo: Editora Garçoni, 2003).
normalization of an anomaly	457
forms to a strategic understanding of change. It was specific contextual and historical factors that changed the party’s preferences and hence shifted its behavior. A serious reassessment occurred in the wake of Lula’s loss to Cardoso in the 1994 presidential election. If party lead- ers had previously interpreted key economic and political factors as fa- vorable to a socialist transformation of society, by the mid-1990s they recognized and accepted the constraints imposed by the international political economy and by Brazilian politics itself. With the decision to jettison their project for far-reaching change and abide by the in- stitutional parameters of competition for election to the presidency and other majoritarian offices, the party shifted along the economic and political dimensions that defined Brazil’s competitive landscape. Change on the ideological dimension (that is, a programmatic shift to the center) and on the organizational dimension (for example, a shift from mass/participatory structures to some combination of personal- ism, patronage, and professionalism) went hand in hand.
economic limitations to socialist transformation
If the pt had not advanced further when socialism was still seen as a viable alternative and significant fluidity/volatility existed in the elec- toral system, party leaders were forced to admit even greater challenges by the second half of the 1990s. Brazil’s adoption of market reform was a crucial external factor that motivated the party to change course. The party’s radical program, which included proposals to nationalize leading industries and launch a major land reform, had placed the pt on the far left tail of the political spectrum and distribution of voter preferences. Yet by the mid-1990s, the Articulação leadership observed that important segments of the citizenry favored key aspects of market reform, rendering a far left position untenable electorally.
Surveys showed public opinion to be especially favorable toward free trade. Over two-thirds of Brazilians persistently supported free trade in the fifteen-year period following the initiation of Collor’s trade lib- eralization. That Brazil was extremely closed to imports of consumer goods throughout the isi era, a situation widely understood to elevate prices and lower quality, shaped public opinion positively toward re- versing it.48 Similarly, a large majority favored foreign investment. Polls suggested that most Brazilians associated foreign direct investment with visible consumer benefits and comparatively well paying jobs. Moreover, they cited foreign firms as better managed than their do-
48 Andy Baker, Consuming the Washington Consensus: Mass Responses to the Market in Latin America (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming).
458	world politics
mestic counterparts.49 As for privatization, support reached higher lev- els in Brazil than in many other Latin American countries, although it was always lower than for free trade and foreign investment. In the mid- 1990s, a majority of the population supported sell-offs in sectors deemed nonessential to citizens’ basic welfare or to national sovereignty.50
Cementing the pt’s decision to conform to (rather than try to change) public opinion on market reform was the recognition that ac- tually reversing the liberalizations begun by Fernando Collor and fur- thered by Fernando Henrique Cardoso would be too controversial. The reduction of inflation and the overall stabilization of the economy under Cardoso,51 accompanied by an institutional strengthening of the state,52 set further limits on a strategy aimed at radical change. Improve- ments in state performance made it less and less credible for the pt to pres- ent itself as a radical alternative to an unacceptable situation. The decisive first-round reelection that Cardoso won in 1998 reinforced this conclusion. Thus, as one member of Lula’s inner circle emphasized, it was not abstract deliberations about the demise of international socialism that convinced party leaders to shift course. Instead, the domestic effects of stabilization and global economic restructuring, which were recognized and digested only with time, led pragmatic leaders to set aside the pt’s historic project and replace social transformation with the pursuit of power.53
political limitations to radical transformation
Although a strategy of differentiation had helped the pt consoli- date a core following, there were downsides to this course, especially if the party wanted to win the presidency in the foreseeable future. Party leaders were forced to recognize that consciousness raising and organization building would be much slower processes than they had
49 Ibid.; Celso Lafer and Fernando Kasinski Lottenberg, “Nacionalismo E Reestructuração Da Economia,” in Bolívar Lamounier, ed., Ouvindo o Brasil: uma Análise da Opinião Pública Brasileira Hoje [Listening to Brazil: An Analysis of Contemporary Brazilian Public Opinion] (São Paulo: Editora Sumaré, 1992), 72–73; Maílson da Nóbrega, “Presença do Estado na Economia e na Sociedade,” also in Lamounier, 33–34.
50 Baker (fn. 48).
51 For a discussion of improvements in the Brazilian economy, especially the sustained control of inflation and its resonance with the Brazilian public, see Leslie Elliott Armijo, Philippe Faucher, and Magdalena Dembinska, “Compared to What? Assessing Brazil’s Political Institutions,” Comparative Political Studies 39 (August 2006).
52 Many indicators suggested growing state institutionalization. Key among them was lower min- isterial turnover. Notably, whereas Brazil had thirteen finance ministers between 1985 and 1994, Car- doso had the same minister of finance (Pedro Malan) during his entire tenure in office (1995–2002). Also, electoral volatility diminished considerably over the 1990s and political competition became more structured. See Francisco Panizza, “Is Brazil Becoming a Boring Country?” Bulletin of Latin American Research 19 (October 2000), 515.
53 Interview with Gushiken (fn. 29).
normalization of an anomaly	459
imagined. Poverty and inequality, however egregious, did not translate readily into votes for the party. In fact, the poorest and least educated sectors of society voted decisively against Lula and for the conserva- tive populist Fernando Collor in 1989.54 And in 1994 the evaporation of Lula’s early lead over Fernando Henrique Cardoso with the success of the inflation-reducing Plano Real suggested that the pt’s promises to combat deep structural causes of poverty and inequality (for exam- ple, unequal land distribution) were much less attractive to poor voters than immediate albeit limited improvements.55 These and other elec- toral losses fueled discussions of the vote ceiling entailed in the party’s radicalism.56 In short, the pragmatic leadership represented by the Ar- ticulação faction concluded that there were firm limits to a party-based strategy of grassroots mobilization aimed at progressive macrosocietal change.
In addition to the powerful moderating pull exerted by a state and party system that was becoming increasingly institutionalized, the per- ception of new opportunities presented by the spatial landscape re- inforced the rationale for a decisive move toward the center. By the mid-1990s the party’s main competitor at the national level, the psdB, had moved toward the right.57 Its advocacy of market reform and the alliance it struck with the conservative pfl in 1994 marked the start of this rightward drift, which created a significant opening in the cen- ter-left. Governing Brazil for the next eight years would reinforce the psdB’s moderation and adoption of clientelistic tactics. Since the pt could consider secure its hold over the far left, the newly available space in the center-left presented itself as an invitation with the pt’s name on it. Together with the recognized limitations of a far left position, spa- tial dynamics and the possibility of success that these opened up lured the pt onto a more mainstream course. This would in turn render the pt much more susceptible to the institutional pressures and incentives for building electoral support in Brazil.
The requirements of winning presidential office played a central role in debates that shaped the pt’s future, especially after Lula’s 1994 de- feat and as the 2002 election drew closer. Party moderates referred to
54 André Singer, “Collor Na Periferia: A Volta Por Cima Do Populismo?” in Bolívar Lamounier, ed., De Geisel a Collor: O Balanço da Transição [From Geisel to Collor: Assessing the Transition] (São Paulo: Sumaré, 1990).
55 Rachel Meneguello, “Electoral Behavior in Brazil: The 1994 Presidential Elections,” Interna- tional Social Science Journal 146 (December 1995).
56 Almeida (fn. 35), 44.
57 Timothy J. Power, “Brazilian Politicians and Neoliberalism: Mapping Support for the Cardoso Reforms, 1995–1997,” Journal of Inter-American Studies and World Affairs 40 (Winter 1998).
460	world politics
the difference between Brazil and Chile, where a mere plurality of 36.9 percent of the popular vote was sufficient to elect Salvador Allende on a socialist platform in 1970. Lula would need to capture a majority of all voters. The weakness of Brazilian parties had rendered the electorate fragmented and not very ideological. Most voters in the higher income and education brackets did not lean strongly to the left. And those at the lower ends—who by virtue of compulsory voting would turn out in numbers roughly proportional to their large population size—appeared even less open to the pt’s partisan project and more concerned with ac- quiring concrete material benefits sooner rather than later. Also, since more Brazilians appeared sympathetic to the figure of Lula than to the party organization, strategists concluded that more attention should be placed on cultivating his personal image.58
In this light, moderate leaders worked strenuously to convince their radical counterparts to be more realistic about the given parameters of competition. After Lula’s 1994 defeat they emphasized that it was erroneous to think his strong 1989 showing (on a radical platform) could be repeated. In retrospect, they saw that it was the special cir- cumstances of that campaign—a highly polarized contest between a populist right-wing candidate associated with the military regime and a candidate who represented a break with that style and era—that yielded such a positive result. A less polarized contest involving a cred- ible centrist opponent from an institutionalized party not linked to the military brought a decisive first-round loss in 1994.
Also, in most local and regional contests, it was those pt politicians with moderate profiles who tended to get elected. This was true even when it came to the best opportunity possible for the election of radicals: contests decided by proportional representation to fill lower-house seats from the industrial states of the South and Southeast. Pragmatists argued that if radicalism hurt the party even in this context, it was especially un- realistic to expect the pt to prevail in majoritarian races involving higher concentrations of conservative voters. In fact, the party did quite poorly under such circumstances. For example, of the nineteen pt candidates who competed in the 1994 gubernatorial races, only nine managed to win more than 10 percent of all valid votes and only three (all from the party’s moderate wing) made it to the second round.59
58 This assessment was made by comparing Lula’s first-round vote shares to that of the party in simultaneous races. Public opinion research confirms the average Brazilian to be more drawn to Lula than to the pt. See David Samuels, “Sources of Mass Partisanship in Brazil,” Latin American Politics and Society 48 (Summer 2006).
59 Interviews with two key actors from opposing sides of the moderate/radical divide confirmed the use of such arguments at these debates. Author interview with José Genoino, several-time national
normalization of an anomaly	461
The evidence pointed to an unavoidable conclusion. The pt needed to be more attuned to the preferences of the electorate and to attract more support from demographic groups that had systematically leaned toward more conservative options: residents of small towns and rural areas, people from Brazil’s Northeast, North, and Center-West re- gions, the least educated and poorest segments of the population, the elderly, and women. Efforts to secure their backing seemed to require a centrist ideological shift as well as measures that would modify the party in organizational terms, deemphasizing programs and highlight- ing personality (that is, the figure of Lula) and even providing concrete immediate material benefits.60
iv. responding to external imperatives and internal exigencies: strategic adaptation and path dependence
A shift toward vote maximization compelled the leadership to nego- tiate changes in the pt’s strategy in line with the constraints and in- ducements discussed above.61 Although Lula and his closest allies in the party underwent a major rethinking in the mid-1990s, they did not institute transformations all at once. Instead, change followed a process of “layering.”62 Innovation was negotiated, with many altera- tions secured via addition, that is, by placing new elements on top of established ones. In the end, the pt did reorient markedly on measures that concerned its relations with the public, namely, those most directly and obviously linked to expanding its vote share (for example, mov- ing to the center programmatically, making opportunistic alliances, marketing the image of Lula). Yet facing internal resistance from left factions, pragmatic leaders who pursued adaptation could not always bring the party sufficiently in line with systemic incentives. Some of their efforts—for example, their strategies to raise campaign funds, as
deputy and party president (2002–5), São Paulo, August 7, 2006; and author interview with Valter Pomar, São Paulo, August 3, 2006. Genoino was an outspoken advocate of electoral pragmatism. Party militant Valter Pomar led the resistance to this trend. See also “Baixos Teores de Radicalismo,” Istoé (November 2, 1994), 30–31.
60 José Genoino (fn. 59) and Paulo Vannuchi (fn. 33) stressed in author interviews the difficulty of gaining internal acceptance of the view that the pt should reorient its strategy around the premise that most poor people cared less about the pt’s ideological vision and more about the personal appeal of Lula and any immediate benefits they could receive from him as president. Their instincts received strong confirmation in the groundswell of support that Lula received in his 2006 bid for reelection from recipients of the Bolsa Família, a minimal income transfer program provided to the poorest Bra- zilians.
61 Jorge Almeida, “Esquerda, Pesquisas e Marketing Politico,” Teoria e Debate 34 (March/April/ May 1997); Luiz Dulci, “Por Uma Nova Estratégia,” Teoria e Debate 34 (March/April/May 1997).
62 Schickler (fn. 17); Thelen (fn. 17, 2003).
462	world politics
discussed below—reflected important continuities with the past. The pt also retained its uniqueness with respect to many internal matters (for example, the tight scrutiny of those aspiring to run for office un- der the pt label, the high discipline and loyalty expected of its legisla- tors, the requirement that officeholders make sizable donations to the party). Many of these bore no immediate relationship to the party’s electoral prospects. Thus, while the pursuit of votes did cause the pt to become more catchall in nature, its transformation was incomplete. The party’s efforts to adapt to external pressures bears out a strategic understanding of politics. Some of the gaps in its adaptation reflect the influence of historical legacies. This mixed picture calls for integrating insights from rational choice institutionalism with ideas from historical institutionalism.
signs of adaptation and normalization
In a major programmatic shift, the party publicly acknowledged the benefits of Brazil conforming to international market trends. This first occurred with Lula’s third run for the presidency in 1998. The trend was accentuated in a striking fashion in the 2002 campaign. Beyond omitting the word “socialism” from the party’s electoral program, a no- table sign of moderation was the promise to adhere to Brazil’s existing agreements with the imf, widely seen as the ultimate enforcer of global capitalism. Retaining some “product differentiation,” the party contin- ued to underscore its commitment to poverty reduction and equity en- hancement, but it did this by advocating policies well within the exist- ing system, such as job creation, substantial increases in the minimum wage, and a minimum income provision. These and related measures were less ideologically charged and would deliver tangible immediate gains to less privileged segments of the electorate. No doubt the party’s ideological moderation brought it closer to the center of the distribu- tion of popular preferences.
Similarly, the leadership began to consider alliance partners that it would have rejected out of hand earlier, first on the subnational level and later in major national races.63 The unavailability of the psdB—a natural partner from an ideological standpoint yet the pt’s archrival po- litically—made coalition building particularly difficult. Lula’s insistent efforts to convince militants of the mathematical odds against winning the presidency without loosening the party’s restrictive alliance policy paved the way for a stark concession to pragmatism: in 2002 the pt
63 See “ pt reelege José Dirceu e abre para alianças,” Gazeta Mercantil, September 1, 1997, A–8; and “Partido começa a discutir alianças,” Jornal do Brasil, September 13, 1999, 2–A.
normalization of an anomaly	463
allied with the small right-wing Liberal Party (pl). Joining with the pl, led by evangelical pastors and affluent businessmen, was thought to be opportune for various reasons. Evangelicals, a group that voted against the pt historically, constitute a sizable share of Brazil’s popu- lation.64 The pl’s stronghold, the state of Minas Gerais, contains the second largest number of votes in the country.65 Moreover, the party’s president, industrialist José Alencar, enjoyed strong connections to the business community. The calculation was that he could soften business resistance to the prospect of a pt presidency by becoming Lula’s vice presidential running mate.66 With similar calculations in mind, the pt sought support from a large faction of the pmdB (Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement), arguably the most opportunistic of Brazilian parties. Thus, the pt broadened its external contacts by forging alli- ances outside the left. Nevertheless, as discussed below, it continued to maintain tight norms of entry into the party itself.
Another standard practice the pt adopted was to engage profes- sional consultants and publicists who would follow public opinion polls and help the party adjust to their findings. In a departure from the pre- vious eschewing of such practices in favor of building support for the substance of the pt’s ideals and programs, party strategists had come to advocate taking account of voters’ views, especially regarding the party itself. In this connection, they hired an analyst known to be sym- pathetic to the pt away from one of Brazil’s major commercial poll- ing firms. That individual’s initial charge was to help soften resistance within the party to the very idea of tracking and conforming to public opinion.67 Moreover, a survey research unit was created within a think tank of the party, the Fundação Perseu Abramo. Notably, although the adoption of opinion polling meant that the pt tried to figure out what the public actually wanted by listening from the “bottom-up,” activists could still try to convince voters from the “top-down” to adopt the the party’s values.
Marketing the personal appeal of Lula constituted a further change. It reflected a growing acceptance of media images as an important ba- sis of voters’ judgments in a system where they tend to lack strong ideological moorings. It was also a concession to the popularity of Lula
64 At least 15 percent of all Brazilian voters identify as evangelicals. Evangelical Protestantism is expanding rapidly among the working class.
65 The perceived importance of Minas Gerais was one reason the pt also cultivated the support of pmdB governor, Itamar Franco. “PT não vence sem Itamar, afirma Dirceu,” Folha de São Paulo, May 20, 2000, A–6.
66 “Em busca do bilionário liberal,” Veja on-line, February 27, 2002. 67 Author interview with Gustavo Venturi, São Paulo, August 9, 2006.
464	world politics
relative to his party.68 By 2002 Lula had hired Brazil’s best-known and most expensive publicist to run his campaign. Duda Mendonça, who generally advised candidates on the political right, went to work cast- ing Lula in a more “presidential” style and formulating catchy yet un- objectionable slogans like “Lula, Paz e Amor” (“Lula: Peace and Love”) and “O pt: para um Brasil Decente” (“The Workers’ Party: for a De- cent Brazil”).
The electoral benefits of the party’s adaptation are clear. Compari- sons of key variables across the various presidential races in which Lula was a candidate before assuming the presidency in 2002 are telling in this regard. Falling rejection rates reflect the evolving image of the party and its leader in a less sectarian direction. Whereas the number regis- tering an active aversion to Lula was judged to be as high as 40 percent of the electorate in 1989,69 this rate decreased to roughly 32 percent in 1994,70 fell further to approximately 27 percent in 1998,71 and was estimated at somewhere between 10 and 16 percent in 2002.72 Other survey responses also reflect perceptions of diminished sectarianism. For example, a 1994 poll asked whether respondents thought Lula, if elected president, would confer with a broad range of societal sectors (including the business community) or would confine his consulta- tions to the party. In 1994 nearly 40 percent of all respondents thought he would not consult widely when making decisions.73 By contrast, in 2002 only 14.8 percent of respondents reported thinking that way.74
The pt ‘s more assimilated profile also widened the range of voters to whom the party appealed, readily discernible by comparing polls that use the same demographic categories across elections. Whereas Lula’s early following featured an overrepresentation of people with high lev- els of education and middle-class incomes, over time his support base came to include more and more people from the lowest education and income brackets. While he suffered initially from a deficit of support among older Brazilians, by 1998 and 2002 he had made significant headway with that group. Similarly, whereas polls from 1989, 1994, and even 1998 show a 9–10 percentage point preference for Lula by males, he closed the gender gap in 2002. Notably, he also extended his support over a larger portion of the ideological spectrum, with the ex-
68 Almeida (fn. 61), 12–15. 69 iBope poll, no. 00198, October 1989. 70 iBope poll, no. 00339, February1994. 71 iBope poll, no. 01259, September 1998. 72 datapoll, February 2002; datafolha, September 2002. 73 Almeida (fn. 35), 215. 74 iBope poll, no. 1811, November 2002, question 28.
normalization of an anomaly	465
ception of people who classified themselves as being on the far right.75 Moreover, the regional base of support for Lula evened out strikingly over time, as reflected below in Table 1. In 1989 pt followers were con- centrated in the South and Southeast, Brazil’s wealthier and more in- dustrialized regions. By 2002 the party was able to bring into its camp a majority of voters from the less developed North and Northeast, along with the Center-West. In short, if the aim of pt strategists was to pick up more middle-of-the-road voters, they were successful.
At the same time many of the votes cast for Lula in 2002 bore some link to the pt’s historic profile. Election and survey results suggest that the pt had evolved to the point of striking that crucial but difficult bal- ance between assimilating to the political environment and retaining an alternative identity, a challenge more generally for former ideological parties seeking to broaden their support base.76 As encapsulated well by Otto Kirchheimer: “There is need for enough brand differentiation to make the article plainly recognizable, but the degree of differentiation must never be so great as to make the potential customer fear he will be out on a limb.”77 In short, while adaptation helped expand its vote share, the pt continued to benefit from the broad contours of the po- litical and economic profile it had established in earlier years.
partial adaptation: caught Between the system and the party’s past
Despite notable changes, path dependency was ever apparent. An im- portant example of the party’s incomplete transformation concerns how it sought to address financial shortfalls. The pt had always struggled in a system where political campaigns, financed disproportionately from corporate contributions, are among the most expensive in the world. Legal allowances for businesses to contribute directly to candidates and at exceedingly high rates (up to 2 percent of their gross yearly income) favor conservative political elites with ties to the private sector. Al- though candidates receive free television and radio time (in proportion to their party’s representation in the lower house of Congress), they incur large expenses for the production of these advertisements, for ad-
75 Estudo Eleitoral Brasileiro, Centro de Estudos de Opinião Pública (cesop) (Campinas: Uni- versity of Campinas, 2002).
76 Space constraints preclude a presentation of evidence to this effect. A binomial logit analysis suggests that anticlientelistic sentiments and reservations about some aspects of market reform were important predictors of voting for Lula in the first and second rounds of the 2002 presidential contest. See Wendy Hunter, “Growth and Transformation of the Workers’ Party in Brazil, 1989–2002,” Work- ing Paper no. 326 (The Helen Kellogg Institute of International Studies, University of Notre Dame, August 2006), 20–21.
77 Kirchheimer (fn. 1), 192.
466	world politics
taBle 1 regional Breakdown of second-round presidential election results (1989 versus 2002)
North Northeast Southeast South Center West
Brazil total
Collor vs. Lula (1989)
70.5	29.5 55.7	44.3 50.5	49.5 48.3	51.7 63.2	36.8
53.0	47.0
Lula vs. Serra (2002)
58.2	41.8 61.5	38.5 63.0	37.0 58.8	41.2 57.3	42.7
61.3	38.7
Source: Banco de Dados Eleitorais do Brasil (1982–2004), organized by Jairo Nicolau, http:// jaironicolau.iuperj.br.
ditional promotional materials like flyers and posters and for food and drinks and other handouts at events designed to drum up support.78
Corporate support is thought to be especially decisive in presidential campaigns. Monetary restrictions had hampered the effectiveness of Lula’s previous campaigns in crucial ways, such as limiting his ability to travel and even to pay campaign workers. Yet the shift toward vote maximization turned the pt’s limited resources into an even greater obstacle than when party building was the overriding priority and mo- bilizational strategies rather than catchall tactics were relied upon. Al- though the pt’s image and aspirations had shifted by the second half of the 1990s, its financial standing continued to reflect a more radical past and posed an obstacle to its new ambitions.
Compared with other leading parties, the pt received less money from donations overall and a far smaller percentage of it came from corporations.79 Its more mainstream counterparts, especially those in government, enjoyed access to legal campaign finance through their ties to the private sector. On the supply side, large businesses were under- standably reluctant to finance a party that had for most of its existence called for significant economic redistribution. On the demand side, leading members of the pt’s left wing actively rejected the Lula fac- tion’s desire to cultivate the business class. Fearing that business inter- ests could co-opt and pervert the party’s decisions over major economic issues and orientations, they even launched a campaign to prevent pt
78 David Samuels, “Money, Elections, and Democracy in Brazil,” Latin American Politics and Soci- ety 43 (Summer 2001).
79 Whereas Cardoso’s declared contributions in the 1994 campaign were $41,366,843, Lula’s were $1,741,401. The numbers for 1998 were $37,088,337 and $1,933,129, respectively; Samuels (fn. 78), 31. In 1994 pt candidates (for various offices) each raised only about 10 percent of the amount from business that candidates from nonleftist parties raised. They did only slightly better in 1998 (p. 39).
normalization of an anomaly	467
mayors and governors from accepting legal donations from major com- panies. They tried also to force two pt governors to return such dona- tions they had received from construction firms in their states.80
To make up for these shortfalls, the party developed a centrally or- ganized fund-raising network with smaller businesses in cities where it governed. pt mayors extracted kickbacks from private and public firms seeking municipal contracts (most prominently in garbage collection and transportation) and then diverted these forced contributions to a secret campaign slush fund, the caixa dois(or “second till”). The party also engaged in shady deals with local bingo and lottery operations. Key actors within the pt have since underscored the special constraints the party faced and how it tried to overcome them through such ex- changes. The brother of a former pt mayor murdered in connection with a caixa dois deal gone awry (Celso Daniel of Santo André) testi- fied that his brother had regarded the scheme as a “necessary evil, the pt being denied the donations from big business available to its politi- cal opponents.”81
The conventional interpretation that pt corruption signals the par- ty’s complete sellout and its convergence with other parties fails to ap- preciate the distinctiveness of these activities. Path dependency, a key notion within historical institutionalism, shaped the pt’s reliance on such tawdry operations as alternatives to typical (and mostly legal) cor- porate contributions. The highly centralized organization of the caixa dois network run by the pt bears the mark of the party and its history. Although other parties have engaged in such off-the-books schemes in municipalities, they have generally done so in a decentralized fashion. Isolated groups, not the party per se, have been implicated. Another important and distinguishing characteristic of pt malfeasance is that virtually all of those involved seem to have engaged in misconduct for the sake of the party and its growth rather than for their own personal enrichment. In short, while initial appearances might suggest that the pt became just like any catchall Brazilian party after the mid-1990s, important details suggest otherwise. The pt’s financing scheme (and subsequent scandal) suggests that the party found itself caught be- tween the incentives of Brazil’s political system and its own historical commitments. It wanted to compete in the mainstream political game but was not entirely willing or able to play by its rules. This contradic-
80 Vannuchi (fn. 33) confirmed the left-wing’s reservations about the party developing closer rela- tions with big business.
81 “How a Murder Is Reviving Brazil’s Furor over Corruption,” Financial Times, March 28, 2006.
468	world politics tion ultimately and all too ironically took a toll on the party’s image as
the standard bearer of ethics in politics.
remaining distinctiveness
On several core organizational characteristics, the pt remained quite distinctive even after moderating ideologically and instituting other changes in the period leading up to Lula’s 2002 presidential victory. Reflecting the historical institutionalist perspective that behavior is bounded by norms and practices embedded in the past, the pt con- tinued to have the highest rates of cohesion, discipline, and loyalty of any political party in the system. It scrutinized individuals rigorously before allowing them to run under the pt label and held them to strict standards of contact if and when they assumed office. These features are part of a legacy of democratic centralism. pt legislators were judged to have the highest levels of agreement with one another over a host of issues.82 The rate at which they voted together and in line with the leadership’s directives was without parallel.83 Migration toward other parties was almost unheard of. And when asked to rank order their commitments, it was deputies from the pt who expressed the great- est willingness to support the party program and label over their own interests and those of the districts they represented.84 In short, even though the leadership made changes with an eye toward boosting the organization’s vote share, as individuals pt politicians did not act with the blatant self-interest that characterizes many of their counterparts in other Brazilian parties.
Thus, even though the party became more normalized over time, its adaptation was uneven. The pt moved closer to the traditional Brazil- ian pattern on some dimensions than on others. The ways in which it conformed the most were predictable from a desire to win elections, the presidential election in particular, especially after structural economic changes had rendered unsustainable the party’s historic project of soci- etal transformation. Pressures to change the internal norms and work- ings of the party were less immediate and obvious, rendering the latter more likely to endure. The conclusion returns to the issue of the party’s uneven adaptation, paying central attention to the analytical purchase provided by strategic and historical institutionalist frameworks.
82 Roma (fn. 27). 83 Souza (fn. 27). 84 Hagopian (fn. 27); Leal (fn. 27).
normalization of an anomaly	469 v. the pt in regional perspective: comparative evidence
How representative is the pt’s moderation of left parties and move- ments in Latin America in general? Has the left in other countries been subject to the same forces that pulled the pt into a pattern of cen- tripetal competition? Why has political moderation taken hold among the left in Chile and Uruguay, whereas Hugo Chávez in Venezuela and Evo Morales in Bolivia were able to win majorities with a highly radi- cal discourse?
Cases of leftist moderation (namely, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay) share two important features that distinguish them from instances of radical- ism (Venezuela and Bolivia): the perception among citizens and poli- cymakers of stricter constraints emanating from global capitalism and domestic neoliberalism, and a state and party system with a medium to high degree of institutional strength. Contrasting conditions prevail where the left is more radical. Countries with diversified export-depen- dent economies foster leaders who promote cautious economic man- agement, pragmatic institutional reforms, and more open trade. States with solid records of governance and parties with relatively stable an- chors in society leave little possibility for the successful rise of political outsiders promising sweeping change. The convergence of these eco- nomic and political factors set tight limits on the left’s willingness and ability to pursue a radical strategy.
Economies subject to the discipline of global markets, coupled with well-functioning states and institutionalized party systems, have greatly restricted the left’s room for maneuver in contemporary Chile and Uruguay, as in Brazil. Models of institutional strength, they stand out in the region for their low levels of ministerial turnover, corruption, and electoral volatility.85 Widespread approval exists for the market- oriented goals of productivity, efficiency, competitiveness, and fiscal discipline. Chile’s demonstrated ability to sustain singularly impres- sive growth rates and greatly reduce poverty has helped consolidate the neoliberal model. Such signs of good governance and smooth func- tioning make it hard for the radical left to make headway. Thus, Chile’s radical left, the Communist Party, is totally marginalized.
Although the state and party system in Brazil do not rise to the lev- els of institutionalization that exist in Chile and Uruguay, the last de- cade has seen a strengthening of both. Brazil is closer to Uruguay and Chile than it is to Venezuela and Bolivia in these respects. Enhanced
85 Payne, Zovatto, and Díaz (fn. 25), 154.
470	world politics
governability—reflected in outcomes such as controlled inflation, lower ministerial turnover, and a sharp downward trend in party system vol- atility—suggests a state and party system undergoing consolidation. Brazil’s economy, while large and diversified, is tightly constrained by global capitalism. Brazil lacks anything like Venezuela’s oil that would lead citizens and government officials to think that the country could escape the prevailing economic constraints. As in Chile and in contrast to Venezuela, the market economy in Brazil is institutionally consoli- dated.86 Brazil managed to implement structural reforms, though more incrementally than Chile. These and related conditions have thus re- stricted the left in Brazil, as in Chile and Uruguay, to effecting change within fairly limited parameters. Given the comparatively large size and diversity of Brazil’s economy and the somewhat weaker level of political institutionalization found in the country, the pt’s adaptation is especially noteworthy.
Such constraints hold far less in Venezuela and, prospectively, in Bo- livia, where left leaders promising sweeping change have gathered sup- port and persuaded large numbers of voters that it is possible to defy established business at home and evade economic constraints abroad. Since his election in 1998, former army officer Hugo Chávez has sought to enact in top-down fashion a self–styled “Bolivarian revolu- tion” or “socialism of the twenty-first century.” A surge of popular mo- bilization brought Evo Morales to office in 2005 on the ticket of a new political movement, the mas (Movimiento al Socialismo). A leader of the country’s coca growers, Morales came to power hailing eco- nomic nationalism, indigenous identity, and a more grassroots style of democracy.
Hugo Chávez and Evo Morales emerged in contexts of extremely poor governance, reflected in outcomes ranging from escalating cor- ruption to economic crises.87 Voters in both countries held the politi- cal establishment responsible for the state’s deficient functioning. Par- tyarchy in Venezuela—that is, the long-standing rule of the ossified Acción Democrática and copei—made this rejection particularly pro- nounced.88 The subsequent erosion of traditional parties, which reached a veritable state of collapse in Venezuela, opened the door to the rise of political outsiders.
86 Javier Santiso, Latin America’s Political Economy of the Possible (Cambridge: mit Press, 2006).
87 Scott P. Mainwaring, Ana Maria Bejarano, and Eduardo Pizarro Leongómez, eds., The Crisis of Representation in the Andes (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2006).
88 Michael Coppedge, “Explaining Democratic Deterioration in Venezuela through Nested Infer- ence,” in Frances Hagopian and Scott P. Mainwaring, eds., The Third Wave of Democratization in Latin America (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
normalization of an anomaly	471
Beyond benefiting from poor state functioning and a weak institu- tional context, Chávez and Morales have reaped political advantage from the central presence in their economies of a valuable and nonrenewable natural resource: oil and natural gas, respectively. Both leaders have used these resources to rally nationalistic sentiments by reinforcing the percep- tion that wealth was squandered by venal political elites willing to sell out the national patrimony to foreign firms.89 Rents from natural resources have buffered Venezuela from the full impact of market constraints. Morales has tried to persuade supporters that the same could eventu- ally be the case for Bolivia. In the current boom times a valuable natu- ral resource can effectively remove or at least diminish the economic constraints that have induced the left in other countries to moderate. Oil in Venezuela, home to the largest energy reserves in the Americas, gives Chávez room to defy the dictates of the international economic order and avoid making the kinds of structural adjustments and reforms that left-leaning leaders in other countries have enacted. An unusually long period of high oil prices has financed Chávez’s “missions,” a set of antipoverty programs that has been critical in sustaining his popularity.
The convergence of a political system in deterioration and the dis- covery of major natural gas reserves fueled the prospects for a radical left alternative in Bolivia. After 1985 Bolivia saw the emergence of a mul- tiparty system that managed to tame and incorporate new antisystem forces. But by the late 1990s political parties had become targets of rising discontent due to inefficient government performance and corruption.90
89 This perception among Venezuelans is documented in Alfredo R. Keller, “Populismo Institu- cional e Populismo Revolucionário na Venezuela,” in Germán Lodola, ed., Neopopulismo na América Latina [Neopopulism in Latin America] (Rio de Janeiro: Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, 2004); Aníbal Romero, “Rearranging the Deck Chairs on the Titanic: The Agony of Democracy in Venezuela,” Latin American Research Review 32, no. 1 (1997). On Bolivian perceptions, see Antonio Aranibar, “Los Bolivianos, La Democracia y el Cambio Político: La Emergencia de un Nuevo Sentido Común” (Paper presented at the wapor [World Association for Public Opinion Research], First Latin Ameri- can Congress, Colonia del Sacramento, Uruguay, April 2007).
90 René Antonio Mayorga, “Bolivia’s Democracy at the Crossroads,” in Hagopian and Mainwaring (fn. 88), 158. Evidence of the weakness of the Bolivian state leading up to the explosion of social pro- test in 2000 is considerable. One widely used indicator of poor governance is corruption. Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index supports the profile of the Bolivian state as more corrupt than the Brazilian. See Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index, 1997, 1998, 1999, www. transparency.org/policy_ research/surveys _indices/cpi. Indicators presented by Daniel Kaufman, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi confirm this depiction and rate Bolivia worse than Brazil in over- all government effectiveness. See Kaufman, Kraay, and Mastruzzi, “Governance Matters V: Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators for 1996–2005,” and “Appendices” (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2006). Moreover, efforts at administrative reform in Bolivia brought marginal results. See “Bo- livia: From Patronage to a Professional State: Bolivia Institutional and Governance Review,” Report no. 20115–BO (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2000). The pact that provided a political support base for stabilization and market reform there was greased by a large amount of political patronage, as discussed by Eduardo A. Gamarra, “Crafting Political Support for Stabilization,” in William C. Smith, Carlos H. Acuña, and Eduardo A. Gamarra, eds., Democracy, Markets, and Structural Reform in Latin America (Miami: University of Miami, North-South Center Press, 1994).
472	world politics
The discovery of new gas reserves and President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada’s 2002 proposal for a gas pipeline through Chile, Bolivia’s his- toric enemy, gave critical impetus to radical left sentiments. Morales positioned himself in the December 2005 election as the defender of Bolivia’s national interest. While hailing coca growing and indigenous rights, he rallied and extended his base by promising full state con- trol over the hydrocarbons sector and ended up winning more than 53 percent of the vote. Natural gas reserves give Morales much more bargaining power in office than he would otherwise have enjoyed in a country as poor as Bolivia. But since Bolivia still needs to develop its gas sector, the country remains more constrained economically than oil-rich Venezuela. Recognizing the need for foreign capital, Morales has begun to moderate his anti-neoliberal discourse. Initial claims to pursue outright nationalization have been scaled back to proposals to raise taxes on private mining companies and increase Bolivian shares in joint ventures. Economic realities have induced his government to be more pragmatic than the earlier radical rhetoric would have suggested.
vi. conclusion
How can we understand key aspects of the pt’s evolution from ob- structionist opposition to pragmatic government? What accounts for major changes as well as important lines of continuity in the party? To answer this question, this article draws on insights from rational choice and historical institutionalism and responds to calls to combine the two in productive ways.91 Relying on both traditions offers a richer ac- count of the pt’s evolution than either alone can provide. Bearing out Hall and Taylor’s assessment of these two strands of institutionalism,92 “[e]ach seems to be providing a partial account of the forces at work in a given situation or capturing different dimensions of the human ac- tion and institutional impact present there.”93 Indeed, the pt did adjust to external inducements and constraints in crucial ways. Yet historical legacies modified its adaptation.
The main story of the pt ‘s evolution between 1989 and 2002 is that of a radical programmatic party that became transformed into a catch- all party. This story is well told from a rational choice perspective. Ap- proaching the pt’s evolution with this analytical lens focuses attention on the strategic situation the party faced at different moments and the
91 Hall and Taylor (fn. 2); Katznelson and Weingast (fn. 2); Thelen (fn. 2). 92 Hall and Taylor (fn. 2), 955. 93 Ibid.
normalization of an anomaly	473
associated choices it made. Conduct at the broadest level, for example, whether the party pursued policy seeking and difference or vote maxi- mization and accommodation, can be understood in these terms. Fol- lowing recent exhortations to move away from orthodox notions of pref- erence formation within rational choice,94 the present analysis does not assume the pt’s preferences as given but shows how they were shaped by ongoing developments and prevailing circumstances. Indeed, new in- centives and pressures that unfolded by the mid-1990s induced a shift away from policy seeking and differentiation and toward vote maxi- mization and moving closer to the center of the vote distribution. The party began to employ many of the tactics of its catchall competitors in order to capture the majority of votes necessary to win a presidential election. The shift was unexpected in light of the pt’s previous radical- ism and the important role the party had played in anchoring the left.
Testimony to the powerful role that external incentives exert on politi- cal parties is the fact that even the pt, with a committed core of militants and a history of radicalism, adjusted eventually to them. If even the pt could not resist employing the logical instruments of a vote-maximizing strategy within the economic and political context that unfolded, it is unlikely that any other party of consequence could have. That the very individuals responsible for implementing these changes had played a prominent role in the party’s founding and once supported radical plat- forms bears out a strategic understanding of political change.
Yet the pt has not become “just like any other Brazilian party,” con- trary to a frequent charge leveled in the Brazilian media. Insights from historical institutionalism add a crucial layer of complexity and nuance to the story. The party’s history conditioned the ways in which it rose to external challenges. After modifying its strategic motivations in the mid-1990s, the pt responded to a dense and complex mix of param- eters and preferences that at times pulled it in conflicting directions. A full account of the party’s evolution requires explaining important aspects of continuity (for example, high internal discipline), as well as distortions in some efforts at adaptation (for example, the caixa dois phenomenon). Rather than conforming fully to the expectations of a strategic framework, the party’s conduct was influenced by enduring historical commitments and norms. These complexities help account for the unevenness of the party’s adaptation.
The above analysis thus suggests that political institutions, the focus of rational choice institutionalism, are insufficient to explain the adap-
94 Katznelson and Weingast (fn. 2).
474	world politics
tation of left parties. Whether or not radical parties choose to reorient themselves and respond to given institutional incentives depends on the broader economic context and structure of political competition that prevail. And even when they choose to do so, their adaptation may well be incomplete. Transformation along any given dimension can be distorted by historical norms and commitments within the party. Like- wise, change can occur more on some issues than on others. For exam- ple, Downsian logic may induce a party to moderate on a key dimen- sion of competition, such as the market versus state cleavage. Yet the same party that succumbs to such logic may nevertheless retain a left or alternative identity on other issues. Rational choice institutionalism thus needs to recognize the issue-specific nature of change within parties.
Describing the pt after Lula’s 1989 loss to Fernando Collor, Marga- ret Keck wrote: “While prevented by its very project from fully adapt- ing to its political environment, it has not succeeded in changing it. Ten years after it began, the pt remains an anomaly.”95 How could one characterize the party in 2002, on the eve of its long-awaited move from opposition to government? Having adopted many of the practices of its catchall competitors, the pt was no longer an anomaly. In crucial ways the party had become normalized in response to pressures exerted by its economic and political environment. Yet in other ways it retained features that distinguished it within the system of Brazil’s political par- ties, with internal currents clinging desperately to the “very project” that prevented a more complete transformation. Although change was bounded and “layered,” the accumulation of adaptations made over time did lead to an important reshaping of the party.
Lula’s first term in office (2002–6) would reveal more about the complexities and complications of maintaining such an “in-between” or hybrid status. Executive power opened up new demands and con- flicts as the structure of institutional incentives facing the party shifted from the electoral to the governing arena. The policies implemented to ensure Lula’s reelection in 2006 reinforced the process of normaliza- tion begun while the pt was still in the opposition and then after 2002, with the pt in government. The question that lies ahead is whether the pt will continue to adapt and converge ever more with its catchall counterparts or whether it will undergo an internal process of reformu- lation, embracing anew the values and practices that had distinguished the party previously. Will change, which started on the external front, proceed toward the internal front, making the pt look even more like other Brazilian parties? Unequivocal steps toward further normaliza-
95 Keck (fn. 4), 19.
normalization of an anomaly	475
tion would deprive Brazil’s party system of the many hopes raised by its once most promising political alternative. Yet restoring the past is im- probable, especially as the pt sheds its ranks of some of the individu- als who valued and defended the party’s historic features the most and likewise brings into its fold others who conform more readily to the vote-maximizing organization that the party has become.
Year
1989 1994 1998 2002
Year in Chamber
1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002
Year
1982 1988 1992 1996 2000
appendix party’s growth at different levels (1989–2002)
Lula’s Record inPresidential Elections
1st Round	2nd Round % of Votes	% of Votes
17.2 47.0 27.0 — 31.7 — 46.4 61.3
Congressional Elections
% of pt	Seats Seats in Chamber
# of pt Senators
8 16 37 50 60 91
# of pt
0 0 1 5 8
14
1.7 3.3 7.0 9.6
11.3 17.7
pt Mayors
2 36 54 115 187
pt CounCillors
127 1006 1100 1895 2475
Municipal Elections
source: Banco de Dados Eleitorais do Brasil (1982–2004), organized by Jairo Nicolau, http://jaironicolau.iuperj.br.

2008
Geography
Antipode
Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements: An Interview with Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile, a Leader within Brazil’s O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST)
Jeff Garmany

Department of Geography and Regional Development, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; garmany@email.arizona.edu
Fla ́via Bessa Maia
Department of Geography, University of Sa ̃o Paulo (USP), Sa ̃o Paulo, SP, Brazil; flabmaia@gmail.com
Having first emerged over 25 years ago, O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST) has grown to become what many consider the largest and, according to Wendy Wolford and Angus Wright (2003:xv), “most important” social movement in Latin America today. Organized around securing land rights for Brazil’s camponeˆs population (peasant or landless rural workers), the MST seeks agrarian reform in a country where 45% of the agricultural land is controlled by only 1% of the population (Lerrer 2003:27). By occupying unproductive land, MST squatter settlements (called assentamentos) pressure the federal government to enact a constitutional amendment providing agricultural land reform. The MST’s actions have been notably successful, having secured well over 1000 settlements for formerly landless rural workers (Wolford 2004:412).
While the movement’s leadership base is remarkably decentralized, the most prominent MST leader in the public eye is undoubtedly Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile. As an academic activist, his numerous publications, interviews, and public appearances have made him the most recognized face of the MST. Among the many written works he has published, Brava Gente (Stedile and Fernandes 1999) stands out as one of the more widely read and “most comprehensive sources on the
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
188	Antipode
movement” (Wolford and Wright 2003:356). The book is composed of a series of interviews between him and Bernardo Manc ̧ano Fernandes, a Brazilian geographer at the State University of Sa ̃o Paulo (UNESP).
In July 2006, we had an opportunity to conduct an updated interview with Stedile in Sa ̃o Paulo. This interview comes seven years after the publication of Brava Gente, situating the MST within the current Brazilian political setting, and has been translated for English-speaking audiences. Further, our interview has important ramifications for spatial theory and social movements, as our questions to Stedile focused upon the importance of space and the movement’s ideological conception of territorial occupation. What follows are some excerpts from our hour-long discussion, the entirety of which was far too lengthy to be published as an intervention. For an extended, continued excerpt from this conversation, please see Garmany and Maia (2007).
Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile (JPS): In the political struggle for the land we’re always disputing, like you say, a space. For example, we occupy a latifu ́ndio1 that has a power as a place where people reside, work, live, and create a family. But in the head of a camponeˆs there doesn’t exist this idea of “space”. He thinks, “I want to have a place to live, a place that gives me security, where I can raise my family and where no one will bother me”. Then the camponeˆs begins to have a small feeling of individual sovereignty: “here I have autonomy, here I can develop my production, here I can have my culture, and here I can be a person”. This is what’s in his head. And when we go to public spaces, on the roadways and city walkways, I think that there’s a mentality within the movement that has grown throughout the long period of this political struggle that we always need to go with a lot of people. When there are a lot of us, we have the sensation that we can occupy that space because deep in that space are the people, and it’s a public space. Now when we have only a few people, we’re afraid. We know that it isn’t ours and that there exists an institutionalized power that controls that space. So the only way that we can secure public space is when we have a lot of people. If not, we don’t even try.
There has also been much debate within the movement in recent years to envision schools as a public space, and now we’re also using the expression “occupy” the school. Or stated differently, the school is a very public space and the people have the right to control it and to guarantee that their children frequent it. This vision of school includes not only access to the physical space itself, but to the knowledge of society. So we fight so that the children have guaranteed schooling and so that we can also study there. Within the movement there is this mentality, this philosophy, that everyone must
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements	189
continually be studying. And, for this to happen, we have to occupy the school.
Jeff Garmany and Fla ́via Bessa Maia (JG/FBM): Then considering this idea of the occupation of space, do you think the movement is trying to change, or perhaps reprogram space in this way? Is there something that the movement does to try to change the mentality of the people within the spaces of the MST?
JPS: Like I told you before, we don’t have a lot of political debate in terms of the significance that a territory or a space has. Still, in the past we looked at a settlement mostly as a piece of land to work upon. Now we are taking into account that a settlement is more than that: it is a territory where we can have autonomy not only to produce, but also to reproduce our culture, our family, and as such, to construct our own values. And more recently we have also incorporated this debate together with the fight against agribusiness and the transnationals for the control of seeds, for the control of water, and for the control of biodiversity. Five, six years ago nobody within the movement considered this issue. Well, international financial capital came to dominate Brazilian agriculture and began to dispute the water; it wanted to privatize the water, it wanted to import transgenic seeds, it wanted to control biodiversity, and it wanted to take possession via patent laws. So the camponeˆs movement reacted and woke up! Now we’re realizing that to have control over nature and biodiversity is a very important thing, that to have control of the water is a very important thing, and that to have control of the seeds is a very important thing. It’s important for autonomy, for the future of the movement, and for the future of camponeˆs agriculture as such. So I think that deep down these contradictions and this political clash represent a true class struggle. On one side is the camponeˆs model, and on the other, the model of agribusiness that is an alliance here in Brazil between the large capitalist farmers and the transnationals. There is a permanent clash between these two visions of agriculture, and this clash is generating a consciousness in the camponeˆs movement that disputing the territory is needed; that it’s needed to dispute biodiversity and that it’s needed to have control over these resources that should be at everyone’s disposal.
JG/FBM: In regards to this issue of class struggle, between that of labor and capital, do you think there exists for the MST a profound difference, or perhaps an important difference, between urban and rural contexts?
JPS: The majority of the gravest social problems that we have in Brazil are inter-related. They have a common cause which is the super- exploitation of labor. Thus, this super-exploitation, which has increased in the last 15 years under neoliberalism, has created the three principal sicknesses that affect the social body of Brazil. The first is poverty.
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
190	Antipode
And what are the origins of poverty? The origins of poverty are in the concentration of landed property. It’s in the concentration of the means of production in the city. And if you were to look at the owners of the means of production in the city, you’d see that they’re also the owners of the land in the countryside. The dominant class is the same. It’s been mixed.
The second sickness is social inequality. Brazil, as you know, has the most unequal society on the planet. There’s a tremendous difference between the poor and the millionaires here. And it’s getting even worse today. And if you look again to where the roots of this inequality are, they’re in the ownership of the land, they’re in the methods of production and in the wealth that has been accumulated throughout our history. And now it’s getting worse with the third sickness which is unemployment. Unemployment in Brazil has transformed into a structural problem. It’s no longer like in the industrial capitalism of Marx’s era that earned the nickname “the army of the industrial reserve” because it was part of the logic of capitalist accumulation to always have a small, rotating contingent that kept salaries low. Not today. Today it’s structural. Twenty to twenty-five percent of the Brazilian population cannot find work, which is now common for counties on the periphery. And the cause is not an underqualified labor force; it’s the logic of the model. In this stage, under this model, you don’t need to exploit the labor of everyone. At most they’re exploited for their consumption needs; for them to consume electricity, for them to consume water, but not for labor. So, evidently there is an intrinsic tie between the problems of the city and the problems of the countryside.
In the beginning the MST thought that poverty and social inequality could be resolved simply by occupying land and trying to democratize the latifu ́ndio. Now we’re being forced to realize that the problem is larger. And as such, the economic model needs to change. This is the stage that the Brazilian society is now living in. And, right now, we have a concrete problem. There is the neoliberal economic model that allows finance capital and transnational corporations to dominate our society. So we have to fight that and implant another model, or at least a transitional one that fundamentally has at its base a solution to the problems of people in society. To guarantee work, guarantee land, guarantee shelter, guarantee school. But if the problem nowadays is the model, obviously the camponeses alone can’t change it. We are a fragile force. In order for agrarian reform to advance in Brazil, so that camponeses can continue to produce, the agribusiness model must be knocked out. A change in the model as a whole is needed. So the camponeses need to join with the urban social movements, to generate an energy, a confluence of forces that permit a revival of the proletariat in Brazilian society and remove this minority that is exploiting us even more everyday.
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.
Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements	191
And so this is where we are today. It explains why the MST continues to occupy latifu ́ndios today; latifu ́ndio occupation today, for the rural poor, is necessary for survival. If not, they would have to go to the city and that would be the end of them as a class. But only occupying latifu ́ndios doesn’t defeat the model. So the MST must combat their larger enemy which is the banks, the transnationals, the model itself; we must align ourselves with the people of the city. Today we’re putting a lot of energy into constructing spaces of conversation with different social movements, and we’re trying to create a unity, not an alliance, but a unity between the various camponeˆs movements.
Endnote
1 A large agricultural estate or plantation.
References
Garmany J and Maia F B (2007). Resistance and social reform in Latin America: speaking with Joa ̃o Pedro Stedile of Brazil’s “O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra” (the MST). Journal of Latin American Geography 6(2)
Lerrer D (2003) Reforma Agra ́ria: Os Caminhos do Impasse. Sa ̃o Paulo, SP (Brazil): Editora Garc ̧oni
Stedile J P and Fernandes B M (1999) Brava Gente: A Trajeto ́ria do MST e a luta pela Terra no Brasil. Sa ̃o Paulo, SP (Brazil): Editora Fundac ̧a ̃o Peseu Abramo
Wolford W (2004) This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94(2):409–424
Wolford W and Wright A (2003) To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Books
⃝C	2008 The Authors Journal compilation ⃝C	2008 Editorial Board of Antipode.

2000
Social Sciences
Latin American Perspectives
The MST Challenge to Neoliberalism 
Monica Dias Martins 

Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 5, Radical Left Response to Global Impoverishment (Sep., 2000), pp. 33-45 Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2634156 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 18:47
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
TheMST ChallengetoNeoliberalism
by Monica Dias Martins
Quandoeu morrer Cansadode guerra, Morrode bem Coma minhaterra. -FranciscBouarqudeeHollanda1,997
Brazil'sMovimentodosTrabalhadoreRsuraisSemTerra(Landless WorkersM'ovement-MST)isoneofthemostcombativpeopularforcesin contemporarLyatinAmericaI.temergedin 1979withitsfirsltandoccupa- tioninEncruzilhadNaatalinoR,ioGrandedoSul.Supportebdychurchorga- nizationsuchas thegrassrooctommunitieasndtheComissaoPastoralda Terra(PastoralLandCommission-CPT) andbythePartidodosTraba- lhadores(Workersp'arty-PT),amongotherst,hemovemenstpreadall over thecountryas landreformwasincludedinthepoliticalagendaduringthe redemocratizatidoanysofthemid-1980s.'Inthe1990s,itbecameanimpor- tantmassorganization.
TheMST's ruralsettlemenatrsecharacterizebdycooperativreelations, collectiveplanninga,nd self-managemenSto.lidaritys,ocialjustice,and autonomyareitsfundamenteatlhicalvalues.Ithasestablisheda monthly newspaperto communicatietsideas,an educationaslystembased on the "work-and-studmy"ethoda,ndan intenseprocessofpolitical-ideological formatiotnhroughstudygroupsonradicaltheoryW.ithinthesegroupsis emerginagnewlydevelopedconsciousnesosfthenecessityforsocialowner- shipofthemeansofproductionT.heirleadersappearinthemediaandnego- tiatewiththegovernmenatn,dtheiractionshaveconsolidatedan alliance withworkerst'radeunionsandurbanmovements.
M6nicaDias Martinissa sociologistwith25yearsofprofessionalndpoliticaalctivityamong rurawlorkerisnBrazilcombinedwithacademicstudiesattheFederalUniversitoyfCeara.She is theauthorofTheChallengesofCooperationintheRuralSettlement(1s994) andinJune successfullycompletedherdoctoradlissertatioontheNortheasotfBrazil.Sheisindebtedto TimothyHardingR,obertAustinP,abloPozzi,andJamesPetrasfortheirusefulcommentsA.n earlierversionofthisarticlewaspresenteadtthe21stCongressoftheLatinAmericanStudies AssociationC,hicago,Septembe2r4-26, 1998.Thisarticleis dedicatedtothememoryofthe MST activistasssassinatedinthestrugglfeora bettersociety.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue114,Vol.27No.5,Septembe2r000 33-45 i 2000LatinAmericanPerspectives
33
34	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TheMST's complexpracticeis designedtodealwitha centraqluestion: Howcana peasantorganizationac,cordingtomanyintellectuaalsndpoliti- ciansa "vanishings"ocialcategoryc,h2allengetheso-calledbenefitosffree- markectapitalismanditsideologyn,eoliberalismL?andlessworkerhsave becomea powerfunlewsocialforceinBrazil.Despiterepressivveiolence and attemptast co-optationt,heypromotemass mobilizationto occupy unproductivperopertieasndpublicbuildingsL.and occupationisncreased from43in1990to180in1997,totalin6g98inthesesevenyearsT.heMST's beliefshavealreadybecomeintegrateidntoa popularmovementhathas thousandosfactivistfsightinfgorlandwithrevolutionarpyassion.
Aftera briefpresentationfthecontroversicaolnceptoflandreformt,his articleanalyzesthemainfeatureosftheMST's actionsandperspectiveosn resistancteotheneoliberasltateanditseffortsoconstrucatnalternativpero-
ject in termsofclass struggle.
LAND REFORM
Landreformis notnecessarilyradical.U.S. scholarsuchas Barrington MooreandSamuelHuntingtohnaveusedtheconceptoflandreformtomea- surevulnerabilityosocialrevolutioindevelopingcountrie(sSilva, 1971). DuringtheperiodoftheKennedyadministratiaondtheAllianceforProg- ress,manyLatinAmericangovernmenwtsereputunderpressurteocarryout landreformprogramsI.3n BrazilduringJoaoGoulart'spresidency(1962-
1964),popularmobilizatiofnocusedonlandreformas thekeytodemocrati- zationandmodificatioonfthesocialstructurIen. themilitarydictatorship period(1964-1985)itwasconsidereda nationaslecurityissue,strategifcor capitalistdevelopmenatndindustrializatioinparticularIt. has also been usedasastatepolicytorestraicnlassstrugglienruraalreasandtotransform potentiallryevolutionarpyeasantsintoconservativsemallfarmerBs.utland reformhasalsobeenimportanttorevolutionarsytructurcahlanges,asin Mexico,Bolivia,Chile,Colombia,Cuba,NicaraguaP,eru,andelsewhere.
Thus,landreformis betterdefinedas a contradictorpyrocessoftrans- forminpgroductioanndpowerelationtshatdependsi,nitsformulatioand implementation,thecorrelatioonfpoliticaflorcesandthespecificourse of theclass struggle(Martins,1994). This conceptreinforcetshelinks betweeneconomicp,oliticala,ndideologicalconditionsa,s opposedtothe viewoflandreformas eitheraneconomicissueora socialpolicyorsimplyan ideologicalproblemT.hereproductionfaclassofsmallfarmertshrough accesstoruralpropertiys occurrinigna conjuncturoefintensivperoletar- ization (expropriationof means of production).This challenging
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	35
contradictiohnelpstoexplainwhylandreformcannotbelabeledas "conser- vative"or"revolutionarpye"rse.Itisa tool,andwhatmakesthedifferencise whocontrolist.Theansweris complexandleadsus toanalyzelandreform as a movemenitnwhichsocialclassesdirecthiscontradictorpyrocess. Whethelrandreformis capitalisotrsocialistmustbe consideredinthecon- textofa newproposalemerginfgromthehandsandmindsofhundredosf acampadosandsettlersa,proposalantagonistticotherulingclasses' agrar- ianproject.
Thepolitical-ideologicpaollarizationbetweentheMST andtheUniao DemocraticaRuralista(RuralDemocraticUnion-UDR), a landowners' organizationp,a4rticulardlyuringtheelaboratioonfthefirsNtationaPllanof LandReformin 1985andthe1988ConstitutionAalssemblyl,edtothecon- structioonftwodifferenmtodelsoflandreformthatexpressthecapital-labor forceconfrontatioAnc.entrailssueistheownershiopfthemeansofproduc- tion(individuaolrcollectivea)ndtheprocessofwealthdistributio(pnrivate capitalaccumulatioonrsocialcapitalaccumulatioanndthedevelopmenotf productivfeorces).5
The UDR's	proposaldefendsindividuailnterestasndprivateproperty, and,to theextenthatthebourgeoisieacceptsredistributioint,mustbe througthheparcelingofthelandintohundredosfunitsafteritslegalacquisi- tionT.hemodelofprivataeppropriatioisnsimilartotheclassicalcapitalistic agrarianredistributiotnhatpromotesagriculturamlodernizationunder agroindustriecso'ntroolftheworkersp'roductiopnrocess.Inthe1970s,it wasimplementeidna limitedwayundertheBrazilianmilitardyictatorship throughtheestablishmenotfcolonizationprojectsI.n fact,theso-called colonoorparceleiroreceivedindividuatlitletoproperttyhatallowedhimto applyforcreditandtechnologyA.s hewasisolatedfromotherasndthedeci- sionsconcerninwghatandhowtoproduceortowhomandwhentosellhis productwsereimposedbythegovernmentinalstitutionansdtheagricultural policies,themajorbenefitwsentothehegemoniacgroindustrsiaelctorT.his is theparadigmoflandreformacceptedbyvariousfractionosfthedominant classes.
TheMST's modelofsocialappropriatioins basedoncooperativreela- tionsamongdirectworkerasndalternativpeatternosflandappropriatioand use.Throughdemocratisctructuroefsdecisionmakingsettlemenmtsayvary informfromfamilybasistocollectivpeossessiond,ependinogntheworkers' experiencet,hequalityofthesoil,thekindofcropst,hemarkesttructuraen,d manyotherfactorsF.orinstancep,ropertcyanbe individualloywnedbutthe workandtheproductiodnonecollectivelyo,rworkandproductiocnan be individuaolnpartofthelandandcollectiveonanotheprart,orall theprop- ertycanbecollectivbeutfamiliewsorkonpartofthelandtoproducefortheir
36	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
ownuse.Agrowingproportioonfsettlersm'onetariyncomeisnotdivided butusedcollectivelytomaintaintheexistingmeansofproductionf,ornew investmentosr,foreducationalh,ealtha,ndtechnologicalssistancetotheir familiesT.hesedifferenktindsoffundos(reservesp)rovidevidenceofan experimenint socializedcapitalaccumulationL.andreformas proposedby theworkingclasshasthepotentiatlobecomea moreegalitarianmeansof wealthdistribution.
Rurallandownerospposecooperativfeormsofpossession,production, andworkT.heyseemawarethathesexperimenctasnconsolidatneewprac- ticesofsocialorganizatioandpoliticaplarticipatiotnhatunderminperivate propertryightasndmayescalatefromthelocaltothenationaslphereT.he BrazilianscholarandUDRsupporteMriguelRealeJuniordescribestheir class positionin thejournalof theSociedadeRuralBrasileira(Brazilian RuralSociety-BRS) (1985: 9) as follows:
FromtheendofWorldWarII toourdays,itisevidenthathereisnoagrarian chaosinBrazil,butinsteadperfecctoherencbeetweentheland'sstructuraned itsuse andthepresenetconomic-sociaslysteminthiscountryandthecurrent neoliberaildeology.
A newmassiveandradicalandreformproposalis notsimplylandredistri- butiontoincorporatmeorefarmerisntothecapitalistsystembutinvolves shiftintgheentireagrarianstructurpe:roductionp,ower,andculturarlela- tions.Itmeansthathewholeeconomic-social-politicsaylstemisgoingto bechanged.EvenbeforetheMSTbecameinfluentianlationwidethe agrarianbourgeoilseaderswereconsciousthatheprojectofcollectivoeccu- pationandproductiornepresenteadchallengetotheirclassinterestasndto capitalism.6
ACTS OF RESISTANCE
To analyzetheimportancoeftheMST's resistancaegainstneoliberalism, theconceptof class is essentialA.	class-strugglaepproachallows us to understantdhelimitsand thepossibilitieosf itsproposalof landreform vis-a-vistheclassicalredistributiavgerarianreformandBrazilianstatepol- icyandlegislation.
Thespecificourseofthebattlebetweenthetwoantagonistimcodelsof landreforminBrazil,datingtothe1980sbutstillinflux,is thekeytoan understandinogfwhytheMST hasbecomethemostimportanstourceof
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	37
resistancteotheneoliberaplrojectI.nbrieft,heconfrontaticoanbeexpressed in termsofthedualityprivatizatiovnersusoccupation.
The MST developedan efficienstrategyof pressureon theInstituto NacionaldeColonizac,aoe ReformAagraria(NationalInstitutfeorColoni- zationandLandReform-INCRA),a stateinstitutiomn:assiveandcontinu- ouslandoccupationsB.y1964Brazilianlandlaw,privatepropertcyanbe confiscatewdhenitisnotcultivateodrwherethereareconflictbsetweenthe ownerandworkerosrenvironmentdalmage.ThustheMST's directaction supporttshisconstitutionparlovisionandviceversa.7Thisstrateghyasalso beeneffectivienrevealinglandconcentratiotnh,ecauseofmostofthepres- entsocialproblemsT.heoccupationprocessc,alledafesta("theparty"b)y themovementh,asa specialmeaningforthelandlessthemselvesT.hedeci- siontosettleonandseizea privatperopertyno, taneasyone,requirems	atu- rityc,ohesiond,isciplinea,ndhope.
Thisdirectactionturns"passive"peasantsintopowerfualctorsfighting forlandandpoliticaplarticipatioTnh.eynowcallthemselve"sfreeworkers." Theyrecoverthecapacitytocreatematerialndculturaclommoditiedsenied thembyboththetraditionlaaltifundiuamndthemodernagribusinescsom- plex,wheretheyare"workerfsorcapital."Theiractionthreatentsheruling classes,whichreactwithviolencea,s wellas arguingthatheoccupationasre illegal.Accordingtothem,landseizuresareleadingtoa breakdownof authoritiynBraziliansocietyT.omaintaipnublicorderr,epresentativoefsthe staterespondtowhatis consideredan obviousabotageofdemocraticnsti- tutionbsyprosecutintgheMST leaders.
Whatis beingchallengedbythisradicalaction?Basically,theprivate propertryightgsuaranteebdybourgeoilsaw,oneofthevaluesofthecapital- istorderthatisreinforcebdytheneoliberadliscourseI.tchallengePsresident FernandHoenriqueCardosobothinhispoliticaplerformanocnethenational sceneandintermsofthegovernmentc'sommitmentosstructuradljust- mentsimposedby theWorldBank and theInternationMalonetaryFund (IMF) intheinternationaarlena.
Market-assistleadndreformwasproposedbytheWorldBankin 1995as a solutionforunstablepoliticallydevelopingcountriesuchas SouthAfrica andColombiab,utBrazilwasincludedintheproposawlhentheWorldBank begantoviewtheintensitoyfmassivelandoccupationasndtheradicaliza- tionofconflicatsadangertotheneoliberarlegime.T8heagreemenwtiththe federaglovernmenwtastointroducmearket-assistleadndreforminCeara'i,n theNortheasotfBrazil,withthesupporotfa modernlocal administration controllebdythepresidentp'sartyt,hePartidoSocial DemocrataBrasileiro (BrazilianSocialDemocratipcarty-PSDB). Anothereasonforthechoice
38	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
ofCearaseemstohavebeentheoutstandinsguccessofthesettlemenrtessult- ingfromlandoccupationandcooperativperactice(seeMartins1,994)coor- dinatedbytheMST,whichaccelerateldandconfiscatiobnylegalmeansT.he WorldBankandthegovernmenhtadtorecognizethathesepracticeswere importanitn explainingCeara's performancTe.heirprojectproposesto transforamgrarianreformintoa privatbeusinesss,timulatintghelandmarket as a properplaceforthelandlessandlandownertsonegotiatuendercondi- tionsof"equality.T"hroughtheBankoftheNortheasotfBrazil,theproper- tiesarebeingsoldbytheirownertsothelandlessonanindividuablasis.Rural workerst'radeunionsandlocalassociationhsavebeeninvolvedinthisproject largelytoguarantetehedebtpaymenotftheirmembers.
Despitetheproposalto privatizelandreformsponsoredby theWorld Bank,thestrugglgeoeson.Occupationandproductioanrebothconsidered partoftheMST's economicandpoliticasltrategaygainstneoliberalismT.he settlemenist conceivedofas a wholeproductiounnitandnotonlya legal propertyIn.deed,productioanndmanagemenhtavebeencrucialtothesuc- cessoftheMST's alternativperoposala:griculturcaoloperatio(nMST,1993;
1996),combiningtheeffortosfindividuawlorkertsoaccomplishthingsin common-buyingmachinesandtools,raisingcattle,sharingland.Forthe settlerso'rganizationsp,lanningmeansdemocraticdecisionsconcerning productionm,arketinegd,ucationh,ealthcare,politicsc,ulture,tc.Butthis isnota simpletask,especiallyifhundredosfpersonsareinvolvedD.uring theirfrequenatssembliesf,amilymemberpsarticipatine manyways:making proposalsa,skingquestionsd,iscussingproblemsc,omingtodecisionss,ing- ing.9Normallyt,heagendais knowninadvanceandsomemethodological toolsare used to improveparticipationM.ost womenand teenagerspeak independentalys companheiradse luta.In someofthesettlemenatsmarried memberis acceptedonlyifbothspousesjoin. The annualbalanceis pre- sentedinageneramleetingandthedistributionfprofit-forepairss,oil improvemencta,ttlefeedingc,omputersh,ousebuildingt,eacherss'alaries, childcare,mobilizationan,dsoon-hastobeapprovedbythemajoritoyfthe membersT.heparticipatorpylanningprocessis influencebdythefamilies' previousexperiencesr,egionalandecologicaldifferenceasn,daccessto materiaclonditionosfproductiosnuchascreditt,echnologyan,dtraining. The resultsmayvarywidely(Medeiros,1994).
TheconceptofcollectivweorkingandlivingisthecoreoftheMSTstrat- egyfordevelopingsustainablaectsofresistancienthesettlementOsn.cethe landisappropriateda,periodofdemobilizatiomnayoccur.Peasantswho havefoughftora placetoliveandworkmaybe seducedbythesupposedben- efitsoffree-markceatpitalismT.otheextenthathisistruec,onfrontation also takesplaceinthesubjectivfeieldofbattle.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	39
Educationtoeliminatneotonlyilliteracbyutalsothetechnologicaglap andpoliticaml	isinformatiosna prioritoyftheMST's landreformprogram. Ina generalsense,as PauloFreiresaid(1983:58),"a settlemenptr,ecisely becauseitis a productiounnit(thereis noproductioonutsidetheman-world relation)s,houldalso be a wholepedagogicunit."Educationalactivities involvethesettlersc'hoosingtheirownteachersc,hangingthesubjectsand methodsoftheregularpubliclearningprocess,organizinbgrigadesforthe political-ideologicfaolrmationfactivistsa,ndcoordinatintgrainincgourses forentrepreneuraianldtechnologicailmprovemenTth.eMST'stwo-year schoolforsecond-levetlechnicianisnagriculturcaoloperationhasrecently beenaccreditedbytheMinistryofEducation.
In Brazil,therearetwocooperativoerganizationTs.heOrganizac,odas CooperativadsoBrasil(CooperativesO'rganizatioonfBrazil-OCB) repre- sentstheruralandownerasndis linkedwiththeUDR andtheSBR. The Confederac,oNacionaldas Cooperativasde ReformaAgrariado Brasil (NationalConfederatioonf AgrarianReformCooperativesof Brazil- CONCRAB) wascreatedbya networokflandreformcooperativeisn1994 andis calledthe"economicarm"oftheMST,supportinigtssocialandpoliti- cal mobilizations.
As efficienats thelargeprivatfearminsgectort,heMST settlerosrganize agriculturparloductiocnooperativelsocallya,tthestatelevel,andnationally. Neverthelests,hereis an essentialdifferencbeetweenthissystemand the OCB. Infactt,heMST's cooperativsetructureemphasizesocialneedsand politicarlesultassmuchaseconomicreturntsothesettlerCs.reditm,arketing supporta,ndtechnicaalssistanceareofferebdythecooperativetsoincrease theiragriculturacltivitiesp,rofitabilitayn,dlivingstandard(sMST, 1998). The CONCRAB systemhas becomean instrumenftorestablishingsolid relationshipamsongproducerasndconsumersd,emonstratitnhgerelevance oflandreformfortheurbanpopulationa,ndguaranteeinrgelativfeinancial autonomya,t leastcomparedwithotherpopularorganizationtshatdo not havecontroolftheirownproductionA.lthoughtheMST believesthateco- nomicpowerisfundamenttaolachievingpoliticaplowerm,ostofitsefforts areaimedatcreating"a newmananda newwomanfora newsociety."
THE ALTERNATIVE PROJECT
Social scientisthsavetendedtofocusmainlyontheactionsofpopular movementDs.espitetheirimportancteh,isisanelitistviewofthesocialpro- cess.Itlegitimatetsheauthoritarianrgumenthatworkerso'rganizations need to be tutoredbecause theyare incapableof articulatinigdeas and
40	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
transformitnhgemintoacoherenvtisionforchangeinsocietyA.ctionand conceptioanreequallyimportanintexaminintgheMST's effortsoconstruct an alternativperojectforBrazil.
TheconceptionofthePopularProjectas democratiacndparticipatory planningcomesfromtheday-to-dapyracticeisntheoccupationasndsettle- mentsa,s wellas fromthestudyofotherpeople'shistoricaelxperienceisnthe schoolsandthebrigadesT.hecontributionftheMST's supporters-profes- sors,politicianst,echnicians,tudentsp,riests-isorganizedthrougha net- worktosupporsteveralgroupsthatmeetsregularltyodiscussthenumerous proposalscomingfromthebases andto producedocumenttshatreturnto themT.oconfronteoliberalismwithitsownpoliticawleaponst,hestrategy hasbeentocreatea consultapopularm,	obilizingthepopulationandstimu- latingthemtoparticipatine theformulationfeconomics,ocial,andcultural policiesforall Brazilians.
Toprovokea broaderdebateonthePopularProjectt,heMST leda march toprotestheCardosoadministrationtr'sansferrionfgthepeople'swealth, througphrivatizatiotno,powerfuBlraziliansandtopromotteheconstruction ofa trulydemocratiscocietywithsocialjustice,incomedistributioan,dsol- idarityF.romAugust3 toSeptembe7r, 1998(BrazilianIndependencDeay), almost6,000workerso,rganizedinmorethan80 colunas,marchedthrough- outthecountryd,iscussingissuessuchas employmenhte,althe,ducationa,nd housing.
Thebeginningosfthisnationwidmeovemenctanbetracedtothe1980s. AttheFirstNationaLlandlessCongressi,n1985,itwasdecidedthatstruggle andmobilizatiowneretheonlywayofpressurintgheSarneyadministration toimplementthelandreformprogramT.hesloganwas"LandOccupationIs theSolution."The SecondCongressi,n 1990,duringFernandoCollorde Mello'sadministratiofna,cedadifferenrtealityw,ithneoliberalreforms beingimposedalloverLatinAmericaF.ortheMSTtosurviveasanation- widemovemenatndovercomteheisolationimposedbythestateinstitutions, itneededmoreconomicandpoliticaelxpressionD.elegationfsrom20 states enthusiasticallaypprovedtheproposal"Occupy,Resist,and Produce." Includingproductionbecameextremelyimportantto invalidatethestate strategbyasedoneconomicallydestroyintgheruraslettlemenatnsdtreating thelandlessas invader(sFolhade Sdo Paulo,June13, 1997).
AfterCardoso'selectionin 1994,theThirdLandlessCongressi,n 1995, discussedaproposatlonegotiatweiththenewpresidenTt.histimethefocus was"LandReformE:veryone'sStruggle.I"treflectedthemarketexperi- mentsofthecooperativets,helandoccupationnsearthecities,andtheinflu- enceonthesettlerosfurbancultureT.hemajorityofthesewereyoungcou- ples thathad improvedtheirlivingstandardasnd changedtheirconsumer
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	41
preferenceGs.enerallyt,heproposalconcretizetdhepopularallianceanda newpoliticalagendaincludingtheneedsandinterestosfthemajority.
ThegovernmentrtiedtoimposesomeconditionosntheMST,oneofthem beingthatnegotiatiownouldstartonlyiftherewereno morelandoccupa- tions(O Globo,December26,1997).Awarethatthisstatepracticewas directedatweakeningitsnegotiatinlgeveraget,hemovementa'snswerwas toincreaseanddiversifmyassmobilizationTs.hemoraldefeatsufferebdy Cardoso'sadministratitohnenraisedtheidea ofthegreat"MarchAgainst Neoliberalisma,"s itbecameknownT. heNationaMl	archforLandReform, Employmenatn,dJusticoef1997,ledbytheMST,wasaneffectivienstru- mentforarticulatintghedemandosftheworkinsgectorasndthepoorestpop- ulationT.hetwo-month-lomngarcharriveidnBrasiliawiththesupporotfthe leftpoliticalpartiest,hepress,andthechurchT.hemarcherpsubliclypre- sentedtheauthoritiwesitha setofproposaltshatconstitutetdheoutlineofthe PopularProjecti,ntendetdobeanalternativtoetheneoliberaploliciesadopted bytheinternationcalpitalismandimplementebdytheBrazilianstate.
AvarietyofmeasurewsereusedtointimidateheMST:massacresuchas theonesthatookplaceatCorumbiarian 1995andEldoradodos Carajasin 1996,changesinthelegalapparatusju,dicialprosecutionps,ublicaccusa- tionsofbeingmarijuangarowersa,ndsoon.AtfirsCtardosotriedtoignore themovementap,plyingthemodern-versus-traditdiounaalilty".Modernity" is oneofthemythosftheneoliberadliscoursea,ndCardoso'spoliticswere portrayeads"modernw"hiletheMSTwassaidtorepresenatnarchaicpast. Nextcame attemptast co-optationandisolationandthenpunishmenatnd negotiationw,hichwereequallyunsuccessfublecauseoftheprecedinmgass mobilizationsM.orerecentlyt,hegovernmenhtastriedtodividetheMST leaders,exploitintgheirinternadlebateinthemedia.
Meanwhilet,helandlesshavebeendevelopingurbanactionsT.heysup- portprogressivuerbanpolicies,helpto organizehousingoccupationsa,nd visitsmallcitiestodonatebloodandfoodandtocleanthestreetsF.urther- more,becauseof theincreasedproductionof theirsettlementcsompared withthatofindividualgriculturteh,eyareimprovintgheirproductivsetruc- tureandintensifyinagroindustriparloductiounnderworkersc'ooperative control.
ThesecretothegrowincgredibilitoyftheMST amongtheBrazilianpeo- ple lies in theextraordinasriymplicityb,orderinogn thenaive,oftheircon- duct,theircollectivestructurteh,edeclaredsupporotfimportanotrganiza- tionsuchas thechurcheasndAmnestyInternationanl,dthecooperatioonf intellectuaalsndartists.S1u0rveyresultshowthat94 percenotftheBrazilian populationis favorablteolandreformS.omesaythattheMST's strength comesfromthemystiquoefmilitancycombinedwithitssymbolst:hered
42	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
flag,thehymna,ndtheemblematifciguroefCheGuevaraO.thersarguethat itis duetoitsmilitaryformation-thberigadesinspiredbyrevolutionary populararmiesE.conomistwsillemphasizetheproductioanspectsp,olitical scientisttshepowerrelationsg,eographertsheterritorialiatnyt,hropologists theculturahleritageh,istoriantsherootsofthemovementp,edagoguesthe learningprocesss,ociologisttsheorganizationfaelaturesa,ndsoforthE.ach disciplinefocuseson itsparticulasrubjectin attemptintgo understantdhe landlessmovementO.bviouslya multidisciplinaarpyproachcombinedwith participatioandmilitancwyouldcontributoebothacademicunderstanding andpractice.
Forme,fourchallengincgonceptasrisefromMST practice(:1) itscollec- tivewayoflife,whichrangesfromproductiotnotheartisticreationprocess, (2)theoriginalitoyfitseducationaslystemm,arkedbythework-and-study method(,3) itsrespecftora diversitoyfopinioncsombinedwithunityofper- spectivea,nd(4) itsinsistenctonfrontatiwoniththeneoliberaplroject.
Increaseinlandoccupationsd,enunciatioans falseoftheofficialgrarian reformdata,andsupporftorthepresidenticaalmpaignofthePT's LuisInaicio da Silva (Lula) wereimportanptointson theMST agendafor1998. The emphasish,oweverh,asbeenontheelaboratioonfanalternativneationaplro- jectfocusingas wellonglobalthemesuchas employmenetd,ucationh,ous- ing,food,healtha,ndculturaalctivitiesA.lthoughthePopularProjectdeals witha varietyofproblemsl,andreformremainasnessentiailssue.InMST politicaplracticeit,hasbeenthekeyelemenitnunifyinBgrazilianworkers- urbanandruralm,anuaalndintellectual-itnheirstrugglfeorabettesrociety.
Atthemomenta,ccordingtotheMST leader,JoaoPedroStedile,the agrarianissue,whilecentralt,akessecondplace,sinceitdependson the adoptionofa newmodel(interviewpublishedin0 Globo,December26, 1997).ItseemsthatheMST's proposaloflandreformforallcanonlybe thoroughliymplementewdithinewpowerstructuraensdanewmodelfor developmendtifferenfrtomcapitalismT.hisdebatehasseverailmplications, butonecouldexpecta radicalizatioonfthesuccessfusltrategieosflandsei- zureandcollectivperoductionT.heimmediatcehallengies,atthesametime, todemonstrateotheBrazilianpeoplethatheirday-to-dapyroblemasrea consequenceofneoliberaplolicies.
CONCLUSION
The MST practiceis beingcloselyobservedbythelandlessthemselves and by Braziliansocietyin general,notas a laboratoryexperimenitn free-markpeotlicya,s LatinAmericahasbeenusedinthepastdecade,butas
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	43
theembryofa newsocietythatwillemergefromtheeffortosfthepopular sectorsT.hePopularProjecti,nvolvinmgass,directr,adicalc,ontinuousa,nd sustainablaectionsofresistanceh,astobeconstructeidna processoriented fromthebase thatrespecttshesocialheritagec,onceivesofalternativefsor themajorityp,resentisdeasinasimpleandconvincinwgay,transformidseas intoprojectsforstructurcahlange,makespeopleunderstanadndfightfor thema,ndmobilizesforces.
AnimportanctomponenotfthePopularProjectis landreformofa very differenktindfromthecapitalistmodel.Insteadofindividuaplarcels,the workertshemselvews,hohavefoughftorandwonaccesstoland,capitala,nd knowledgea,reconstructinagneworganizatioonftheproductiopnrocessI.n somesettlementshereis evidencethatsocializedcapitalaccumulationis underway.Mass occupationandcollectiveworkarechallengingprivate propertryightsand legitimatinagnotherkindof appropriatioand wealth distributioTnh.isemerginglandreformsectorplaysacentrarloleineco- nomic,social,politicala,ndculturaclhange.
Workersc'ooperationdoesnotfitintotheneoliberaplrojecta,ndthenext stepistomobilizeforcesB.razilcertainlnyeedslandreforminthecontexotf changingthewholemodelofdevelopmenTt.heMST appearstohavethe capacitytotransfortmhecollectivdereamofmillionosfBrazilianswhowant a betterlifeintoradicalaction.Itremaintsobe seenwhetheirtwilldo so.
NOTES
1.Particularilmyportanatm,ongtheliteraturtehatexaminetshesignificancaendtheviabil- ityofBrazilianlandreforminthatperioda,retheworksthatreflecthedynamicosfthedebate amongintellectualasndworkerleaders(CONTAG,1982;Carvalho,1982;Figueredo,1984). Duringtheso-calledNewRepublicthisdebateintensifieadn,da nationaclampaignforland reformt,heCampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria/CNRAw,asorganizedtocoordinattehe proposalsandthepopularmobilization(CsNRA,1987).
2. TheruralpopulationofBrazilhasdeclinedto23percentofthetotalof156,664,223 (IBGE, 1993).Therearenearly12,000,000landlesspeasants.
3.ChileundertheFreigovernmenhtadaprototypAellianceforProgresslandreform project.
4. TheUDR, theBrazilianruralentrepreneurosr'ganizationw,as createdin 1986(Bruni, 1987).Becauseoftheviolenceofitsactionsh,iringunmenandmaintaininagprivatearmyto defendruraplropertyit,lostitspoliticaslupporitnthe1990s.ItsleaderR,onaldoCaiado,hada weakperformancaes a candidateinthe1990presidentiealection.
5. A theoreticalpproachtothetwomodelsoflandreformis developedinMartin(s1997: 57-71).
6. Atthebeginninogfthe1960s,thelandownerwserefrightenbedya strongmovemenftor landreforme,speciallyintheNortheasTt.hiswasoneofthecausesofthemilitarcyoupin1964 andthebrutarlepressionofpopularorganizationusntilthemid-1980sA.tthatime,therural
44	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
workersn'ationaltradeunion,theConfedera,coNacionaldeTrabalhadorensaAgricultura (NationalConfederationfRuralWorkers-CONTAG)a,ndthemostimportanpteasantmove- mentt,heLigas Camponesas(PeasantLeagues),weremoreconcernedwithlandredistribution thanwiththeproductiopnrocess(Silva,1971).
7. Accordingtothislaw,theINCRAisresponsiblfeortheconfiscatioonfprivatperoperty. UnderdesapropriaCJo(dispossession)the owneris compensatedforthe land; under
(expropriatiotnh)elandbecomespublicpropertwyithouptayment. expropriaCdo
8.ThedocumenMtarket-AssistLeadndReformd,iscussedattheAgriculturCeonferencoef theWorldBankin 1995,saysthat"thelackoflanddistributiognenerateasn unstablepolitical situationw,ithruralunemploymencti,vildisordersa,ndarmedviolenceinmanydeveloping countrieisn,cludinBgrazil,"andcontinuetshat"therheasbeenalong-timienteresitnpromoting landreformintheNortheasBtrazil,withoneoftheworld'sworstincomedistribution(sG"ov- ernmenotfCeara,1995).
9. ThemeetingstaratndendwiththeMST hymnandpopularsongsaboutthestrugglfeor land,thealliancewiththeproletariaatn,dwomen'sparticipatioOnn.eofthebest-knowsnays, "To changesocietythewaywe wantto,we havetoparticipatweithouftearofbeingwomen." Beforemakingdecisionstheysometimedsramatizoerdraw"pictureosflife,"andtheyuseseeds toindicatetheirapprovaolfstatuteosrelectrepresentativreasthetrhanraisingtheirhands.
10.InMay1997,thePortuguesweriteJroseSaramangoandtheBraziliansingersMilton NascimentoF,ranciscoBuarquede Holanda,andthephotographSerebastiaoSalgadogavethe authorsr'ighttsotheMST,andtheproductisnquestion(books,postersa,ndCDs)weresoldat culturaelventsheldsimultaneousliynmanycountries.
REFERENCES
Bruni,Regina 1987"UDR:paraalemdaviolencia."TempoePresenca/CEDIn,o.221(June).
CarvalhoA,bdiasVilareD'incaoandMariadaConcei,cao(eds.) 1982Reformagrdria:SignificadeoviabilidadeP.etr6polisV:ozeseCEDEC.
CNRA(CampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria) 1987ReformagrdrianaConstituintPer:opostaM.imeo,Brasilia.
CONTAG(Confedera,coNacionaldos Trabalhadorensa Agricultura) 1982PosiCdodaCONTAGsobreoProgramNaacionaldePoliticaFundidriaM.imeo,Sep- temberB,rasilia.
FigueredoV,ilma(ed.) 1984AquestdodareformagrdrianosanosoitentaR.iodeJaneiroT:empoBrasileiro.
FreireP,aulo 1983Extensdoucomunica,coR.iodeJaneiroP:azeTerra.
GovernmenotfCeara 1995"A reformagrariassistidapelomercado."Septembe2r6.
IBGE (InstitutBorasileirode Geografiea Estatistica) 1993CensodemogrdficborasileiroB.rasilia.
MartinsM,6nicaDias 1994Osdesafiodsacoopera,donosassentamentodsareformaagrdriaS.aoPaulo:Peres. 1997"Aradicalidaddeareformaagraria.C"adernosdoCEASno.171(September/October): 57-71.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	45
MedeirosL,eonilde 1994Assentamentorsurais:UmavisaomultidisciplinSarao. Paulo:UNESP.
MST (MovimentdoosTrabalhadoreRsuraissemTerra) 1993"AcooperacaoagricolanosassentamentosC."adernodeFormacdono.20.Sao Paulo. 1996"Cooperativadse producao:quest6espraticas."Cadernode Formaca-noo.21. Sao Paulo. 1998CONCRAB:Quatroanosorganizandoa coopera,do.Sao Paulo.
Silva,JoseGomes 1971 A reformaagrdria no Brasil: Frustracdo camponesa ou instrumentode desenvolvimentRoi.o de JaneiroZ:ahar.
SRB (SociedadeRuralBrasileira) 1985A rural.65 (December):7-12.

2009
History
Latin American Perspectives
Camponeses : Brazil's Peasant Movement in Historical Perspective (1946−−2004) 
Cliff Welch 

Latin American Perspectives 2009 36: 126 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X09338609
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/36/4/126
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/36/4/126.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Camponeses
Brazil’s Peasant Movement in Historical Perspective (1946–2004)
by Cliff Welch
Comparison of the histories of three leading peasant organizations in the Pontal do Paranapanema region of Brazil—the Partido Comunista do Brasil (PCB) from 1945 to 1964, the Confederação Nacional de Trabalhadores na Agricultura (CONTAG) from 1964 to 1984, and the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) from 1984 to 2004—suggests that continuity is as important as change in understanding Brazilian peasant movements. The MST has been considered a “new social movement” in that it has eschewed partisan politics, incorporated families as members rather than just male heads of household, had a national scope and a participatory decision-making structure, and been attuned to the international struggle over globalization. Placing it in historical perspec- tive makes it clear, however, that this is not the first time that militants have organized around the concept of peasants as a political identity; that while the representation of peas- ants in the leadership of contemporary rural labor organizations may be greater than in the past, earlier peasant leaders also struggled on behalf of their class; that earlier peasant organizations had, if not a national presence, a substantial presence in the agricultural states of the time; and that attempts at international organization to unite peasant strug- gles around the globe are not entirely new. This is not to deny the innovative features of contemporary movements but to suggest that the investigation of past achievements will contribute to a fuller appreciation of these movements’ conditions and prospects.
Keywords: Peasants, Rural labor organizations, New social movements theory, Pontal do Paranapanema, State
This article examines examples of change and continuity in the organiza- tional practices and ideological content of individuals and entities engaged in mobilizing peasants in Brazil during the latter half of the twentieth century. I intend to locate recent rural social movements such as the Landless Workers’
Cliff Welch is a participating editor of Latin American Perspectives and professor of history at Grand Valley State University. He has taught as a visiting professor in the graduate programs of the Pontifícia Universidade Católica of São Paulo and the Universidade de São Paulo and the Universidade Estadual Paulista, Presidente Prudente campus, where he continued to work as a collaborating professor and researcher from 2007 to 2009. In addition to various scholarly arti- cles, he is the author of The Seed Was Planted: The São Paulo Roots of Brazil’s Rural Labor Movement, 1924–1964 (1999), a revised and up-dated Portuguese version (2009), and, with Sebastião Geraldo, Lutas camponesas no interior paulista: Memórias de Irineu Luís de Moraes (1992) and pro- ducer of the documentaries Grass War: Peasant Struggle in Brazil (2001) and Sonhando com futebol (2004). He is currently working on a book about the struggle for land in São Paulo, Brazil, from 1959 to 2009.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 167, Vol. 36 No. 4, July 2009 126-155 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X09338609 © 2009 Latin American Perspectives
126
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra—MST) in Brazilian historical perspective and evaluate what is “new” about them, espe- cially in relation to democratization. The analysis traces change across three general periods defined by the predominant organizations occupying the leadership space of peasant struggle.1 These were the Peasant Leagues (ligas camponesas), a front organization established by the Communist Party of Brazil (Partido Comunista do Brasil—PCB) in dozens of municipalities soon after World War II; the Farmers’ and Farmworkers’ Union of Brazil (União de Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agrícolas do Brasil—ULTAB), a pragmatic would-be corporatist front founded by the PCB in 1954 and replaced in 1963 by the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (Confederação Nacional de Trabalhadores na Agricultura—CONTAG), an official corporatist entity administered by Communists, Catholics, and bureaucrats during the dictatorship (1964–1985); and the MST, an autonomous movement that celebrated its twentieth anniversary in 2004 by hosting the fourth interna- tional conference of the Via Campesina, an organization dedicated to coordi- nating the worldwide anti-neoliberal peasant movement.2 Continuity is traced across the three periods in the relatively similar discourses and related prac- tices of the different leadership groups.
Some analysts characterize the social movements arising in Latin America since the 1970s as new, suggesting that they also represent an improvement over past movements (Slater, 1985; Escobar and Alvarez, 1992). Supporters of the new—and improved—social-movement concept argue that whereas the older movements were politically oriented to induce revolutionary change, the new movements are social, seeking immediate improvements for mem- bers as well as long-term reform. Thus, unlike older movements, the new are not based on traditional class formations and workers’ struggles for state power. These new movements are part and parcel of the wave of “democrati- zation” processes that washed over the region in the 1980s and 1990s. Brazil, for example, shifted from military to civilian rule in 1985, ending 21 years of military dictatorship with an elected government. Consumer revolts, women’s protests, territorial occupations, gay marches, and other multiclass, issue-oriented movements appeared, bringing a new dynamic to civil society.
Another important contextual pillar is globalization, particularly the neo- liberal reforms that reduced the role of government in society, thereby expand- ing the expected role of civil society, community groups, and entities such as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and social movements. The military and other traditional institutions and politicians, it is argued, marginalized the less powerful, causing the injured to rise up in autonomous organizations to demand equal participation in the political economy. As the political scien- tist Harry E. Vanden writes, the insecurity of these groups drove them “to seek new forms of protest and different political structures that might better address their needs” (2005: 22).
Regarding Brazil’s MST as a new social movement, Vanden and others argue that historical land concentration and recent modernization—especially mechanization—made land difficult for peasants to retain and drastically reduced the need for rural labor, causing significant unemployment in the sec- tor (Fernandes, 2000; Branford and Rocha, 2002; Wright and Wolford, 2003;
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	127
128	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Nef, 2006; Welch, 2006a). Years of dictatorship had caused many to lose faith in political parties and labor unions. Numerous mobilizations and new orga- nizations took shape to help force the military out of power. In this context, the MST arose and “rapidly became a national organization with coordinated policies and strong local participatory structures characterized by frequent state and national meetings based on direct representation” (Vanden, 2005: 23). The MST was a new social movement because it eschewed traditional politics, incorporated families as members rather than just male heads-of- household, and had a national scope and a participatory decision-making structure. It had an unprecedented “broad national vision” to transform Brazil’s society and economy through mass mobilization “attuned to the inter- national struggle over globalization.” It built alliances with other civil-society institutions but remained autonomous from political parties, even the leftist Workers’ Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores—PT), whose candidate Luis Inácio Lula da Silva was elected as president in 2002. This “new repertoire of action” broke with “old forms of political activity” such as orientation by political parties or actions to promote the violent overthrow of the state by an armed revolutionary vanguard (Vanden, 2005). The analysis of the political scientist Jorge Nef differs somewhat from these conclusions in associating the rise of the MST with a crisis in representative democracy—its “failure to include and give a space to the popular sectors” (2006: 6)—in the neoliberal era rather than with the transition from military rule. Nef sees hope as lying in the ability of such movements to adopt formal democratic political behavior.
The “new social movements” literature has faced an onslaught of criticism, particularly as it relates to peasant movements (Frank and Fuentes, 1989; Knight, 1990; Hellman, 1995). In Cutting the Wire, the journalists Susan Branford and Jan Rocha place the MST in a context that extends back to the English Diggers of the mid-seventeenth century (Branford and Rocha, 2002: 264–266). In her essay on the “riddle of new social movements,” the political scientist Judith Adler Hellman argues that it is “particularly obvious in the case of rural mobilizations” that questions about the mode of production are just as central today as they were decades ago (Hellman, 1995: 157). For the MST, it is here argued, agricultural production has been a fundamental ques- tion, and the target of mobilization has been public policy and bourgeois practice. The central issues and means of mobilizing, therefore, were little dif- ferent from those of past peasant movements. New Brazilian peasant move- ments are more autonomous, but, like the old movements, they still depend on political alliances and state power. It is the affiliations, if not the ideologies, that have changed. During the cold-war era, more militant peasants were affiliated with the PCB and identified themselves as Communists. In the glo- balization era, they associate themselves with a range of political parties, use Marxist analysis and communist imagery, and increasingly identify them- selves as camponeses (peasants), quite like their politicized predecessors (Welch, 2006b).
Through a case-study approach, this article places a series of incidents in one geographical setting, the Pontal do Paranapanema region of the state of São Paulo, in the broader context of Brazil’s process of democratization. As Brazil’s richest state, São Paulo has tremendous influence on the nation’s
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
political economy. Significantly, it is the country’s leading agricultural pro- ducer, responsible for 40 percent of Brazil’s agricultural export earnings—a huge sum given Brazil’s world leadership in agricultural commodities pro- duction (Welch, 2007). It is also the country’s most populous state and home to some of Brazil’s most influential media conglomerates and politicians, and this helps to make the state politically powerful as well. Politicians and busi- nessmen proudly point to São Paulo’s leadership in the progress of Brazilian social, economic, and political development. For these reasons and more, the movements discussed here have their headquarters in São Paulo. Providing a contrast with the state’s favored image of modernity and progress, the Pontal is one of São Paulo’s poorest regions. Located in the far northwestern corner of the state, the Pontal has long been the setting for peasant conflict, in part because of its remoteness and in part because of the dubious basis of property rights. The incidents were selected to represent different phases in the land struggle, demonstrating important aspects of change and continuity in the formation of rural social movements and their interpretation by commenta- tors and theorists. This approach is combined with a biographical approach, identifying, researching, and writing the history of the human agency of indi- viduals who stood out in the cases chosen. In each case, peasants and their movements questioned the distribution of property in land and the best way to exploit it, contributing to the rich history of the country’s democratic devel- opment struggle.
PEASANT LEAGUES: SANTO ANASTÁCIO AND NESTOR VERAS
The most important legacy of the early postwar period was the organiza- tion of dozens of peasant leagues in the states of Paraná, São Paulo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, and Pernambuco. The leagues responded, in part, to a new set of social and political rights established in law by Getúlio Vargas, who ruled Brazil from 1930 to 1945 and again from 1951 to 1954. The new laws included labor rights for farm workers and organizational structures for farm- ers. Dictator Vargas was forced out of power in 1945 by the pulse of democra- tization that hit the world following the war, bringing Brazil a dynamic period of electoral democracy that historians refer to as the Populist Republic. Until 1947 the PCB enjoyed a unique moment of legality, and militants used the opening to found the leagues, helping many peasants register to vote and thus swelling the ranks of the party (French, 1989; Welch, 1999; Medeiros, 1999). The PCB saw the leagues as a means to enhance the party’s political clout while empowering squatters, sharecroppers, rural workers, and small farm- ers, an unrepresented, generally neglected segment of Brazilian society. Acting like special-interest groups, they helped members appeal for government assistance in questions related to land rents, food production, and income. The leagues also served as a pressure group to help PCB delegates argue the agrar- ian question in the 1946 Constituent Assembly. The experience of the PCB- organized leagues proved an inspiration for other landless peasants in the mid-1950s when they organized the ligas camponesas in Pernambuco and other northeastern states where their leader, the lawyer and socialist politician
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	129
130	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Francisco Arruda de Paula Julião, found support (Moraes, 1970). The Julião edition of the leagues proved, in turn, an inspiration for the MST (Stédile and Oliveira, 2002).
A case in point is provided by Nestor Veras and the Santo Anastácio Peasant League founded in 1946 in the Pontal do Paranapanema region of São Paulo state. The Pontal was still a frontier region of São Paulo in the 1940s. A tribu- tary of the Paranapanema gained the saint’s name in May 1769 when a Portuguese troop stumbled upon it, and the village that gradually took root there became the region’s second incorporated municipality in 1925. Starting in the mid-1800s, rival political bosses (coroneis) claimed title to the region. They used a process of fraudulent land grabbing called grilagem, as well as influence over bureaucrats and clergy, to make historic claims to the land. They started land colonization and development companies to attract immi- grants, developed settlements, and sold land titles that appeared legitimate but actually were false. By 1940, 250,000 people lived in the Pontal region, and the questioning of false land claims was already a constant. The brutalities perpetrated against the landless by landlord enforcers such as the hired guns (jagunços) Juventino Nunes and Zé Mineiro were legendary in the region (Leite, 1998).
We are still learning about the life of Nestor Veras. Apparently he was born May 19, 1915 in Ribeirão Preto, an important agricultural center in São Paulo state, which was the world's leading coffee producer. The PCB, as well as the police, described him as either a peasant (camponês) or a farmer (lavrador) who lived in the Santo Anastácio area. Curiously, the PCB literature does not reveal his status as an elected city councilman, while state police reports of the period referred to him as “Vereador [town councilman] do Prestes” (in refer- ence to the PCB leader Luis Carlos Prestes). In 1948 the police investigator Floriano Ferreira Guarita described him not only as a city councilman but also as a former candidate for the state assembly and a representative of the National Labor Party (Partido Trabalhista Nacional—PTN), with which the PCB occasionally aligned itself. A 1949 police inquiry profiled him as an “agrarian agitator” and “self-styled peasant leader” from Santo Anastácio (Guarita, 1948). We know that he remained dedicated to this cause and to the PCB, debating other militants and reporting on the struggle in São Paulo, serv- ing as a officer of ULTAB, elected first treasurer of CONTAG in 1963, and representing it at international rural labor assemblies such as the Quinta Conferência Mundial dos Sindicatos dos Trabalhadores da Agricultura, das Florestas e das Plantações in 1967 until his arrest and disappearance in April 1975, a victim of the dictatorship (Veras, 1960; 1967; MST, 1987 [1985]: 117).
As the Alta Sorocabana Railroad Company constructed tracks to the state boundary, Santo Anastácio became the setting of a busy train yard, and hun- dreds of Spanish and Italian immigrants came to live and work in the area. This gave the backlands town a surprisingly cosmopolitan feel and created a fertile base for PCB organizing. The concept of the peasant must have reso- nated among these European immigrants, who, we can assume, were familiar with classic forms of this awkward class (Shanin, 1972). Indeed, while peasant leagues were established in other Pontal towns, such as Rancharia and Presidente Bernardes, the Santo Anastácio league received more attention
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
from the press. The University of São Paulo researcher Emiliana Andréo da Silva, depending entirely on her pioneering investigation of the state political and social police (the Departamento Estadual de Ordem Política e Social— DEOPS) archive, argues that the Santo Anastácio league was one of the only ones actually established—that the police succeeded in shutting down most others before they were founded. Other sources challenge this view, and her interpretation is suspect for being too consistent with the impression of com- petence the political police tried to convey in order to justify their existence (Silva, 2003; Welch and Geraldo, 1992).
Established in April 1946, the Santo Anastácio Peasant League responded to a wealth of problems among the landless and small farmers. More than 200 “peas- ants, most of them tenants, small farmers, sharecroppers by halves and thirds,” attended the founding meeting, according to the story that appeared in the PCB daily Notícias de Hoje (June 28, 1946). In this period, cotton predominated in Santo Anastácio agriculture, and many migrants were attracted to the area by land- lords promising riches through tenancy arrangements. The league was to serve “to guide the struggle of workers seeking to improve their situation as tillers of the soil [trabalhadores da terra].” Antônio Valero Valdeviesso, whose biography remains obscure, gave a “clear exposition” of the theme and read the statutes aloud. Those present “democratically elected” the league’s board of directors, including Veras as president and another 11 officers and substitutes. Various speakers addressed the issues that would animate the organization: demands for lower land rents, road maintenance, schools, and clinics. These members seemed to identify with the concept of “peasant” and questioned the landlord’s sense of responsibility toward the broader community. They organized collectively in the league and reached out to the state for help. Rents were too high, roads aban- doned, the health and education of their children left to chance.
Some 150 landless peasants trusted the new democracy of the Populist Republic enough to sign their names to the Santa Anastácio league petition.3 “The large estates must be subdivided, free of charge, among those who want to plant,” the document asserts. “Our produce is worthless on the market, but what we buy costs us an eyeful.” Describing themselves as “landless, without rights, our sons and daughters suffering malaria, yellow fever, tuberculosis, rickets, cold, and hunger,” the petitioners explained. “We come before your Honor to relate the precarious situation that we have been suffering for years.” In addition to the demand for radical agrarian reform—the appeal for policies that would help them retain more profits from their production in order to care for their children—the petition criticized the landed for charging rents for poor lands, rents often higher than the land’s sale price. The result was not only a superexploitation of the landless but a tendency for them to abandon the countryside and move to the cities in search of “better living conditions” (something the Vargas-era policies were meant to address in order to “keep the peasant down on the farm”) (Welch, 2006b). A final clause supports the need for the peasants to have their own representative organization. The Communist press documented further Santo Anastácio peasant dissent in May when the director of the mixed agricultural cooperative (cooperativa agrí- cola mista) of Santo Anastácio denounced the precarious condition of the more than 800 peasant-family co-op members. He supported the need for the league
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	131
132	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
given the “miserable life led by sharecroppers and tenant farmers because the fruit of their labor is entirely taken by the landlord.”
In June the state responded to the pleas of these uppity children by cracking down on the Santo Anastácio peasant league. “What the Brazilian people need is a good whipping, not democracy,” Santo Anastácio Sheriff Roque Calabrese was quoted as saying on the occasion. The size of the organization must have been too much for the landowners’ private militias to handle. Not even the region’s most influential landlord, the coronel Alfredo Marcondes Cabral (infamously quoted as saying that “land awash with blood is good land”), had the forces to cripple such a movement (Leite, 1998). Indeed, the timing of the June 1946 crackdown links Sheriff Calabrese’s action to local interests by iso- lating it from larger trends. The cold-war-influenced decision to suppress the PCB and shut down front organizations like the peasant leagues would wait nearly a year, until May 1947, to be put into place. League President Nestor Veras protested the action in telegrams to President Eurico Gaspar Dutra and the heads of all of the political parties participating in the Constituent Assembly. “The local police closed the peasant league,” Veras told the news- paper Noticias de Hoje (June 28, 1946), “apprehended its files, and denied it the right to organize the peaceful rural workers” (Barriguelli, 1981: 211–212).
Himself a peasant, Veras put the sheriff, an authority beholden to the local power structure, in the central role. Calabrese had warned them to formalize the founding of the league, and consequently Veras had the founding statutes published in the Diário Oficial and filed the papers with the local notary. His moves to strengthen the league only seemed to make it more threatening to landlords. “The peasants’ just demands in relation to their most hardfelt prob- lems strengthen the league’s structure,” Veras’s interview with Notícias de Hoje continued, “and this must be the principal motive that drove the police and other authorities to close it down.”
Despite repression by the sheriff, Nestor Veras persisted in his effort to organize Pontal peasants. DEOPS documented his attempt to found the União dos Camponeses da Alta Sorocabana in March 1947, including an aggressive police assault on the assembly that resulted in numerous serious injuries and the death of a police officer. Police battered and jailed Dr. José da Silva Guerra, an outspoken Communist physician from neighboring Presidente Bernardes (Moniz, 1949; interview with Pedro Paulo Guerra, Alphaville, SP, 2004). When President Dutra extinguished the PCB’s legal standing in May, the party used clandestine means to organize among peasants. Partly because of the repres- sion and the campaigns of church and state authorities to link the PCB to ill- ness and to devil worship and other abnormal, antisocial behaviors, peasant identification with communism and the Communist Party dwindled over time, but it remained the leading political force among peasants and laborers in the countryside for at least two more decades (Welch, 2006b). In fact, the DEOPS files document how peasants succeeded in obtaining legal status for a new peasant league in the município of Santo Anastácio in 1949. In 1954, del- egates from the region participated in the founding congress of the PCB’s ULTAB (interviews: José da Silva Guerra, Presidente Bernardes, SP, 1986; Pedro Paulo Guerra, Alphaville, SP, 2004; José Alves Portela, São Paulo, SP, 1988; Silva, 2003).4
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
What happened in Santo Anastácio in the late 1940s serves as a partial basis for analyzing new and old rural social movements in Brazil. The attendance numbers and repeated mobilizations show considerable discontent in the region and support the argument that the league’s organizing arose from this discontent. The agency of Nestor Veras is not fully understood, but his char- acterization as a local peasant, elected official, and known member of the PCB make credible that the league was founded in an attempt to link this local movement with a national movement articulated by the party and oriented by a broader ideology, including an international anti-imperialist agenda. The means of protest were fairly traditional from the point of view of democratic systems. The peasants assembled and elected leaders, forming an interest group to petition the state for interventions to help them socially and eco- nomically. They complained of high rents and asked for the distribution of public lands, they complained of chronic illnesses and asked for medical assis- tance, and they protested the neglect of their children, demanding schools— nothing revolutionary, but extraordinary in the context of the day. A dictatorship had recently come to an end, but the repressive apparatus of the DEOPS remained active, and it was deployed to extinguish this movement—a strat- egy that, despite momentary victories, inevitably failed. While much of this experience compares with current events, some contrasts include the role of the Communist Party (as a political party linked to structures that no longer exist), the importance given to formalities (especially the formalization of the organization), the predominance of men on the available attendance lists, and the absence of any direct-action mobilization.
ULTAB/CONTAG: TEODORO SAMPAIO AND ZÉ CRUZ
In September 1954 the PCB allied itself with São Paulo governor Luis Nogueira Garcez of the PTN to host the first national congress of farm laborers and farmers. Hundreds of representatives attended, many from hastily orga- nized agricultural associations some of which were based on peasant-league organizing in the mid-1940s. They formed ULTAB, elected officers, established a charter that included agrarian reform and demands to help small farmers and farmworkers, and named delegates to represent Brazil in Prague at the first international congress of organized agricultural and forest workers. On one level, ULTAB was a weapon in the cold war, helping the PCB fulfill some of its responsibilities to the Soviet Union by ensuring Brazil’s participation in the Soviet-linked labor organizations headed by the World Federation of Trade Unions (Welch, 1995). On another level, it was a way for the PCB to develop its credentials as a power broker in the countryside by organizing and thus helping rural workers, pulling them away from total dependence on their employers.
In the early 1960s farmworker unions replaced the early labor and small- farmer associations established by ULTAB militants during the mid-to-late 1950s. Catholic priests and laymen also participated in establishing these asso- ciations, largely oriented by the Church’s effort to confront PCB advances among rural workers. The 1963 Farmworker Statute permitted union formation.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	133
134	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
The law was a significant conquest of the combined pressure of Communists, Catholics, and populists. The law mandated the creation of state federations of farmworker unions and a national confederation of these bodies. This was CONTAG, the corporatist institution that effectively replaced the autonomous ULTAB at the end of 1963, with many Communist officers and militants con- tinuing as leaders of the rural labor movement. (Radical Catholics, dissidents of the Church’s mainstream campaign, also joined CONTAG’s executive board.) These developments created a formal organizational structure for rural workers and small farmers, enhancing Brazilian democracy and the power of the PCB until the military coup in 1964. Recuperating from the repression in the early 1970s, CONTAG initiated the Farmworkers’ Union Movement (Movimento Sindical dos Trabalhadores Rurais—MSTR) and greatly expanded and fortified the union structure into the late 1980s (Medeiros, 1989; Welch, 1999; Ricci, 1999; Cunha, 2004; Houtzager, 2004).
Until the 1990s, the basic model established by ULTAB and CONTAG—one that emphasized the formation of a rural proletariat and the eventual disap- pearance of the peasant—predominated among rural social movements in Brazil. Under the military’s first dictator, General Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco, the regime sent a mixed message. On the one hand, it main- tained the rural labor union structure and supported passage of the Land Statute, a land reform law that had long been in debate. Surprisingly, Castelo Branco bragged that the new “revolutionary government” would bring about radical reforms without the agitation and instability caused by Goulart’s efforts. The statute altered Article 10 of the 1946 Constitution to allow a more flexible payment mechanism via government titles rather than cash, facilitat- ing land expropriation (Campanhole and Campanhole, 1980; Callado, 2003 [1985]: 57–59). On the other hand, the military eliminated the peasant leagues, closed down hundreds of farmworker unions, and jailed known militants, Communists, progressive Catholics, and socialists. Thus, the regime backed policies that promised representation for the landless and land distribution but repressed those best equipped to use these structures and turned agrarian reform into a vehicle for expelling peasants, concentrating land ownership, and modernizing agricultural techniques. In essence, the regime told rural workers to be patient and let the government decide when, where, and how favors would be distributed. Ironically, small farmers controlled the labor union apparatus used to facilitate the implementation of these policies (Gonçalves Neto, 1997; Houtzager, 2004).
However, as numerous studies have shown, the military regime pursed an agrarian development policy most aptly described as “painful,” especially from a rural labor perspective (Silva, 1982; Gonçalves Neto, 1997; Linhares and Silva, 1999: 182–195). The new ruling class, which looked very much like the traditional rural class in olive drab, supported radical change that intensified the historic agro-industrialization process, alienating the rural oligarchy while stimulating the rural bourgeoisie. These policies both intensified production and extended the agricultural frontier. The former involved the transforma- tion of diverse crop land into monoculture, segmenting the labor process in various regions and thus increasing the instability and insecurity of most rural work. The latter generated another phase of enclosure and land concentration
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
that cast millions of peasants into flooded urban labor markets. In the South, for example, soy displaced wheat, forcing many family farmers out of busi- ness. Pig and poultry production also became concentrated, with new forms of dependency created for large conglomerates to control the production of farmers. In the Center-South and the Northeast, full-time resident sugarcane plantation workers were fired and rehired seasonally as harvesters through third-party labor contractors, resulting in greater exploitation (Silva, 1981: 82–100; Martine, 1987; Goodman, 1989).
This interpretation is exemplified by examination of land disputes in the Pontal. A case in point is that of the Gleba Santa Rita, located just north of the Paranapanema River in the municipality of Teodoro Sampaio, which was incorporated in February 1964. The story of the Gleba Santa Rita begins 10 years earlier, in 1954, with a land scheme orchestrated by the powerful São Paulo politician Adhemar de Barros. In collusion with the Sorocabana Railroad and Sebastião Camargo, owner of what was to become the huge Camargo- Correia Construction Company, he encouraged political associates to buy land in the Pontal that promised to increase dramatically in value with the construc- tion of a new track called the Dourados branch. One of the beneficiaries was Justino de Andrade, then mayor of nearby Presidente Bernardes. Andrade cre- ated a colonization company and anticipated building a town called Santa Rita do Pontal, subdividing the 10,000-hectare area among migrants and profiting from the train traffic, lumber production, and farm produce (Leite, 1998: 100).
Although Barros served as governor during the 1940s (1947–1951) and the 1960s (1963–1966), Andrade’s dream remained unrealized. The train line was never built, and Andrade’s town rose and fell, never hosting more than two dozen houses. In fact, the land should never have been sold to him; the acre- age, like the vast majority of Pontal land, belonged to the state. Despite repeated warnings about the dubious legality of land titles in the region, Andrade acted as though the land were his, and to make something of it he depended on a classic land development scheme. In 1967 he let about 1,000 hectares of Santa Rita’s forested land to a cotton-gin and trucking-company owner from Martinópolis, São Paulo, named Francisco Pereira Telles. In turn, Telles sublet the land to some 400 families in 1968. The details of these arrange- ments were typically murky. Andrade later claimed that Telles was to return the land converted into cattle pasture within three years. Telles claimed that the land was not Andrade’s to rent and that he had gotten the permits to clear the forest, attracted the families, and organized the production of cotton farming, doing everything by the book as defined in the 1964 Land Statute. In a 1978 newspaper article, Andrade essentially corroborated Telles’s version, complaining that while he had received almost nothing, Telles had gained shares of the cotton produced and encouraged the tenants to defy him by tell- ing them that the land belonged to the state (Leite, 1998; Correia, 1977; O Estado de S. Paulo, July 13, 1977, and July 11, 1978).
The accumulation of wealth from the Gleba Santa Rita proceeded primi- tively. While Telles rented the land, he was also a property owner, although he did not control as much land or enjoy as much clout as Andrade. Such inter- mediaries were an essential part of the expanding agricultural frontier in Brazil. They applied their capital and organizational skills to the first stages of converting virgin land into a commodity. Adequate records have not yet
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	135
136	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
emerged to document the entire process. Telles claimed to the press that he had spent Cz$365,000 to develop the land he rented from Andrade. Andrade told reporters that he had gained nothing from the land; in fact, the peasants were the ones who were getting rich, since, from 1972 on, they no longer paid rent to Telles, who had abandoned them. Andrade repeatedly sued Telles for damages but never won, largely because of the questionable legality of his title (Correia, 1977; O Estado de S. Paulo, July 13, 1977; Santos, 1980).
Telles defended himself in the press, wrapping himself in the law and blam- ing Andrade for his own misfortunes. The newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo summarized his arguments as follows (Correia, 1977: 12):
Telles said that he did everything according to the Land Statute and that, in addi- tion to seed and chemicals, he furnished [the farmers] with health care assis- tance. But, when they completed the deforestation work, he said, “because of the social question I stopped providing employment for the 400 families there, and they started to suffer from hunger. Although I may be wrong to see it this way, I don’t feel responsible because the families that I placed there, more than half of those that honored my judgment, left the land at the end of the contract. But Justino should maintain better vigilance over his property, to impede its invasion by other families.
The documented history of the 400 landless families begins, in all but one case, with their resistance against savage capitalism. They entered the scene in silence, accepting without apparent question the offer to clear the forest and plant cotton for shares. Only when this arrangement ended and they were asked to leave the land and join the roving, insecure agricultural labor market, multiplying the “dangerous classes,” did the media capture their voices for the public record.
One exception was a posseiro (squatter) named Jenival who was interviewed by the literary critic Antônio Callado in November 1984.5 Callado visited the region on assignment for the São Paulo Energy Company (Companhia Energética de São Paulo—CESP) to write about the combination of inundating land for a CESP hydroelectric plant and the construction of a compensatory agrarian reform settlement. (The subtitle of Callado’s book—”Essay about a Brazilian Agrarian Reform That Never Occurred”—undoubtedly repelled CESP marketers.) On meeting Jenival on the Gleba Santa Rita, Callado discov- ered a curious fact: this landless family had been living in the same house for 17 years. “For a Brazilian farmer,” Callado (2003 [1985]: 39) wrote, “he is a person with an extraordinarily stable life.”
In a 1975 event that also defied the spin of Andrade and Telles, 33 landless families walked the 65 kilometers from Santa Rita to Teodoro Sampaio and disrupted the peace of the town with their demands for help. “With the soil prepared, but without seed, something they cannot buy due to the impossibil- ity of obtaining bank financing, the squatters directed their grievances at the municipal government. Given the refusal to attend their needs, they revolted, trying to get by force at least some food.” At least a portion of these allegedly well-treated families were starving to death; to keep the peace, the mayor eventually arranged to feed them a meal at the Hotel Comercial, while the military police sent reinforcements to defend public order (O Estado de S. Paulo, October 30, 1975).
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
The police learned to know the Santa Rita landless almost as well as anyone during the 1970s. Between 1973 and 1980, they joined Andrade’s gunmen and other authorities four times to fulfill expulsion orders from judicial authori- ties. The worst cases occurred in 1973 and 1974, when they forced 63 families from land that they had cleared and made productive. To make the action stick, they burned down the peasants’ shacks and sheds, uprooted their crops, and killed their livestock (O Estado de S. Paulo, July 13, 1977, and July 11, 1978). In 1977, gunmen poisoned some wells and livestock died. At the time, two of the peasants told reporters, “The landlords’ gunmen have the run of the place, intimidating the squatters and threatening their families. They come accom- panied by police officers who, according to the squatters, are being paid by Justino to ‘legalize’ their threats” (A Folha de S. Paulo, October 1, 1977). In 1982 gunmen randomly shot at them, and in 1984 cattle were stampeded over their crops. For 13 years the families lived under intense pressure, with new threats of violent expulsion regularly directed at them and hopes of permanence shat- tered again and again. The majority of the original families slowly gave up, but reinforcements arrived as displaced rural workers sought stability and opportunity on this ill-fated land. Despite expulsion actions, court orders, the intervention of state governors, death threats, and vigilante violence, the peas- ants hung on. In 1979 Andrade was 70 years old, blind in one eye, and barely able to speak but “was not in the mood to cede his land. Nor were his lawyers, as according to them, the farmers were trespassers” (O Estado de S. Paulo, March 18, 1979). In 1986 he had to give up when Brazil’s first civilian presi- dent, José Sarney, expropriated the land, bringing to something of a just close this tragic story.
Peasant resilience in the face of such intense and prolonged pressure seems to defy the logic of the military era. This was the same period that saw the dic- tatorship send three military missions to the Araguaia River basin in order to exterminate a small band of Communist militants (members of the Partido Comunista do Brasil—PCdoB) and facilitate the expansion of commodity agri- culture in peasant territory (Portela, 2002). Since this story of occupation and repression dominates representations of the military regime’s relationship with peasants, one might have expected the security apparatus to have eliminated the Gleba Santa Rita landless within a few days. But the military could not rule by violence alone. Machiavelli, Gramsci, Arendt, Skocpol, and other theorists of state power help us understand the necessity of consent for the longevity of even the most brutal regime. Even as the hard-liners tightened their grip on the regime and intensified the repression, they found ways to win the hearts and minds of the working class.
The early 1970s were relatively good years for the Brazilian economy. The so-called rising cake of an “economic miracle” of capitalist growth provided a basis for the popularity of the military president Emilio Garrastazú Médici (1969–1974) despite a concomitant heavy investment in repression. In a 1997 interview, the former union leader and future Brazilian president Luís Inácio Lula da Silva analyzed the Médici period (Couto, 1999: 117):
Today we can say that it was due to the external debt, you know, the Brazilian miracle and such. But a concrete fact is that, had there been direct elections at the time, Médici would have won. And it was a high point of political repression,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	137
138	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
what we now call the hard-line period of the military government. Médici’s popularity among the working class was huge. Now, why? Because it was a period of high employment.
If the relative prosperity of the period brought support for the regime among industrial workers, its popularity was even more profound in the countryside.
In his study of Brazilian citizenship, the historian José Murilo de Carvalho (2004: 172) comments that the “rural electorate supported [the military regime] in every election.” This habit could be explained away as simply a by-product of conservative rural traditions or the manipulation of voters by powerful rural bosses. To the contrary, the consent of the landless was rational when one considers that Médici approved the most sweeping reform in the history of Brazilian rural social relations, the PRORURAL law of May 1971. This law for the first time extended retirement benefits to rural workers and small farmers, eventually becoming one of the largest rural social programs in the world. Through the Rural Assistance Fund (Fundo de Assistência Rural— FUNRURAL), the law helped rural communities establish health care facilities and other social services. The military empowered the rural labor unions to administer these programs, stimulating a boom in rural labor union formation around the country via CONTAG’s MSTR (Ricci, 1999; Couto, 1999; Carvalho, 2004: 172; Gaspari, 2002: 210; Houtzager, 2004). Into the twenty-first century, measures based on these policies continued to support hundreds of towns and millions of people.
The growth of the rural labor union movement, with its Church connec- tions and state-sponsored social assistance services, was the lubricant of mili- tary rule in the countryside. In the case of the Santa Rita conflict, it is important to note that problems erupted in the same year the Teodoro Sampaio rural labor union was founded, 1973. Statistically speaking, this was a tough time for peasants. Between 1970 and 1978, Teodoro Sampaio lost 78 percent of its rural properties. The number of minifundios, farms with less than 20 hectares, dropped from 1,862 to 203. Two new properties with more than 10,000 hectares appeared during this period, and the number of farms between 20 and 100 hectares grew by 20 percent. The geographer Leite connected the dramatic decline in minifundios to the end of the lumber cycle, as nearly all the remain- ing lumber mills closed in the 1970s with the disappearance of the forest reserve. The lumbermen, many of whom lived on small subsistence plots without title, were left without paid work and forced to migrate. This resulted in a decline in cultivated area of nearly 10,000 hectares during the period. In 1979, the state planning department issued a development proposal that con- firmed CESP’s intentions and added a sugarcane alcohol mill (an innovative fuel important to the military’s 1974 development project, the Programa Nacional de Alcool—Próalcool), promising further land concentration with the expansion of sugarcane cultivation on 15,000 hectares (Leite, 1998: 184– 189; Thomaz Júnior, 2002).
According to Divanil José Cruz, who ran the union with his father, José Ferreira “Zé” Cruz, from 1973 until the 1990s, it was Mayor José Natalicio dos Santos who initiated the process of founding the organization. Teodoro Sampaio was only about 10 years old and had no medical services, he explained. Taking advantage of FUNRURAL financing, Teodoro Sampaio
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
could gain a clinic, with a doctor and dentist. The Cruzes had been involved with a rural union in Paraná before moving to the Pontal. A priest there had impressed upon these farmers the need to be involved in the union move- ment. In Teodoro Sampaio, their efforts paid off. It was not long before the union had around 1,500 paying members, and—along with the Church—it quickly became one of the town’s chief social institutions. Confirming Lula’s impression of working-class political behavior at the time, Cruz became a member of the pro-regime party, Aliança Renovadora Nacional (Alliance for National Renewal—ARENA), and expressed nostalgia during the interview for military rule because of the support that rural unions then received.
Carvalho (2004: 172) argues, like many critics, that FUNRURAL helped co- opt the rural labor movement. “Now, assistance tasks were assigned to the unions, which contributed a lot toward reducing their political combativeness and generated political dividends for the regime.” The political scientist Claudinei Coletti (1998: 85) is harsher in his criticism of union officers like Cruz. “In the hands of the dictatorship, assistentialism transforms itself into a powerful instrument of social and political control, permitting the expansion of the self-interested union administration (peleguismo) in the labor move- ment.” Both concede that positive results were possible. The case of Teodoro Sampaio confirms Carvalho’s suspicion that some towns had medical services solely because of the union’s administration of the FUNRURAL. Coletti says that a combative union leadership could convert the FUNRURAL into a base for organizing greater negotiating power for rural labor. Analysts such as Biorn Maybury-Lewis (1994), Regina Novaes (1997), and Peter Houtzager (2004) emphasized these positive aspects of the military’s strategy and sought to understand “the politics of the possible.” It is in these terms, I believe, that the Santa Rita conflict is best understood. Without considering the possible positive role of the Teodoro Sampaio union, it is difficult to understand peas- ant resistance.
In August 1973, 80 military police fulfilled the first judicial expulsion order of Santa Rita peasants without interference. In January another 16 families were forcefully removed, but further action by the police was contained by Zelmo Denari, the recently appointed regional state prosecutor (subprocura- dor). Born in Presidente Bernardes in 1935, Denari was the son of a large land- holder. Dr. Guerra, the Communist physician who helped found the Santo Anastácio peasant league in 1946, was the family doctor, and Denari told me that he had been impressed by the spirited debates Guerra and his father had had as he grew up. He claimed the Guerra children as best friends and cred- ited the family with shaping his value system. In the late 1950s Denari left the area to attend college and make his career in São Paulo. When he returned, he found that his role as defender of São Paulo’s interests had the potential of placing him in conflict with landlords like Andrade. To do his job well meant resurrecting disputed title claims, and the expulsion of the Santa Rita peasants stimulated him to do this both professionally and morally. The presence and participation of Bishop José Gonçalves da Costa helped him turn the tide. The bishop denounced the police action and treatment of peasants as “inhumane,” drawing attention to their plight. Denari entered the fray, contending that the land did not belong to Andrade and that the peasants should be allowed to stay until proper ownership was established. This act and Denari’s consistent
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	139
140	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
effort to demonstrate that the land belonged to the state proved crucial. Although the military regime had begun its own process of controlled with- drawal, Denari reported that he had received threats from police and land- lords that frightened him enough to make him lose control of his bladder in his sleep (O Estado de S. Paulo, July 13, 1977; July 11, 1978; interview, Zelmo Denari, Presidente Prudente, SP, 2004; interview, Pedro Paulo Guerra, Alphaville, SP, 2004).
In 1975 the press began to cover the Santa Rita dispute, and until about 1985 the Teodoro Sampaio rural union remained present in the narrative as a regular advocate for the peasants. It appeared first as a provider of social assistance, a relief agency of sorts, expected to help the landless survive once expelled from the land. From the perspective of the regime and critics of bread-and-butter unionism, this should have been the beginning and end of the union’s involve- ment. The papers quoted Divanil Cruz as complaining that the union did not have enough resources to deal with so many displaced families. He noted that membership dropped with the end of the harvest season and that workers did not make enough to afford dues. This, in and of itself, was a harsh criticism of the regime. Reporters were directed to document rural labor conditions. “Shape-up sugarcane cutters (bóias-frias),” an observer was quoted as saying, “so long as they have some land, even in a situation where they suffer suppli- ers who won’t extend them any credit, a banking system that makes it impos- sible for them to get financing, malnutrition, and even death due to a lack of medicine, don’t see these as sufficient motives for complaint. They normally accept everything, because the slightest protest can mean they’ll be fired” (O Estado de S. Paulo, November 1, 1975). Ten years later such stories would be common fare, but this one exposed a fissure as yet unrecognized in the reflec- tion of the “economic miracle.” The Cruzes regularly exploited the attention attracted by the Santa Rita land struggle to expose rural distress and document their efforts to address problems. The union reportedly worked with the mayor and the Church to create shelters and raise money to feed and clothe peasants expelled from the Santa Rita lands.
These two union roles—relief agency and propagandist—were maintained throughout the period. Two other roles were also typical of the Teodoro Sampaio rural labor union: interlocutor and legal advocate. These roles put the union in the news as representative of the peasants before executive and judicial authorities. These were classic union jobs, and clearly the regime accepted these functions. As interlocutor, Zé Cruz in particular appeared to be ready, willing, and able to lobby executive authorities on behalf of peasants. To help attract attention to the cause of the landless and give him more bargaining power with the authorities, he also wore the hat of an organizer (O Estado de S. Paulo, March 23, 1980).
During the transition from military to civilian rule, Zé Cruz helped organize several rallies and spoke privately with three governors, helping to buy more time from each. In 1977 he spoke with the dictatorship’s state intervener, Paulo Egydio Martins, when he visited the nearby town of Andradina. “There’s one thing I can guarantee,” Egydio said after the interview. “No one is going to touch you. This I guarantee” (A Folha de S. Paulo, October 1, 1977). In April 1979 he spoke with Paulo Maluf, the military’s new state administrator, and publicity
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
surrounding the appeal apparently forced Maluf to stop another expulsion action later that month. Arguing for the “settlement of the squatters ‘in order to impede injustice and social chaos’ through the land’s disappropriation” (Realidade Rural, 1979; Santos, 1979), in 1983 Cruz organized a caravan of Santa Rita landless to go to the state capital to appeal to São Paulo’s first postcoup elected governor, Franco Montoro. In March 1984 Montoro expropriated a por- tion of the land and ordered it distributed among the peasants, a job that Cruz and Denari were to manage (Realidade Rural, 1983; O Estado de S. Paulo, March 24, 1984; A Folha de S. Paulo, March 24, 1984).
While Zé Cruz worked on the patriarch, lawyers worked on the courts. From the common-law perspective, the Brazilian judicial system appears to be extremely dysfunctional (Taylor, 2004), but its decentralized structure pro- vided a means for repeatedly addressing grievances, and these appeals bought time for the peasants. The Teodoro Sampaio union did not have its own law- yer until 1980. Before that, CONTAG and state federation (Federação Estadual de Trabalhadores na Agricultura do Estado de São Paulo—FETAESP) lawyers advised Cruz on the peasants’ legal rights. In 1979 Cruz revealed his frustra- tion with the legal strategy, suggesting that “‘legal means for helping them were already almost completely drained’” (O Estado de S. Paulo, March 23, 1979). But the following year the attorney Emidio Severino da Silva started to work for the union. He joined Zelmo Denari and his assistant attorney, Gilberto Lima, in their judicial appeals.
The courts were in fact an essential battleground in the land struggle, since a key issue was the legal status of Pontal lands. While everything else was going on, judges in various jurisdictions and at various levels worked to resolve the question of the land’s rightful ownership. Justino de Andrade’s lawyers defended his title tooth-and-nail while the peasants’ lawyers fought to demonstrate that the land properly belonged to the state. The labor move- ment joined the state’s case but also used the courts to defend the rights of the landless under the land statute, the rural labor statute, and other laws that gave them leverage. Under the land statute, for example, contracted Santa Rita tenant farmers had rights to permanence on the land until the end of the harvest season. They also had the right to be compensated for the structures they had built, so the police were accused of violating the law when they destroyed peasant property. The relative autonomy of judges within the judi- cial system allowed lawyers to seek out sympathetic jurists to issue last- minute stays. These cases disrupted the easy application of class power on the part of landlords and their allies in the military and helped extend the peas- ants’ stay until the end of the dictatorship. It was only then, with expropria- tion decreed by President Sarney in August 1986, that the landless of Santa Rita do Pontal became smallholders (O Estado de S. Paulo, August 24, 1986).
Despite its perfect old-movement characteristics, the Teodoro Sampaio rural labor union acted in ways that demonstrated some continuity with the new social movements. The union was part of a system rooted in historical forces of Communist and Catholic organizing among peasants in the region. Its immediate origins lay in the development process of a new municipality then being incorporated into the sugarcane-fuel agro-industry, part of the military regime’s plans for Brazil’s orderly progress toward global capitalist integration. The enclosure of the Santa Rita peasants was part of this process:
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	141
142	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
once they had cleared the land of forest, they were to be cleared away as well, opening the land for commodities such as beef cattle and sugarcane. But the tenants resisted, and union leaders Zé Cruz and his son Divanil, migrants and farmers themselves, took up their cause in the name of the rural working classes, ignoring the fact that the peasants were nonmembers.
Despite its roots in historic social mobilizations, the Teodoro Sampaio union had clearer origins in political and bureaucratic influences. Thus, part of the Cruzes’ work involved taking advantage of peasant mobilization rather than instigating it directly—a marked difference from the methods later used by the MST. The reasons for this cannot be explained away by accusing the Cruzes of being co-opted. Structurally, the union was part of a state-sanctioned system, arising and descending from the municipal unions to the state federa- tions to the national confederation, CONTAG. The mode of production at the time also lent itself to a defensive rather than offensive stance. At this time, the task of agrarian reformers was not to create settlements for landless peasants but to help retain those already on the land. In either case, as Hellman wrote, classic base-and-superstructure issues, the sorts of influences that supposedly had no impact on the new movements, were at play. The MSTR used a num- ber of novel weapons to represent the peasants’ interests, including the manipulation of public sympathy through the media, assemblies and manifes- tations, social assistance relief measures, pressuring authorities, appealing to officials, the courts, and alliance building with other entities as well as politi- cians. These same “weapons of the weak” (Scott, 1987) remained part of the MST tool bag into the twenty-first century.
MST/VIA CAMPESINA: NOVO CANUDOS AND ZÉ RAINHA
Some blame the incompetence of Brazil’s bourgeoisie for the rise of the nation’s landless movement (Stédile, 2006). Because of the misfeasance or mal- feasance of the ruling class, tens of millions of Brazilian peasants fell into the ranks of the unemployed, underemployed, and socially and economically mar- ginalized during the period of military rule (Martine, 1987). With the end of the regime, the New Republic was formed. Most Brazilians suffered significant declines in their power of consumption, and a new index, the misery index, was created to chart change. Signs of hope came in the form of popular mobi- lizations such as the 1992 movement to oust a corrupt president and the MST’s 1997 march to Brasília. For a time, politics and political parties remained impor- tant vehicles for democratization, but a variety of factors caused many of the poor to put more faith in autonomous organizations and direct action. In this neoliberal phase of capitalist development, the state began to withdraw from the economy as well as society, and militants, like entrepreneurs, were left to their own devices. With a productive base in agriculture, the MST proved uniquely successful in this new environment, organizing hundreds of thou- sands of sem-terras and helping hundreds of thousands of families acquire farms in publicly financed settlements around the country (Robles, 2001; Branford and Rocha, 2002). By 2004 the MST reported 350,000 families living in 5,000 agrarian-reform settlements and 200,000 land-occupation encampments, for a total of some 2 million members; in 2008 the Center for Agrarian Reform
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Study, Research and Projects of the Universidade Estadual Paulista reported the MST to have counted on the participation of 376,214 families in 2,183 land occupations between 2000 and 2007 (MST, 2004; Fernandes et al., 2008: 30).
Countering expectations about the process of modernization, the disap- pearance of the peasantry, and the formation of a rural proletariat, many land struggles continued to take place in the state of São Paulo into the twenty-first century. The history of grilagem and skillful organizing were to make the Pontal a lightning rod for the MST. There, José Rainha Júnior, a charismatic militant from a farm family in Espírito Santo state, eventually called for turn- ing the region into a Novo Canudos, recalling the historic millenarian com- munity established in Northeastern Brazil by the rural poor at the end of the nineteenth century (Levine, 1995). As famously recounted by the Brazilian journalist Euclides da Cunha, thousands of peasants repelled three govern- ment assaults on the original Canudos until the military eventually sup- pressed their resistance in 1897 (Cunha, 1999 [1901]). A century later, the Pontal town of Euclides da Cunha Paulista was the setting for lively land struggles. In São Paulo and neighboring states the MST found thousands of recruits for its land-occupation strategy. “We’re going to pump up the occupa- tions,” Rainha threatened in 1995. “There’ll be no reduction” of peasant pres- sure on landlords, he said. “If military police troops come into the picture, it’ll be like a repetition of Canudos, 100 years later, only this time the victory will be that of the landless” (Oeste Notícias [Presidente Prudente, SP], April 11, 1995; O Imparcial [Presidente Prudente, SP], April 11, 1995).
Rainha’s aggressive discourse derived from experience rather than educa- tion, strictly speaking. Like Veras and Cruz, Rainha was a peasant. His father had been a smallholder, but financial problems with Brazil’s dependent- capitalist development model had forced him to sell his land and enter the rural labor market. Rainha and his siblings had followed suit. Like most peas- ants, the Rainha family was Catholic, and like many young people radicalized during the dictatorship Rainha was awakened to the injustice of his situation by liberation theology. He became an activist in the Church and took classes from numerous priests and laymen, including the progressive Catholic essay- ist Frei Betto. In the early 1980s, still a rural laborer, Rainha joined an opposition ticket influenced by the Church to take control of the rural labor union. With little formal education but considerable ideological and political formation, he was chosen to participate in founding the MST in 1984. He eventually left the labor movement and dedicated his time to organizing land occupations and protests in support of agrarian reform in Espírito Santo and states farther north, enjoying several dramatic victories. The target of repeated death threats, he was transferred to the Pontal in 1991 (Barbeiro and Nascimento, 1996; Salgado and Peres, 2003; interview, José Rainha Júnior, Mirante Paulista, SP, 2004).
One of the first bases of support for establishing the MST in northwestern São Paulo came from a former priest, the Belgian René Parren, and his Brazilian wife Lúcia, who lived in Andradina. Inspired by liberation theology, Parren became frustrated with the local Church hierarchy and so actively engaged in the temporal world that he lost his vocation. The object of his engagement was a land struggle that resulted in the creation of a land-reform settlement in Andradina known as the Fazenda Primavera. This was the launching pad for establishing the landless movement in the region, the
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	143
144	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Movimento dos Sem Terras do Oeste de São Paulo. Pontal lands, with their questionable legal status and militant residents, proved fertile soil for the movement’s expansion in the 1980s. At first, Parren and movement activists from Andradina turned to the Teodoro Sampaio rural labor union to build an alliance to help the Santa Rita landless (Fernandes, 1996: 85–114; interviews: José Domingos Bragheto, São Paulo, SP, 2004 and René Parren, Andradina, SP, 2005).
In April 1983, Parren’s movement and the union presented a petition to Governor Montoro signed by 4,000 landless workers from the Northwest interested in obtaining land in the state. In June, the Movimento submitted a follow-up letter threatening land occupations if the governor failed to act quickly by expropriating and distributing land to the landless. “One of the outs for the economic crisis,” read the letter, “is to make AGRARIAN REFORM, as it will create millions of jobs. . . . For this reason we demand . . . AN AGRARIAN POLICY THAT FAVORS THE SMALL FARMER, OR WE WILL BE OBLIGED TO OCCUPY THESE LANDS TO BE ABLE TO SUSTAIN OUR SONS AND DAUGHTERS AND CONTINUE SURVIVING.” A handwritten note on the letter, signed by Parren, explains that he took advantage of a gubernatorial visit to the Pontal to organize a caravan of rural workers to deliver the appeal to Montoro and agriculture secretary José Gomes da Silva in Presidente Epitácio (Movimento dos Sem Terras do Oeste de São Paulo, 1983). As we have seen, this campaign resulted in a state expropriation decree in March 1984.
The strategy of appealing to the governor and organizing caravans of land- less workers to increase the pressure and personalize the cause were tactics that Zé Cruz and the Teodoro Sampaio union used. Coletti (1998: 83) criticizes the unions as old social movements for just these sorts of tactics as well as for depending on letter writing. The Movimento’s letter celebrated the labor movement’s 1979 national congress, which had confirmed agrarian reform as a central demand. Indeed, for nearly two decades CONTAG’s slogan was “Agrarian Reform: Land for Those Who Work It.” Union appeals also used the desperate situation of the posseiros to challenge the state morally, protested the economic crisis suffered by the class, and presented agrarian reform as a key solution to Brazil’s political and economic challenges.
One of the important distinctions between old and new peasant representa- tives lay in their relationship to the state and the law. The unions were part of the corporatist state structure and depended significantly on the skilled use of existing procedures and processes (albeit sometimes radically interpreted). The Movimento’s letter to Montoro expressed an ultimatum based on the movement’s willingness to violate the law. If the governor were to delay in implementing policies favoring small farmers, they wrote (and in capital let- ters!), the peasants would be obliged to occupy—to take—the lands in ques- tion to feed their children and persevere. This threat of direct action was different from anything the unions contemplated, and it was to remain a defining characteristic of the MST that grew out of regional groups from around the nation such as Parren’s Movimento.
The first private-property occupation in the Pontal started on November 15, 1983, when several hundred landless crossed the fence line onto Teodoro Sampaio property owned by the industrial conglomerate Camargo-Correia.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Parren’s movement did not initiate this action, but, along with the union, it worked with the Church to help the families and negotiate a solution with the state. The occupation, which grew with the arrival of thousands of landless workers from Paraná and other states, helped pressure the state government to expropriate and distribute lands in the municipality. Following Montoro’s expropriation ceremony the following March, Cruz commented that now some 8,000 landless would become peasants: “The group of farmers hoping for land in Teodoro Sampaio has reached 5,000 people. Adding in the area’s 3,000 migrant farmworkers, that means that 8,000 people are happy today” (O Estado de S. Paulo, August 11, 1984). But the courts overturned Montoro’s action in May 1985, and the MST do Oeste took the law into its own hands, occupying Santa Rita in solidarity with the families already there (O Estado de S. Paulo, May 8, 1985, and October 27, 1985). Despite his lack of connection to the occupation, Cruz claims that he suffered death threats from a recently formed landlord protection society called the Democratic Rural Union (União Democrática Ruralista—UDR). He eventually condemned the occupation as an “invasion” and expressed his support for the decision of the federal agrar- ian reform agency (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária— INCRA) to reject applications for land in the Pontal from out-of-state immigrants (Jornal do Brasil, November 8, 1985; O Estado de S. Paulo, November 17, 1985). A pattern of distinction between the two groups—one functioning within the corporatist system, one outside it—is confirmed by this case.
The law had always been important to the rural labor movement. Lyndolpho Silva, the national head of PCB rural labor organizing in the 1950s and CONTAG’s first president, noted the power of promising rural workers that “this here’s the law” “Peasants and rural workers were men who put a lot of faith in the law,” he told me. “They were educated that way. What’s outside the law, scares them” (Welch, 1999: 210). Silva’s conclusion is an intriguing one in the context of nearly universal emphasis on the way Brazilian culture deni- grates the law in favor of personalism, a trait exemplified by MST direct action and one that was evident at the time I interviewed Silva in 1988. The quote reflects Silva’s work as a promoter of Brazilian rural labor law during the 1950s and the PCB’s struggle for legitimacy, as well as the modernist faith and progressive historical vision that were essential to the postwar ideological context (Medeiros, 1999; Cunha, 2004; Welch, 2006b). By the 1980s, however, many rural workers had experienced the poverty of progress, and the long saga of the Santa Rita landless demonstrates the limiting characteristics of the law more than any emancipating quality. The rural bourgeoisie frequently got the upper hand in the judicial process, whereas the working class lost again and again, its occasional victories proving almost Pyrrhic. This discussion recalls the phrase attributed to Getúlio Vargas: “For friends, everything; for enemies, the law” (DaMatta, 1991: 137–197).
This is not to say that the MST pursued an outlaw strategy. To the contrary, it developed a method of legally defending its actions, seeking to convince the public and the courts that its interpretation of the law was more legitimate than that of its opponents (Meszaros, 2000). Over time, the movement seems to have developed a plan of action rooted in common law—in the notion that the law should reflect rather than control reality, a posture quite different from that expected of citizens living in civil-law regimes such as Brazil’s (Davidson,
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	145
146	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
1953; Thompson, 1975; Tourinho Neto, 2000; Taylor, 2004). In the case of land rights, the link between physical possession and entitlement is firmly based in Brazilian experience (Foweraker, 1980; Holston, 1991). Since 1988 the MST has defended its land occupation strategy with constitutional law, particularly Articles 184 to 189, with their emphasis on the legitimate motives for agrarian reform and the social interest or function of land.
The MST brought tactical innovation to the agrarian reform struggle, but the strategy of interpreting the law to favor peasants is little different from the way it was used during the peasant league and ULTAB/CONTAG periods. Land targeted for occupation by the MST has generally been identified as subject to agrarian reform expropriation by the appropriate state or federal agencies. Occupations generally seek to speed the implementation of deci- sions already made. They are secretively organized and take place at night in order to prevent landowners from preempting them with protective court orders and impassable barricades. When court orders arrive to force the expulsion of militants, the MST usually negotiates a peaceful withdrawal and forms an encampment on public land near the land in question. When delays occur, the MST organizes further occupations as well as sit-ins in public build- ing (Fernandes, 2004; Garcia, 2000). These acts of civil disobedience have rarely resulted in the successful prosecution of leading militants, although numerous leaders have been jailed and many have been killed by outlaw landlord henchmen or trigger-happy authorities.
Running all of these risks, Rainha proved remarkably resilient. Located in the Pontal, near the hub of national and international media production, Rainha had become, by the late 1990s, the personification of the MST.6 His high profile may have helped keep him alive, but it certainly did not help him stay out of jail. He was constantly targeted for arrest, accused of various crimes from murder to the illegal possession of weapons. The latter charge caused his most prolonged imprisonment, which lasted from July to December 2003. Claiming a desire to avoid repeated arrest, Rainha maintained a low profile in 2004. In fact, in what became known as “Red April,” with an unprecedented number of land occupations memorializing the 19 MST marchers murdered by police in 1996, Rainha’s name hardly appeared in the press (Arruda et al., 2004). In May the MST juggled 10 occupations in the Pontal alone, but Rainha’s name entered the picture only for historical background (Tomazela, 2004c). In June he reappeared in a story in O Estado de S. Paulo about the MST’s efforts to influence the upcoming mid-term elections. He had been sent to the state of Bahia for the month to talk with supportive politicians, arguing that they could count on the votes of 135,000 militants if their actions favored agrarian reform (Arruda, 2004). At the end of the month, the same paper reported that a dis- pute between Rainha and another Pontal militant had resulted in the disman- tling of the huge encampment known as Novo Canudos.
Established in May 2003, the encampment attracted as many as 4,000 fami- lies. Rather than resist the arrival of families from neighboring states as Cruz had recommended, Rainha welcomed them. José Maria Tomazela, a reporter who regularly covered the land struggle for O Estado de S. Paulo, connected the size of Novo Canudos to Lula’s inauguration in 2003. Lula’s election brought the expectation that the PT administration would settle all agrarian reform campers. Inspired by party rivalry, the governor of São Paulo announced his
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
plans to settle 1,400 families in the region. Rainha took advantage of these public policy statements to concentrate the landless on lands in Presidente Epitácio, a Pontal municipality located on the bank of the Paraná River, which divides the states of São Paulo and Mato Grosso do Sul. In this remote setting, he reiterated his desire to re-create Canudos, which had claimed a population of nearly 30,000 peasants before its repression. Expecting a historically sympa- thetic politician to institute agrarian reform on his own, the MST held steady during 2003 without promoting a single occupation in the Pontal. Rainha’s imprisonment helped prevent a break with this peace treaty. But after the MST founding coordinator João Pedro Stédile declared the movement’s intention to “make the countryside a living hell [infernizar o campo]” during April, the remaining occupants of Novo Canudos were mobilized to participate in a week-long march to Presidente Prudente, rallying there in support of agrarian reform on April 6. A few days later they formed two groups of 300 each that were later deployed to occupy large farms subject to expropriation. In the fol- lowing weeks, the occupants played cat-and-mouse with authorities, resisting expulsion orders and negotiating with the police until the final “ultimatum,” when they peacefully withdrew (Tomazela, 2004a; 2004b).
In June 2004 the MST celebrated its twentieth birthday and entered a new phase that depended less on personalities like Rainha.7 The Red April occupa- tions had failed to force the Lula administration to implement agrarian reform. In fact, arguments in favor of an agribusiness development model intensified. As in broader economic policy, the Lula government proved orthodox in its agricultural policy, supporting a commodity-export model of wealth accumu- lation. As agribusiness advocates such as Lula’s first minister of agriculture, Roberto Rodrigues, argued, the extraordinary profits of exported soybeans, beef, and oranges could be used to pay down Brazil’s debt, freeing resources for social investment, including family agriculture. Rainha criticized the large- producer approach as “murderous,” noting that land concentration threatened to wipe out the small family farmers who were Brazil’s greatest producers of foodstuffs (interview, José Rainha Júnior, Mirante Paulista, 2004; Welch, 2007).
Frustrated by Lula, the MST searched for new means of achieving the stra- tegic goal of agrarian reform. Movement organizers realized that forces had to be mobilized to counterbalance if not overwhelm the pressure of the agribusi- ness lobby. The search for new tactics also involved greater articulation with international allies in order to understand and confront transnational agri- business corporations and the Western governments that defend global agri- business trends. The MST solidified its long relationship with the Via Campesina by hosting the organization’s fourth international congress in Brazil on the occasion of the movement’s twentieth anniversary. Allying itself with other organizations, the MST formed the Via Campesina–Brasil and devised new tactics to confront agribusiness. Some of these included the occu- pation of “productive” plantations such as eucalyptus forests (used for cellu- lose production) and the construction of a unifying peasant identity for all rural social movements. As the Canadian anthropologist Annette Desmarais (2002: 99) has noted, “For the Vía Campesina, agrarian protest is driven by a strong peasant identity and a vision of an evolving and vibrant peasant cul- ture involving innovative practices and new ways of thinking about and doing politics.” Rainha’s go-it-alone tendencies conflicted with the collective
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	147
148	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
organization and diplomatic skills required by the new strategy of confronta- tion with agribusiness (Safatle and Pardini, 2004; Stédile et al., 2004; interview, José Rainha Júnior, Mirante Paulista, 2004).
In a lengthy interview of cofounder João Pedro Stédile in 1998, the geogra- pher Bernardo Mançano Fernandes asked if the MST was a peasant move- ment. Stédile responded: “I think that the MST was born as a peasant movement, one of agriculturalists accustomed to work with family labor that resolved to struggle for land.” If this was the case, asked Fernandes, why did they not call the MST the Movimento dos Camponeses Sem Terra? “Because the word peasant is somewhat elitist,” answered Stédile. He went on (Stédile and Fernandes, 1999: 31–32):
It has never been used by the peasants themselves. It isn’t, let us say, part of the common vocabulary. The PCB was the only organization that used the term camponês. The man of the country generally defines himself as an agricultor, rural worker, sharecropper (meeiro), or tenant (arrendatário). In truth, it’s more of a sociological or academic concept that might even reflect the reality in which they live but has not been assimilated as an identity. Without being a popular term, there was no way we could put it in the name of the movement. In essence, the MST was born as a peasant movement that waved the flag of three top demands: land, agrarian reform, and general changes in society. When we thought about how to conceptualize this, we perceived that the MST was different from historic peasant movements that only struggled for land.
Stédile’s analysis is important for conveying the memory of the moment of the MST’s founding. In fact, as we have seen, the PCB used the word camponês successfully in the 1940s and 1950s, and it was also used by the PCdoB, under Chinese influence, until the 1970s. But this political legacy of the peasant iden- tity led the dictatorship to repress the use of the word in the press, and it gradually disappeared from common usage (Welch, 2006b; interview, Moacir Palmeira, Campinas, SP, 2008).
In 2004, Stédile signaled a shift in tactics, using the term to describe the MST in his address to the national leadership meeting. Later that year, Rainha had not incorporated the new language. For him, a camponês was someone engaged in subsistence agriculture, probably the most popular definition (interview, José Rainha Júnior, Mirante Paulista, 2004). While scholars have demonstrated the term’s utility and appreciate its historical connections to Europe, those trained to lead the MST remained uncertain about using it to form a common collective identity.8 This is one reason that Via Campesina– Brasil decided in July 2005 to call together some of Brazil’s more prominent rural-studies scholars to produce the multivolume Coleção história social do campesinato no Brasil (Carvalho et al., 2008–2009). The hope was that revealing the history of this neglected class would provide its descendents and heirs inspiration to adopt the identity and a better chance of being respected in the present and future. As the study reveals, the term “peasant” has a rich politi- cal, social, and cultural history. The resurrection of the term in the present context is a symbolic act, an attempt to invent a tradition to fortify the landless and small-farmer movement.9
The international origins of this effort remind us of the forces that inspired Brazilian Communists to call their rural subjects camponeses, reaching out to organize them since the 1920s, forming the peasant leagues in the 1940s, and
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
founding ULTAB in the 1950s. While we cannot say the movement has come full circle, it would also be inaccurate to claim that today’s movement in this direction is new.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Conceptual generalizations about movements new and old, peasants, and democracy need to be measured against the experience of the groups being discussed. The capacity of social movements to challenge inequality and empower the poor to advance democracy and foment other dramatic changes is hurt when historical knowledge is neglected. Social history has the potential to make arguments about social movements weightier and more persuasive.
Considering the MST in historical perspective, some analysts have found parallels in the past and in other national settings. The journalists Susan Branford and Jan Rocha end their award-winning book Cutting the Wire (2002) by placing the movement in comparative historical perspective with the English Diggers, the American Populists, the Mexican revolutionaries, and the Italian peasant leagues. The Diggers, like the MST landless, they write, “delib- erately defied the power of landowners” (265) and linked enclosure to slavery and land to freedom. “Just like the MST a hundred years later,” they argue, the Populists “gave the oppressed farmers the confidence to think for themselves” (270), and along with the Italian peasants the MST has shown a willingness to “reinvent itself” (283). In the conclusion, Branford and Rocha raise the MST from its national context to the international context of the broad-based anti- globalization movement, where they see the potential for a revolutionary reversal of the “Green Revolution” recently reenergized by genetic engineering and relaxed trade rules: “The MST is well placed to join such a global revolu- tion. As some sem-terra themselves are realizing, their future is not as econom- ically unviable peasant communities living in a time warp but as modern, sustainable, green communities” (282). They introduce important historic par- allels that help us gain perspective on the MST as a social movement that we will eventually understand as having its own beginning, middle, and end.
By placing the MST in historical perspective we discover that this is not the first time that Brazilian militants have organized around the concept of the camponês as a political identity. The twentieth century is rich with examples of the struggle to improve the lot of the rural poor. Even the term sem-terra, which seems unique to the MST, was commonly used by Communists in the 1940s. Although the representation of peasants in the leadership of contempo- rary rural labor organizations may be greater than in the past, peasants such as Nestor Veras and Zé Cruz also struggled on behalf of their class. The MST has a national presence that the PCB and its organizations did not fully achieve by 1964, but the PCB’s peasant leagues and ULTAB associations had a presence in the leading agricultural states of the time. Moreover, the MST has yet to acquire a structure and membership as extensive and large as that con- structed by CONTAG by 1984. The Via Campesina uses new forms of com- munication and transportation to organize internationally, but it is not the first international organization to try to unite peasant struggles around the globe. My intervention is not intended to deny the remarkable achievements and
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	149
150	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
innovative characteristics of contemporary movements. To the contrary, I think it essential to fully investigate past achievements and innovations in order to fully appreciate and measure the conditions and prospects of the so- called new rural social movements.
NOTES
1. I am using “peasant struggle” as an umbrella term for the emancipatory fight for land and/or the labor rights and benefits of agricultural wage workers, sharecroppers, small family farmers, migrant rural workers, and all others who pursued agricultural livelihoods without being owners of significant property or full-time employers of alienated labor. This definition is rooted in theoretical literature such as Chayanov (1986), Mallon (1995), Kearney (1996), Brass (2003), and Otero (2004).
2. Among the entities examined here, the Via Campesina is a relative newcomer and merits introduction. It was founded in 1992 by representatives from peasant, farmer, and indigenous organizations from various countries and first headquartered in Honduras (later in Jakarta, Indonesia). It shares information and establishes cooperation among diverse member movements to defend the common interests of small and medium-sized farmers and fight against the expan- sion of corporate-led agribusiness globalization. The MST is coordinator of the Via Campesina’s South American region, which encompassed 32 organizations in 10 countries as of its fifth inter- national conference in October 2008. At that time, the MST was joined by four other organizations in the Via Campesina–Brasil: the Movimento de Mulheres Camponesas, the Movimento de Atingidos por Barragens, the Movimento de Pequenos Agricultores, and the Pastoral da Juventude Rural. The operational secretary of the Via Campesina–Brasil can be contacted at via- campesina@terra.com.br. The Via Campesina site is http://viacampesina.org/main_en/index .php, (accessed December 14, 2008). See Desmarais (2002) and Stédile et al. (2004).
3. Two hundred was the number reported in the April Notícias de Hoje. In Guarita (1948), the attendance list of the May 19, 1946, meeting included 112 names, all male.
4. Additional evidence for these stories can be found in DEOPS, “Delegacia da Policia de Santo Anastácio—Pomptuário 900,” Arquivo Público do Estado de São Paulo.
5. The term posseiro is just about as ugly and negative in connotation as its nearest English translation, “squatter.” The root of posseiro is posse, which means “possess.” The word is used to distinguish those who possess but do not own or have title to land, and it is used exclusively to describe those who are smallholders and thus precariously located in the political economy. (A large landholder without title is a grileiro, another negative term that is used exclusively by advocates of agrarian reform.) The more aggressive agricultural capitalism, expanding into less densely populated areas, the more posseiros had to be cleared away. An interesting account of this process from the period is Pomar et al. (1981).
6. The pinnacle of recognition in Brazil today is representation in the 8 p.m. Globo TV Network soap opera (novela). In 1996, Rainha and his militant wife, Diolinda, became models for MST militants in the novela Rei do Gado (Cattle King). For a compelling account of the sociopolitical function of Brazilian novelas, see The Heart That Bleeds (Guillermoprieto, 1994: 287–316).
7. Rainha was formally expelled from the MST by mid-2006. During years of tense relations with the MST’s national coordinating committee, he submitted himself to further training and educa- tion, but the media continued to isolate him as if he and the movement were one and the same, and his charisma expanded his popular following among workers in the Pontal. These two forces led him to make individual decisions that irritated and finally distanced him from the MST leadership, which believed that disciplined collective behavior was essential to the movement’s longevity. In 2007, Rainha’s connections to the Movement were completely cut by the MST National Directorate.
8. In 2004 I interviewed 15 mid-level MST militants. They included individuals from around Brazil who were organizers, encampment leaders, regional delegates, agronomists, and other tech- nical specialists. Each was asked to describe his or her understanding of “agricultural peasants (camponeses).” Few expressed the sophisticated politicized perspective of the Via Campesina.
9. As a participant in the history project’s national editorial council, I offer this interpretation on the basis of my experience and the concept of Hobsbawm and Ranger (1983).
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
REFERENCES
Arruda, Roldão 2004 “Sem-terra batem recorde de invasões em 10 anos.” O Estado de S. Paulo, May 28.
Arruda, Roldão et al. 2004 “MST investe nas eleições para ampliar poder.” O Estado de S. Paulo, June 13.
Barbeiro, Heródoto and Gilberto Nascimento 1996 “Rainha fala pela primeira vez desde prisão de líderes.” O Imparcial (Presidente Prudente, SP), February 24.
Barriguelli, José Claúdio (ed.) 1981 Subsídios à história das lutas no campo em São Paulo (1870–1956). São Carlos, SP: Arquivo de História Contemporânea, UFSCAR.
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha 2002 Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Brass, Tom (ed.) 2003 Latin American Peasants. Portland, OR: Frank Cass.
Callado, Antônio 2003 (1985) Entre o Deus e a vasilha: ensaio sobre a reforma agrária brasileria, a qual nunca foi feita. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira.
Campanhole, Adriano and Hilton Lobo Campanhole (eds.) 1980 Legislação agrária. São Paulo: Editora Atlas.
Carvalho, Horácio Martíns de et al. 2008–2009 Coleção história social do campesinato no Brasil. 10 vols. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP.
Carvalho, José de Murilo 2004 Cidadania no Brasil: O longo caminho. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Civilização Brasileira.
Chayanov, Alexander Vasilevich 1986 The Theory of Peasant Economy. Ed. Teodor Shanin. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Coletti, Claudinei 1998 A estrutura sindical no campo: A propósito da organização dos assalariados rurais na região de Ribeirão Preto. Campinas: Editora da UNICAMP.
Correia, Altino 1977 “No Pontal, 55 familias sob ameaça de despejo iminente.” O Estado de S. Paulo, July 12.
Couto, Ronaldo Costa 1999 História indiscreta da ditadura e da abertura: Brasil, 1964–1985. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Record.
Cunha, Euclides da 1999 (1901) Os sertões. Rio de Janeiro: Livraria Francisco Alves Editora.
Cunha, Paulo Ribeiro da 2004 O camponês e a história: A construção da ULTAB e a fundação da CONTAG nas memórias de Lyndolpho Silva. São Paulo: Instituto Astrojildo Pereira.
DaMatta, Roberto 1991 Carnivals, Rogues, and Heroes: An Interpretation of the Brazilian Dilemma. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Davidson, Theresa Sherrer 1953 “The Brazilian inheritance of Roman law,” pp. 56–90 in James B. Watson, Theresa Sherrer Davidson, and Earl W. Thomas (eds.), Brazil: Papers Presented in the Institute for Brazilian Studies. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.
Desmarais, Annette-Aurélie 2002 “The Vía Campesina: consolidating an international peasant and farm movement.” Journal of Peasant Studies 29 (2): 91–124.
Escobar, Arturo and Sonia E. Alvarez (eds.) 1992 “New social movements,” in New Social Movements in Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	151
152	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano 1996 MST: Formação e territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec. 2000 A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes. 2004 “Modelos de desenvolvimento em conflito: o agronegócio e a Via Camponesa,” in Rosa Maria Vieira Medeiros, Álvaro Luiz Heidrich, and Luis Fernando Massini Fontoura (eds.), Tradição e tecnologia: As novas territorialidades do espaço agrário brasileiro: Anais XVII Encontro Nacional de Geografia Agrária realizado de 11 a 15 de novembro de 2004. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade/UFRGS.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano, Clifford Andrew Welch, João Cleps Júnior, and João Edmilson Fabrini (eds.)
2008 DATALUTA: Banco de Dados da Luta pela Terra, Relatório 2007. Presidente Prudente, SP:
NERA. Foweraker, Joe
1980 The Struggle for Land: A Political Economy of the Pioneer Frontier in Brazil from 1930 to the
Present Day. New York: Cambridge University Press. Frank, André Gunder and Marta Fuentes
1989 “Ten theses on social movements.” World Development 17: 179–189. French, John D.
1989 “Industrial workers and the birth of the Populist Republic in Brazil, 1945–1946.” Latin
American Perspectives 16 (4): 6–28. Garcia, José Carlos
2000 “O MST entre desobediência e democracia,” in Juvelino Stozake (ed.), A questão agrária
e a justiça. São Paulo: Revista dos Tribunais. Gaspari, Elio
2002 A ditadura escancarada: As ilusões. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras. Gonçalves Neto, Wenceslau
1997 Estado e agricultura no Brasil: Política agrícola e modernização econômica brasileira, 1960–1980.
São Paulo: Editora Hucitec. Goodman, David
1989 “Rural economy and society,” pp. 49–98 in Edmar L. Bacha and Herbert S. Klein (eds.), Social Change in Brazil, 1945–1985: The Incomplete Transition. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Guarita, Floriano Ferreira 1948 “Relação de elementos comunistas, também presentes a extinta Lig. Camponesa de Santo Anastácio, conforme livro de presença do dia 19/05/46.” Delegacia Regional de Policia de Presidente Prudente, Promptuário 929, Arquivo Público do Estado de São Paulo.
Guillermoprieto, Alma 1994 The Heart That Bleeds: Latin America Now. New York: Vintage Books.
Hellman, Judith Adler 1995 “The riddle of new social movements: who they are and what they do,” in Sandor Halebsky and Richard L. Harris (eds.), Capital, Power, and Inequality in Latin America. Boulder: Westview Press.
Hobsbawm, Eric and Terence Ranger 1983 The Invention of Tradition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Holston, James 1991 “The misrule of law: land and usurpation in Brazil.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 4: 695–725.
Houtzager, Peter P. 2004 Os últimos cidadãos: Conflito e modernização no Brasil rural. São Paulo: Editora Globo.
Kearney, Michael 1996 Reconceptualizing the Peasantry: Anthropology in Global Perspective. Boulder: Westview Press.
Knight, Alan 1990 “Historical continuities in social movements,” pp. 78–102 in Joe Foweraker and Ann L. Craig (eds.), Popular Movements and Political Change in Mexico. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Leite, José Ferrari 1998 A ocupação do Pontal do Paranapanema. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Levine, Robert M. 1995 O sertão prometido: O massacre de Canudos. São Paulo: Editora da Universidade de São Paulo.
Linhares, Maria Yedda and Francisco Carlos da Silva 1999 Terra prometida: Uma história da questão agrária no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Campus.
Mallon, Florencia E. 1995 Peasant and Nation: The Making of Postcolonial Mexico and Peru. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Martine, George 1987 “Êxodo rural, concentração urbana e fronteira agrícola,” pp. 59–79 in George Martine and Ronaldo Coutinho Garcia (eds.), Os impactos sociais da modernização agrícola. São Paulo: Editora Caetes.
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn 1994 The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de 1989 História dos movimentos sociais no campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE. 1999 “Lavradores, trabalhadores agrícolas, camponeses: os comunistas e a constituição de classes no campo.” Ph.D. diss., Instituto de Filosofia e Ciências Humanas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas.
Meszaros, George 2000 “Taking the land into their hands: the Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian state.” Journal of Law and Society 27: 517–541.
Moniz, Cesidio Pinto da Fonseca 1949 “Relatório do inquerito policial instaurado em Santo Anastácio relativamente á agista- ção comunista entre os trabalhadores agricolas da região da Alta Sorocabana, vendo resultar no conflito verificado no dia 20 de março de 1949 naquela cidade, 30 de março.” Delegacia da Policia de Santo Anastácio, Promptuario 900, Delegacia Estadual da Polícia da Ordem Política e Social, Arquivo do Estado de São Paulo.
Moraes, Clodomir Santos de 1970 “Peasant leagues in Brazil,” pp. 453–501 in Rodolfo Stavenhagen (ed.), Agrarian Problems and Peasant Movements in Latin America. New York: Doubleday.
Movimento dos Sem Terras do Oeste de São Paulo 1983 “Carta ao Sr. Governador Franco Montoro.” Box Andradina, São Paulo. Arquivo da Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), Goiania, GO, Brazil.
MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra) 1987 (1985) Assassinatos no campo: crime e impunidade, 1964–1986. Vol. 2. São Paulo: Global Editora e Distribuidora. 2004 “Quem somos: 1984–2004, MST 20 anos de lutas, conquistas e dignidade!” http://www .mst.org.br/historico/historia.htm (accessed November 2, 2004).
Nef, Jorge 2006 “New social movements and the crisis of representative democracy in Latin America: some reflections on theory and issues.” Paper presented to the plenary session of the confer- ence “New Social Movements and Democracy in the Americas,” Tampa, FL.
Novaes, Regina Reyes 1997 De corpo e alma: Catolicismo, classes sociais e conflitos no campo. Rio de Janeiro: Graphia Editorial.
Otero, Gerardo 2004 ¿Adiós al campesinado? Democracia y formación política de las clases en el México rural. Mexico City: Miguel Ángel Porrúa.
Pomar, Wladimir et al. 1981 “Camponeses no Brasil: 11 milhões sem terra ou com pouca terra.” Movimento (São Paulo) 300 (April 27–May 3): 9–13.
Portela, Fernando 2002 Guerra de guerrilhas no Brazil: A saga do Aragnaia. São Paulo: Editora Terceiro Nome.
Realidade Rural
1979 “Mais uma vez o sindicato impede despejo.” 4 (6), 6. 1983 “Depois de 15 de agosto, Montoro deverá entender-se com Venturini sobre Pontal.” 8 (9), n.p.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	153
154	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Ricci, Rudá 1999 Terra de ninguém: Representação sindical rural no Brasil. Campinas: Editora da UNICAMP.
Robles, Wilder 2001 “Peasants speak: the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST) in Brazil.” Journal of Peasant Studies 28: 146–161.
Safatle, Amália and Flavia Pardini 2004 “Grãos na balança.” Carta Capital 11 (306).
Salgado, Eduardo and Leandra Peres 2003 “O beato Rainha.” Veja (São Paulo), June 18, 72–80.
Santos, Valderi dos 1979 “Suspenso o despejo dos posseiros da gleba S. Rita.” O Estado de S. Paulo, April 18. 1980 “No Pontal, indefinida situação de posseiros.” O Estado de S. Paulo, June 15.
Scott, James C. 1987 Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. Reprint edition. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Shanin, Teodor 1972 The Awkward Class. London: Oxford University Press.
Silva, Emiliana Andréo da 2003 O despertar do campo: Lutas camponesas no interior do Estado de São Paulo. São Paulo: Arquivo do Estado/Imprensa Oficial do Estado.
Silva, José Graziano da 1981 Progresso técnico e relações de trabalho na agricultura. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec. 1982 A modernização dolorosa: Estrutura agrária, fronteira agrícola e trabalhadores rurais no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar.
Slater, David 1985 “New social movements,” in David Slater (ed.), New Social Movements and the State in Latin America. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Stédile, João Pedro 2006 “Sair da crise com a energia do povo: entrevista,” pp. 141–191 in Juarez Guimarães (ed.), Leituras da crise: Diálogos sobre o PT, a democracia brasileira e socialismo. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo.
Stédile, João Pedro and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes 1999 Brava gente: A trajetória do MST e a luta pela terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Perseu Abramo.
Stédile, João Pedro, Horácio Martins, Samir Amin, Bernard Founou-Tchuigou, David Griffin, and Silvia Ribeiro
2004 A situação internacional da agricultura. Brasília: Cartilha Via Campesina–Brasil. Stédile, João Pedro and Francisco de Oliveira
2002 “Landless battalions: the Sem Terra Movement of Brazil.” New Left Review 15 (May–
June): 77–104. Taylor, Matthew M.
2004 “The riddle of high-impact, low-functionality courts: the federal judiciary and public policy in Brazil.” Paper presented at the meeting of the Brazilian Studies Association, Rio de Janeiro.
Thomaz Júnior, Antônio 2002 Por trás dos canaviais, os “nós” da cana: A relação capital x trabalho e o movimento sindical dos trabalhadores na agroindústria canavieira paulista. São Paulo: Annablume Editora e Comunicação.
Thompson, E. P. 1975 Whigs and Hunters: The Origins of the Black Act. New York: Pantheon Press.
Tomazela, José Maria 2004a “‘Luz amarela acendeu,’ anuncia líder do MST.” O Estado de S. Paulo, April 4. 2004b “Briga pões fim a mega acampamento de Rainha.” O Estado de S. Paulo, June 29. 2004c “Prefeito é conhecido como inimigo número 1 do MST.” O Estado de S. Paulo, May 4.
Tourinho Neto, Fernando da Costa 2000 “Legitimidade dos movimentos populares no estado democrático de direito: as ocupa- ções de terras,” in Juvelino Stozake (ed.), A questão agrária e a justiça. São Paulo: Revista dos Tribunais.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Vanden, Harry E. 2005 “Brazil’s landless hold their ground.” NACLA: Report on the Americas 38 (5): 21–27.
Veras, Nestor 1960 “O papel dos camponeses na revolução.” Novos Rumos (Rio de Janeiro), June 3–9. 1967 “A situação do movimento campones no Brasil, suas lutas e sua organização.” Paper presented to the Quinta Conferência Mundial dos Sindicatos do Trabalhadores da Agricultura, das Florestas e das Plantações. CEDEM/UNESP. Cx 27.03.79, 4.
Welch, Cliff 1995 “Labor internationalism: the origins of United States involvement in Brazilian unions, 1945–1965.” Latin American Research Review 30 (2): 61–89. 1999 The Seed Was Planted: The São Paulo Roots of Brazil’s Rural Labor Movement, 1924–1964. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. 2006a “Movement histories: a preliminary historiography of Brazil’s Landless Laborers’ Movement (MST).” Latin American Research Review 41 (1): 198–210. 2006b “Keeping communism down on the farm: The Brazilian rural labor movement during the cold war.” Latin American Perspectives 33 (3): 28–50. 2007 “Globalization and the transformation of work in rural Brazil: agribusiness, rural labor unions, and peasant mobilization.” International Labor and Working Class History 36.
Welch, Cliff and Sebastião Geraldo 1992 Lutas camponesas no interior paulista: Memórias de Irineu Luís de Moraes. São Paulo: Editora Paz e Terra.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford 2003 To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Welch / CAMPONESES	155

2003
Political Science
Latin American Politics and Society
Brazilian Agrarian Reform: Democratic Innovation or OZigarchic
Anthony Pereira

ABSTRACT
The government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1995-2002) redis- tributed a surprising amount of land to Brazil’slandless. Assessing that reform, this study argues that an adequate appreciation of land redistribution must transcend the debate about the number of ben- eficiaries and place the reform in the larger context of state policies toward land and agriculture. It then asks to what extent such poli- cies under Cardoso represented the dismantling of past state prac- tices in the countryside. Although the Cardoso administration enacted some significant and democratizing changes, it missed other opportunities to benefit the rural poor, and its policies essen- tially maintained the agricultural model of the past two decades.
The prominence of agrarian reform as a political issue was one of the great surprises of the government of Brazil’s president Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1995-2002). The mobilization for reform was wide- spread and intense. The topic occupied a prominent place in the gov- ernment’s rhetoric about its accomplishments. Its land redistribution program extended farther than those of any of the preceding postmili- tary governments, beyond what most political observers anticipated when Cardoso was elected, and even exceeded what the president him- self seems to have expected. Agrarian reform also became a symbol of and a focal point in the battle between supporters and opponents of the government’s economic policies.
How to explain and interpret this surprising outcome?What does the government’s agrarian reform represent for Brazil’s politics and economy?One answer to the latter question is that the increase in land redistribution represents a major economic and political reform. In this view, the Cardoso government, reflecting the president’s progressive past as a scholar and social critic, broke with past policies. By granting small producers a more secure place in the agricultural sector and by recognizing, negotiating with, and partly accommodating the landless, the Cardoso government democratized economic and social policy in the countryside.
An alternative interpretation, however, would stress the continuity of the Cardoso government’s policies with the past. In this interpreta-
ExcZusion Red=?
Anthony Pereira
41
42	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
tion, a look behind and beyond land redistribution reveals policies that disproportionately benefit a small number of politically powerful, large producers, and a series of missed opportunitiesto benefit the rural poor.
This article argues that the second interpretation is more accurate than the first. It begins by examining some claims about past policies and the Cardoso government’s impact on them. Then it looks at the situation the Cardoso government inherited, and the trends in agriculture and land use that preceded the government’s ascension to power. Tracing the course of agrarian reform since 1995,this study looks beyond the statis- tics on land redistribution to examine the issues of land titling, agricul- tural credit, taxation, payments for expropriated land, and rural violence. Finally, it suggests that the Cardoso government did not fundamentally alter the development model or the pattern of policies in agriculture.
Such an analysis of Brazil’sagrarian reform as offered here might be seen as misleading, by treating as a single phenomenon a whole series of complicated processes that vary enormously by region and over time. It is possible, however, to recognize the complexity and variability of the reform process, as this study does, and at the same time seek some preliminary generalizations about its overall trends and consequences. Reasonable people can, of course, differ as to what those generaliza- tions should be.
PRIORPOLICIEOSF CONSERVATIVE “MODERNIZATION”
Brazil’sstate policies have traditionally followed a pattern well summa- rized by Sorj: “the state takes responsibility for the onus, the bonus is distributed among the dominant classes, and the crumbs [migulhuslare left over for the subaltern groups” (Sorj 1998, 28). The oligarchic and patronage-based features of these policies are rooted in the agrarian past. Land in Brazil has traditionally been not merely a factor of pro- duction but a reward for service and proximity to power, as well as a foundation for the accumulation and maintenance of more power and privilege. This power includes the ability of large landowners to direct the legal and coercive apparatus of the state in their region. It also entails landlord control over and obligations to subaltern populations.
The original division of the colonial cupituniusamong a handful of umigos do rei (friends of the king) reflects this reality (Gongalo 2001, 23). In Brazil, unlike the United States, the state’s exclusionary tenden- cies were not substantially mitigated in later stages of development by frontier policies that granted land to the landless. Whereas the U.S. Homestead Act of 1862 granted frontier land to anyone willing to settle it, Brazil’s 1850 Land Law (Lei du Terra) prohibited the acquisition of public land by any means other than purchase, thus putting an end to
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’S AGRARIAN REFORM	43
previous rights to gain land through occupancy (posse)(Viotti da Costa 2000, 78-79).
Brazilian policies in agriculture in more recent years can best be characterized as the promotion of conservative “modernization.”Unlike Latin American countries such as Mexico and Bolivia, Brazil has never had a political rupture that weakened the landed oligarchy and allowed large-scale redistribution of land to those who cultivate it. In addition, Brazil’s rural workers have never fully enjoyed the benefits of the Vargas-era Consolidated Labor Laws (ConsolidaEao das Leis do Tra- balho), unlike urban workers.
The brief period of mobilization around land and rural labor issues in the late 1950sand early 1960s,which saw the emergence of the Peas- ant Leagues and rural trade unions, was ended forcefully by the military coup in 1964. The military regime of 1964-85 subsequently imposed policies that essentially took land redistribution in already settled areas off the political agenda. Government policies of subsidized credit (mainly for large producers), tax breaks, price supports, and other incentives promoted the development of large, highly capitalized, mech- anized farms and ranches, many of them producing for export. This conservative “modernization” created an exodus from the countryside, as sharecroppers, tenants, and small farmers lost access to land, and rural workers lost jobs (Pereira 1997).
At the same time that land concentration was taking place, new, previously unused lands were also passing into private hands. Leite cal- culates that the private sector acquired, by purchase and government grants,some 31.8million hectares of previously public land in the 1970s alone (Leite 1999, 173).This phenomenon was especially marked in the west and north of the country. To minimize potential social unrest in the face of these policies, the military regime initiated programs of rural social assistance (pensions and health) and colonization, mostly in the Amazon region.
The Cardoso government, some observers believe, made a historic break with those policies. This view places Cardoso in the mold of pre- vious presidents, such as Getulio Vargas (1930-45, 1950-54) and
J u s c e h o Kubitschek (1955-60), who were credited with creating a new order in Brazilian politics (see, for example, Roett 1999; Sorj 1998; Gordon 2001, 125-30). The prominent Brazilian rural sociologistJos6 de Souza Martins is probably the best-known proponent of this view (Mar- tins 1999,2000). Martins sees the Cardoso government’sagrarian reform as the culmination of one process and a dramatic break with another. It is the capstone of a process that began under Getulio Vargas, to undo the absolute dominion given t o private property in land by the 1850 Lei da Terra,and to reassert the public and social character of landholding.’ On the other hand, it also represents a long-awaited supersedence of
44	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
the oligarchic, personalistic, and patronage-based pattern of Brazilian politics in the countryside that prevailed even under democratic regimes. Martins sees President Cardoso’s Brazilian Social Democratic Party (PSDB) as an antioligarchical political party with enough force to push Brazil toward political modernity in the rural areas (Martins 1999, 117).*
Martins sees in land reform four fundamental changes in Brazil’s society and state. First, unproductive or underproductive large estates (lat@indios)have become capitalized and “empresarialized,”submitting themselves to the logic of capitalist reproduction and integrating with financial and industrial capital. Second, family farmers have finally won guarantees to a place in the economy and society. Third, the state has become more representative, institutionalized, pluralized, and demo- cratic. Finally, the state has replaced repression with law and negotia- tion in the countryside, submitting erstwhile latifundiurios to the rational-legal control of public authority (Martins 1999, 119, 121, 125). In his enthusiasm, Martins redefines the government’s most active oppo- nents on the land reform issue-the	Landless Workers’ Movement (MovimentodosSem Terra,or MST), the Catholic Church’sPastoral Land Commission (Comissdo Pastoral da Terra, or CPT), and the Workers’ Party (Partidodos Trabalhadores,PT)-as	its real allies in this historic transformation (Martins 1999, 120).
There is some wishful thinking in this portrait; most specialists on agrarian reform do not share Martins’ views (see Ondetti 2000, 15). While certain of the trends that Martins points to have occurred, policies in land and agriculture did not, across the board, reflect the kind of wholesale innovation he describes. Before considering the evidence for this, however, it is necessary to examine the general tendencies in land and agricultural policies before the Cardoso government came to power, and how the Cardoso agrarian reform related to them.
With the election of a civilian president in 1985, land redistribution returned to the political agenda, mainly because of pressure from below. Jose Sarney (1985-90) promised a massive land redistribution program through the expropriation of unproductive estates. Yet very little of this reform was actually carried out, either by Sarney’s govern- ment or those of his successors, Fernando Collor de Mello (1990-92) and Itamar Franco (1992-94) (see table 1).At the same time, partly as a result of the debt crisis, government subsidies to agriculture dropped precipitously. Agricultural credit, for example, declined from $27 billion in 1986to only $6 billion in 1996, as measured in 1996U S . dollars (Leite 1999, 162). Price supports were also reduced (Leite 1999, 164).
Sarney (1985-90) Collor (1990-92) Franco (1992-94) Cardoso I (1995-98) Cardoso I1 (1998-2001)
83,000 30,000 18,000 287,000 585,683
1,400,000
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’SAGRARIAN REFORM	45
Table 1.Beneficiaries of Land Reform Claimed by Civilian Governments in Brazil, 1985-2001 (number of families)
Beneficiaries Beneficiaries
Average Per Year
16,600 15,000 9,000
- Source: Rows 1-4: Ondetti 2000. Row 5 (Cardoso 11): Folha de Sao Putdo 2002
Data from 2001 cover the period up to November.
Claimed
Promised
This sharp cut in government support reflects a more market-driven approach to agriculture, enacted at first through sheer necessity and later as a conscious strategy. This “sink or swim” strategy led to the demise of many small farms and contributed to the dismissal of many farm workers. To offset the potential for conflict and resistance gener- ated by such policies, the government began to increase its spending on rural social security and welfare (previd2ncia sociu0 (Leite 1999, 169), as it did on social programs in general.
On one level, government policy in agriculture was successful. By the mid-l990s, Brazil’s agricultural sector was clearly one of the most dynamic and productive in the developing world. Its productivity (value added per agricultural worker) doubled between the periods 1979-81 and 1996-98, becoming almost twice that of Mexico in the latter period (World Bank 2001). Still the world’s leading producer and exporter of coffee, Brazil has expanded into new agricultural markets, acquiring the largest herd of cattle in the world and becoming the second-largest pro- ducer of soya and sugar cane. The country supplies 85 percent of the world market for orange juice concentrate and exports tobacco, cocoa, cotton, butter, beef, and corn (Brogan 2000, 185).
Brazil’s potential for even greater agricultural production is high. It still has a land frontier, and analysts estimate that the area devoted to crops in 1999-around	112.5 million acres-could	easily be doubled (Economist Intelligence Unit 1999, 1).Agriculture is still experiencing growth in capital intensivity and mechanization, and its importance to the Brazilian economy is higher than agriculture is to the economies of the richest countries. While agriculture accounts for only about 9 per- cent of Brazil’s gross domestic product, it is responsible for around 35 percent of exports and 23 percent of the economically active population (Brogan 2000, 185).3Agriculture, furthermore, is internationally compet- itive and highly “globalized: 16.4 percent of all agricultural production
-
-
280,000
71,750 83,669
46	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
was exported in 1975 (Leite 1777, 160), almost twice the rate of the economy as a whole. These exports generate the largest positive trade balance of any sector of the Brazilian economy (Graziano Net0 1998, 168-69), amounting to US$l7 billion in 2001.4 This strong performance, moreover, has been achieved with far fewer subsidies than prevail in the United States and the European Union. According to scholar Marcus Sawaya Jank, Brazilian agricultural subsidies, which benefit about two million farmers, are only one-third of what the U.S. government spends on only 250,000 farmers (Jank 2001).5
Brazilian agriculture is also successful at home. Brazil’s food pro- duction index has risen from 69.5 in 1979-81 to 125.7 in 1996-98. (The period 1989-91 = 100.World Bank 2001, 288). In 2001 the Brazilian gov- ernment forecast a record grain crop of 91.6 million tons, a 10 percent increase over the 83 million tons produced in 2000 (Rinelli 2001, 4).The continuing problem of hunger in Brazil is thus the consequence of lack of sufficient income on the part of the poor, not an inadequate supply of food from Brazil’s farms and ranches.
Behind the glittering trajectory of Brazilian agriculture, however, lies what historian Kenneth Maxwell calls “the other Brazil” (Maxwell 1999-2000). Fully one-third of the rural population, according to the government’s own 1790 data, lives below the poverty line (World Bank 2001, 280). With one of the most unequal distributions of land in the world, the Brazilian countryside has been the site not only of the cre- ation of great fortunes, but of social devastation reminiscent of the enclosure of common lands in early modern Europe or the outmigration of displaced smallholders in the U.S. Dust Bowl during the Great Depression. This devastation has been created partly because the poli- cies promoting the “modernization” of agriculture have placed a pre- mium on narrow criteria: the creation of a large, exportable surplus of agricultural goods. Other considerations, such as maximizing rural employment, intensifying the cultivation of the land, and accommodat- ing the desire of small farmers to remain independent small producers, have been neglected.6
Furthermore, social relations have changed in the countryside. Large landowners have jettisoned traditional bonds of obligation to the rural poor, who used to be their tenants, sharecroppers,dependents, or clients. That sense of noblesse oblige was, at one time, a key component of the rural social order, but it has eroded as large landowners have used their privileged connection to the state to transform themselves into entrepreneurs of the new agribusiness. Indeed, in many regions, face-to-face contacts between large landowners and the rural poor have become a thing of the past.
A major survey of 159,778people resettled on land under the fed- eral government’s agrarian reform program from the period before 1960
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’S AGRARIAN REFORM	47
until 1996, conducted in December and January 1996-77, reveals the extent of deprivation that many rural dwellers face. Thirty percent of those surveyed were illiterate, while less than 14 percent had received more than four years of primary school education (Schmidt et al. 1998, 24, 65). Sixty-four percent of those surveyed had no training or skills in the labor market other than their knowledge of farming (the survey used the terms agrictdtor and campon&);and 87 percent farmed their land themselves, without being in a cooperative or part of a larger enterprise.
Well over half these farmers said that they received “no”or “pre- carious” technical assistance from the government. The average house- hold income of these sInallholclers was 722 reais per year, or about the same amount in US. dollars at the then-prevailing exchange rate. But only a small minority lived in houses with running water or sewerage. Only 5 percent of these struggling farmers, growing mainly basic sta- ples, such as corn, manioc, beans, sweet potatoes, and rice, had the benefit of irrigation, while in most regions even fewer had access to farm machinery or motorized vehicles. Their access to education and health services was tenuous or nonexistent, and many of them reported serious health problems, such as intestinal parasites (15 percent) and malaria (8 percent) (Schmidt et al. 1998, 55-1121.’
Brazil‘spoorest farmers thus have a precarious toehold in the new agrarian order. Below them in the rural social order are the landless. These former small farmers, niral workers, and even urban workers face dim prospects in urban labor markets, where unemployment has risen in recent years. While the new rural Brazil boasts of vast farms and ranches run by prosperous owners with cell phones and pickup trucks, small armies of the dispossessed move, sometimes unseen, within it, migrating in search of seasonable jobs, shelter, and-the	biggest hope of many- land. Despite the difficult conditions of life for sinall farmers, inany of the landless seem to prefer this option to any existing alternatives.
The official system of representation in Brazilian agriculture has not been fully able to represent those losing access to land in the new agrar- ian economy. The National Agrarian Confederation is the official, state- recognized entity representing agricultural employers, while the National Confederation of Workers in Agriculture (CONTAG) is its coun- terpart on the labor side. While CONTAG does speak out on the issue of landlessness and agrarian reform and its member unions do some- times organize land occupations (Sigaud ZOOO), its organizational stnic- ture makes it a more effective representative of small family farmers and wageworkers than of the landless.
This shortcoming was a factor in the emergence of the MST, the gov- ernment’s principal critic on land reform (Pereira 1999). The MST, which began its activity in the early 1980s, claims to speak for the estimated 4.8 million landless families in the country and organizes marches, occupa-
48	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
tions (or, as others say, invasions) of unused public and private land, and more recently, occupations of government offices. It demands the radi- cal deconcentration of land ownership via widespread redistribution of land from large landowners to the dispossessed. It has attempted to prod the national conscience and to speak for those excluded from the bene- fits of the modern economy (Pereira 1999, 115, 119).
The MST and its demand for agrarian reform, in turn, have been opposed by the Democratic Rural Union (UDR), an organization of large landowners opposed to land reform that emerged after 1985 (Sorj 1998, 29; Payne 2000). It is these last two organizations, both of which lie out- side the official system of representation, that have garnered most of the headlines in the struggle over agrarian reform in Brazil.
The Cardoso government therefore inherited an agricultural sector that was generating both enormous wealth and misery, a dualistic process that in turn was creating a crisis of representation in the coun- tryside. Despite the market-oriented reforms of the 1980s and 1990s, Brazilian agriculture, like agriculture everywhere, was still strongly dependent on the state. At its inauguration, the Cardoso government faced basic choices about what kinds of policies to enact and what groups to negotiate with.
STATEPOLICEUSNDERCARDOSO: FHC vs. MST
Both supporters and opponents of the Cardoso government’s land reform policies saw the struggle over land in epochal terms. For the government, the reforms reflected Cardoso’s observation during his campaign that “Brazil is not anymore an underdeveloped country. It is an unjust country” (Cardoso 1994, 9). In this view, the state’s responsi- bility was to maintain and stimulate a modern agricultural sector that finally produced for the best interests of the larger society, while using welfare programs, including land reform, to ameliorate the worst social effects of agricultural modernization and provide some relief to a con- flict-ridden countryside. Then-Minister of Agrarian Development Rail Jungmann declared in 2002 that Brazil’s land reform was “perhaps the biggest ever realized in an atmosphere of democratic stability and respect for institutions” (Folha de SGo Paul0 2002); and President Car- doso equated it with “a veritable peaceful revolution in the countryside” (quoted in Margolis 2002, 1).
For opponents of the reforms, however, the Cardoso government perpetuated a fraud about its accomplishments while colluding with ret- rograde elements of the old social order, thus perpetuating oligarchic domination in the guise of “modernization.”In the words of Dom Tomas Balduino, president of the CPT in 2002, “From the point of view
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’SAGRARIAN REFORM	49
of propaganda, it [the government] has achieved success. There is no lack of numbers, which are presented in accordance with their own cri- teria. The reality is totally different” (Folha de SGo Paul0 2002).
Candidate Cardoso promised to settle 280,000 landless families on land by the end of his four-year term (Cardoso 1994, 103). Once elected, however, Cardoso did not seem to make agrarian reform a priority. The government’s overriding concern was to ensure the success of the anti- inflation Real Plan, initiated before the election in July 1994. The gov- ernment’s basic attitude toward agriculture seemed to be that, regardless of the dubious conditions under which many large landowners had obtained their lands and the benighted history of the latifindio in gen- eral, the sector had been professionalized and modernized to such an extent that it would be counterproductive to threaten it with too heavy an emphasis on land reform (Graziano Net0 1998, 168).Agriculture was one of Brazil’s most competitive sectors; it could generate exports, anchor the Real Plan, provide cheap food to the cities, and survive any process of deepening regional trade integration that the government decided to undertake.
At the same time, the Cardoso government tended to regard groups pressing for land reform with skepticism and sometimes alarm. It saw the demand for land reform as an archaic and primitive “agrarian redistribu- tivism” that advocated land expropriation and redistribution as a solution to Brazil’s past and present problems (de Souza 1997, 80; Martins 1999), based on an outdated ideology that criticized a system of unproductive latifundios that no longer existed. That ideology mistakenly assumed that only the ownership of the means of production (rather than the training, skills, and human capital of individuals) determined the distri- bution of income, and reflected a romantic reification of a traditional peasantry that was largely passing out of history (Sorj 1998).8
In the government’s view, land reform programs would primarily be for purposes of social welfare rather than agricultural production. Pro- grams designed to alter fundamentally the structure of production and to include in it more small farmers were foolhardy and pushed against the global trend toward the concentration of land and increasing capital intensivity in agriculture. For this reason, President Cardoso dismissed advocates of land reform for making a “nineteenth-century demand.”
In making this remark, the president seemed to assume that the landless, or at least their leaders, were fighting for land out of some romantic, mystical attachment to the soil, or mere ideological bias. It seems more plausible, however, that the landless are quite pragmatic, and that they struggle for land because of a lack of viable alternatives. Many of them are relatively unschooled, unskilled, older workers, whose employment prospects in the Brazilian economy are bleak. A study of land occupiers by the Brazilian Intelligence Agency revealed
50	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
that some 40 percent had at one time worked in cities (cited in GonCalo 2000, 5), which indicates that at one time they were willing at least to try to find a place in urban labor markets. In the advanced capitalist countries, many rural dwellers welcomed the opportunities created by industrialization, and there is no reason to believe that Brazilians are fundamentally different from Europeans and North Americans in this regard. The Brazilian economy, however, is not creating enough indus- trial jobs to absorb the landless.
President Cardoso’s stance also ignored the possibility that small- holder agriculture could be more fully integrated into the productive structure of the country. Policies to redirect subsidies from larger to smaller farmers and to increase infrastructural, technical, marketing, and financial support to labor-intensive small farms could be appropriate, and not “backward,”in an emerging market economy such as Brazil’s. Such policies could also have dynamic effects on the domestic market, as their redistributive effects would increase demand in the countryside. Yet the government did not seem to seriously contemplate such a strat- egy, and kept the old model of agricultural modernization largely intact. This was largely for political rather than economic reasons.
The Achilles’ heel of the Cardoso strategy, at least in political terms, was that it could not offer a significant portion of the rural population a place in the new, “globalized” economic order. (In this sense, Car- doso’ssocial democracy differs markedly from European social democ- racy of the early twentieth century, which did have a project for the rural poor.) The Cardoso government’s early policy position seemed to consign several generations of the rural poor to social, economic, and political oblivion.
The President frankly admitted that his policies could not include everyone in a lengthy interview with a journalist from Folha de Suo Paul0 conducted in 1996. Declaring that his government favored the most advanced capitalist sectors of the economy rather than the tradi- tional “monopolistic and bureaucratic capitalism” or the “corporatists” [corporativistaslof the old patrimonial state, he added,
I am also not going to say that it [my government] is of the excluded, because it cannot be. . . . Certain sectors are not part of thisdynamicsegmentoftheeconomy.Andthenwhat?[Edai?], ..I don’tknow how many excluded there will be. (Cardoso 1996,6)
After reflecting, he added that the excluded might number somewhere around 16million people!
Under these conditions, the organizing efforts of the MST and its multiple offshoots bore rapid fruit, partly filling the void left by the decline of the organized labor movement under the Cardoso govern- ment. Tens of thousands of landless occupied unused private and some-
120,000 100,000 80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
0
c] Government MST
1995
1997	1999	2001
I’EREIKA: BRAZIL’SAGRARIAN REFORM	51
Figure 1. Beneficiaries of Land Redistribution, Brazil 1995-2001 (number of families settled)
Notes: Data from 2001 cover the period up to November. The MST has not com- puted the number of families settled on land in 2000 and 2001. Sources: Government data from INCRA 2001: MST from Folha de Suo Patdo 2002.
times public land (mostly in already settled areas rather than frontier, previously unfarmed land) in hundreds of encampments around the country, which peaked at 502 separate land occupations in 1997 (INCRA 2001). An estimated 60,000 people were in such encampments in early 2000 (Ondetti 20011~s; ee also figure 1).
The pressure on the government from these encampments was con- siderable; however, what seemed to trigger a change in the administra- tion’s attitude to agrarian reform were massacres of the landless in 1995 and especially 1996. Ondetti argues persuasively that the rhythm of land expropriations closely follows the outcry that accompanied the killing of 10 landless people in Conimbiara in Rond6nia on August 9, 1995, and 19 landless (and the wounding of 69) in Eldorado de CarajBs, Par& on April 17, 1996 (Hammond 2001; Ondetti 2001a). In the wake of these atrocities, committed by military police forces ostensibly controlled by state govern- ments, the federal government accelerated land expropriations and increased the number of people resettled on land. The MST, in turn, uti- lized its newfound media spotlight to organize more land occupations and other actions, including a highly publicized march to Brasilia in April 1997.
According to the government’s figures from 1995 to 1998, roughly 287,000 landless families received land under the land reform program (Ondetti 2000~1,11). This exceeds the 280,000 families to whom Car- doso, in his 1994 presidential campaign, promised to give land. Accord- ing to the official data, in seven years, the Cardoso government bene-
52	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
fited 585,683 landless families, or more than four times as many as the 131,000families listed as beneficiaries under its three predecessors com- bined (Ondetti 2001a, 4-13; see table 1).According to government data, roughly 20 million hectares, mostly in unused private holdings, were acquired for redistribution under the land reform program.
The MST disputed the Cardoso government’s claims (see figure 1).It said (as of mid-2000) that the correct figures were 160,000 families set- tled on some 8 million hectares. This discrepancy occurs partly because the MST did not count squatters who were already on land before receiv- ing legal title from the government, or beneficiaries who entered the land redistribution system before the advent of the Cardoso government (Sem
Terra 2OOO).’	The MST also referred to data from the Escola de Econo- mia da Universidade de S5o Paulo showing that from 1995 to 2000, 400,000 small farmers lost land and 1.2 million rural workers lost jobs (cited in Gongalo 2001, 4). The MST newspaper asserted that some 900,000 smallholders lost access to land in this period G e m Terra 2000). Critics of the agrarian reform further cited partial surveys that found that within twoyears of receiving their land, approximately a quarter of the beneficiaries of land reform abandoned their plots because they were unable to service loans, among several reasons (Margolis 2002).
The MST also argued that despite the Cardoso government’spolicies, unproductive lands were still plentiful. The agrarian atlas (Atlas fundiario brasileiro)put out by the Ministry of Agrarian Policy, for exam-
ple, shows that only 28 percent of Brazil’s cultivable land is being used in some productive activity, while 62 percent of it remains unproductive (cited in Borin 1997, 25). The MST even disputed the Cardoso adminis- tration’s right to call its policies agrarian reform, because, in the MST’s view, the reform did not change the productive structure of agriculture, and was therefore merely ussistencialismo(welfarism, or a form of social assistance, rather than inserting the landless into the productive system).
The government rebutted such attacks by asserting that widespread public support for agrarian reform, if not for the MST’s methods, came largely out of the urban population’s stereotypical attitude to landowners as semifeudal lutifundiurios (Graziano Net0 1998, 168). President Car- doso complained that TV Globo’s 1996 telenovela 0 rei do gudo (Cattle King), which portrayed grassroots members of the MST, if not the move- ment’s leaders, in a sympathetic light, put pressure on his government to redistribute more land (Pompeu de Toledo 1998, 3241, even though such policies had questionable economic value. The government’s position was that land reform was unlikely to increase output or raise rural incomes in what was a highly productive agricultural economy. Land redistribution should therefore not be a priority; it was better to tax unproductive land and encourage tenancy and crop-sharing arrangements to increase employment and alleviate poverty (de Souza 1997, 80).
PEREIRA: BRAZIL‘S AGRARIAN REFORM	53
In its conflict with the MST, the government emphasized the occa- sional violence of the landless themselves and the apparent lack of com- mitment of some of the MST leaders to Brazil’s currently existing ver- sion of democracy. The government and its supporters sometimes characterized the MST as a political party rather than a social movement. They alleged that the MST’s broad attacks on the government’s eco- nomic policies proved that it used land reform as a means to demoral- ize the government rather than as an end in itself. They further charged that the MST’s opposition to the government’s measures to decentralize land reform and create a “market-assisted”land reform program with the help of the World Bank-which	would complement land expropri- ation by the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA) through the purchase of unproductive land-was	based on purely ideological grounds.
The MST’sleader,Joiio Pedro Stkdile, responded in pragmatic terms. He claimed that, given the government’s budget of R$l billion for the market-assisted land reform program and an average cost of R$20,000 for each family settled, the program would be able to settle about only another 50,000 families on the land (Stkdile and Fernandes 1999, 141). The MST also complained that the program was more generous to landowners and banks than to the landless.1°
As an actor in a democracy, the MST, like the Cardoso government, had a blind spot: its attitude toward the agrarian structure. Some MST leaders seemed to regard any landholder with property above a certain size as a latifundiario, regardless of whether that property was produc- tive or unproductive. Stkdile, for example, said in one interview that the maximum size of rural properties should be one thousand hectares (Ste- dile and Mancano Fernandes 1999). It is not clear how such a radical deconcentration of landholding can take place under conditions of democracy and legal continuity; that is, a nonrevolutionary situation. Such a declaration, however, should not be interpreted as representing the view of all members of the movement. Furthermore, the MST (and not just it; about half of all land occupations were led by other groups) did expose a weakness in the Cardoso government’s approach to eco- nomic development, the social question, and the issue of political reform. The movement raised serious questions about the direction of Brazilian society in general, and not just the fate of agrarian reform.
The debate between the government and the MST exposed the cruel dilemmas that the Cardoso administration faced. The government based its agricultural policies on agribusiness, but could not adequately address the needs of the rural dispossessed. It redistributed land, but accelerat- ing land redistribution only led to more occupations; at the same time, almost as many people seemed to have left the land as were resettled on it. The government questioned the economic viability of land redistribu-
54	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45:2
tion, but the public continued to support it. This public support, charac- terized by some of the government’s allies as based on ignorance, was at least as likely to have been based on personal or familial acquaintance with the injustice and violence of the social order in the countryside.” After all, the great waves of migration that transformed Brazil into an urban country occurred only in the last three decades, and many urban Brazilians retain links to the land. It is all the more impressive because, despite the popularity of 0 rei do gado, analysis of the Brazilian media suggests that television news coverage of the landless movement’s lead- ership has been generally negative (Porto 2001, 21-24; Hammond 2001).
The essential aspect of agrarian reform being explored here, how- ever, is the extent to which it represents a major reform of preexisting policies. In this regard, land redistribution itself is less important than a series of other, related measures. These include price stability brought by the 1994 Real Plan, which has reduced speculation in land as a hedge against inflation, thus lowering land prices and leading to rationalization of the use of land as a factor of production. A gun control law was passed in 1997 to curb rural violence, especially by landowners wishing to evict land occupiers. In 1996, the government enacted a judicial reform to send members of the military police who commit intentional homicide to jury trials held in civilian courts. Policies have also been created to decentralize land reform and to supplement land expropria- tion with “market-assisted”initiatives that buy unused land from owners. The most important reforms, however, were the increase in the rate of progressive taxation on unproductive land, and laws facilitating land expropriation and defending the rights of land occupiers.
In December 1996 the Brazilian National Congress approved legis- lation concerning the rural tax (impost0 territorial rural, or ITR) and the procedure for land expropriation (rito sumario de desapropriaEao de terras).The landowners’lobby in Congress succeeded in reducing the tax rate on productive land, but the government increased it on unpro- ductive land; the top rate for the largest estates rose from 4.5 percent to 20 percent (Cardoso 1997, 83). The modification of the land expropria- tion procedure allows the rapid expropriation and distribution of unpro- ductive land and the subsequent negotiation of its price. At the same time, Congress also passed a law that brings in the Public Ministry W i n -
istkrio Publico) in situations of land conflict (Sorj 1998, 38). This legis- lation was introduced by the nucleo agram’o of the PT (the party’s caucus on agrarian issues), and states that any expulsion order (process0 de despejo)entails following a procedure in which the Public Ministry must be present and a judge must hear both sides before making a deci- sion (Stkdile and Fernandes 1999, 116).
These legal changes, for many analysts, represent “another step in the integration and disciplining of the rural areas within the political-
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’S AGRARIAN REFORM	55
administrative structures of the Brazilian state” (Sorj 1998, 38). President Cardoso described them as a fundamental restructuring of the legal framework governing land (arcabouCojur-khi-0da terra) that signified the definitive political defeat of latijiundiarios,who were now “paper tigers” that no longer controlled Congress (Ponipeu de Toledo 1998, 321-22). Yet is such a conclusion warranted?
THEMODESTIMPACOTF OTHEREFORMS
Despite the relatively large scale of land redistribution and the impor- tant legal changes under the Cardoso government, there is considerable evidence that other policy changes have had relatively little impact on the countryside. Furthermore, important initiatives that could have been taken were not.
MST leader Stkdile complained, for example, that the law requiring the Public Ministry to be involved in land conflicts was poorly enforced. He asserted that judges tied to large landowners did not respect the law, but instead continued to grant evictions (darliminarpara despejos), failed to follow the procedures laid down for them, and failed to listen to the Public Ministry (Stkdile and Fernandes 1999, 116). The known autonomy of the Brazilian judiciary certainly lends plausibility to this account (Prillaman 2000). Enforcement of the other legal changes should also not be taken for granted. An example is the 1997 arms con- trol law. There has been an important decline in violence over land and rural labor conflicts since 1985 in Brazil; the average number of rural workers assassinated per year in the period 1985-94 was 91, whereas this dropped to 36 per year under the Cardoso government (see figure 2). Rural violence, however, is still a major impediment to the full enjoy- ment of civil and political rights by the poor in the countryside, espe- cially in southern Para and Maranhiio.
Another area in which policies have not had a major impact is the system of land titling. Formal, enforceable claims to property are unevenly distributed in the countryside. Small farmers, and the rural poor in general, Face a double-edged sword in the property rights regime. Bar- riers to obtaining formal legal title to the land they occupy make them vulnerable to removal by large landowners and their gunmen, while large landowners can sometimes obtain, through de facto possession, huge tracts of land to which they do not have legal title, thus “crowding out” the rural poor (Sorj 1998, 38). In the words of one squatter in the county (munic@io)of Conceicgo de Araguaina in Par& “Here the best title is the biggest ax” (quoted in Alston et al. 2000, 165).
A major reason for this state of affairs is a lack of efficiency in the demarcation of lands and their documentation and titling (cadastra- mento). Because of a costly, confusing, slow, and often politically
56
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2 Figure 2. Assassinations of Rural Workers in Brazil, 1985-2001
180 I 160 140 120 100
80 60 40 20
0
1988	1991	1994	1997	2000 Source: CPT, as reported in Folha de Sao Paul0 2002.
1985
manipulated and corrupt process of land registration, many farmers do not hold titles to their properties. Small farmers are much less likely to be able to obtain legal title than large farmers.12They are then usually unable to obtain credit with which to boost productivity through the purchase of new inputs or the adoption of more efficient techniques (Public Administration and Development 1998, 39, table 8).13 Small farmers thus cannot fully enjoy private property rights to the land they cultivate. This has a big impact on rural poverty, because studies show that small and medium-sized farms in Brazil produce far more employ- ment per acre, on average, than large ones.
Furthermore, many rural properties were simply taken from the public domain. This process is not limited to remote regions, but hap- pens also in the more prosperous Southeast. In the disputed area of Sit0 Paulo’s Pontal d o Paranapanema, for example, of the roughly 1 million hectares, only 20 percent were legally titled; the rest were terrasdeuo- lutas do estado or irregularly occupied by large landowners (Gongalo 2001, 22-23). There are also cases of large landowners receiving lands from the state without paying for them, then receiving fiscal incentives to produce, but not producing anything and simply holding on to the land (GonGalo 2001, 23). The illegal acquisition of lands, or claim jump- ing (grilagem), is often associated with violence, because grileiros are often heavily armed hired hands committed to defending their employ- ers’ land.
Improvements in the operations of the cartdrios, the land registra- tion agencies located in almost every munic@io,have been reported; many have computers now, for example (Fleischer 2001). In 2001 the
I
PEREIRA: BRAZIL‘S AGRARIAN REFORM	57
government also passed a law to create a single land registry of all rural properties in the country under the control of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (Ministkriode DesenvolvimentoAgrario), a relatively new agency created by President Cardoso. The government hopes that the registration project will be complete by 2003 (Economist 2001). This could improve the situation, but the reform came very late in the Car- doso presidency, and its effect, if it has one, will occur only under the current administration of President Luiz Ignacio Lula da Silva.
Smallholders are also marginalized by the prevailing system of agri- cultural credit. The state still dominates the provision of this credit, and large landowners obtain a disproportionate share of these funds. Large landowners, furthermore, have used their political power to default on loans at a high rate, resist foreclosure, and renegotiate loans to their advantage.l4
A striking example of this occurred in 1995-96, when large landowners used their political influence to persuade Congress to cancel indexation for inflation on outstanding agricultural loans-a	move that cost the Bank of Brazil between R$1.8 to R$2.5 billion (Public Adminis- tration and Development 1998, 16). Large landowners also successfully lobbied Congress for another break on agricultural loans in 1999 (Mar- tins 1999, 117). These rural credit renegotiations, in effect, punished small and medium-sized producers, who generally repaid their loans on time. (Some small producers have benefited, but large producers have been the major beneficiaries.) Rural debt renegotiation is also one of the causes of the fiscal deficits that contributed to Brazil’s economic insta- bility during President Cardoso’s second term.
Large landowners are also notorious for evading taxes. The ITR has a high rate of avoidance (Leite 1999, 158); and a study carried out as recently as 1999 showed that 98.7 percent of the two hundred largest rural properties simply did not pay the ITR at all (Gongalo 2001, 22). The 1997 change in the ITR was potentially a significant step in curbing landowners’ traditional free ride in taxation. The new law also reduced the size of property subject to the top tax rate from more than 15,000 hectares to more than 5,000 hectares. A number of potential loopholes in the law remain nevertheless. For the government to charge a rate of 20 percent, it has to determine that 30 percent or less of the rural prop- erty is being productively used. But Brazilian landowners have shown great ingenuity in demonstrating land use and in cultivating favorable rulings from local administrators.
Furthermore, greater utilization rates significantly diminish the tax rate for the largest farms (Cardoso 1997, 83). Considering that Brazil’s top corporate tax rate is reportedly 15 percent (World Bank 2001, 3061, these numbers suggest that rural properties are still relatively lightly taxed, Furthermore, despite the 1997 law, the real value of the revenue
58	ILATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2 Figure 3. Real Value of Collected Land Tax, Brazil 1998-2002
(in millions of reais, deflated for inflation)
1998	2000	2002
250 200
150 100 50 0
Notes: Data on the absolute value of the tax collection from Folha de S6o Paul0 2002. The 2002 figure is a projection. Absolute values were 208 million reais in 1998, 244 in 1999, 230 in 2000, 202 in 2001, and 232 in 2002. These numbers were then con- verted to their value in 1998 reais by deflating them by the cumulative inflation rate, which was obtained from Latin FOCUS2002. According to this source, consumer prices rose 1.7 percent in 1998, 8.9 in 1999, 6.0 in 2000, 7.7 in 2001, and 7.6 in 2002, for an accumulated inflation rate of 31.9 percent for the entire period. The 2002 figure is an inflation projection made in January 2002.
obtained from collecting the ITR has declined from 1998 to 2001 (see figure 3) and has also declined as a percentage of total federal revenue, from 0.106 percent in 1998 to 0.071 percent in 2001.
The system by which land was expropriated under the Cardoso agrarian reform also reveals evidence that policies disproportionately benefit those already privileged by the agrarian political economy. Although the success of the Real Plan brought about a marked reduc- tion in the price of land, critics allege that the government continued to buy land at prices equal to or higher than those in effect before 1994 (Borin 1997, 25). This appears to have been caused both by judicial decisions and by collusion between INCRA officials and landowners (Sorj 1998, 29). In a September 1999 study of more than 70 cases in which owners of expropriated land had brought judicial actions against INCRA, the Extraordinary Ministry of Agrarian Policy (MinistkrioExtra- ordinario de Politica Fundiarial estimated that the government had overpaid for land on the order of R$7 billion, or enough to place three hundred thousand families on the land (cited in Martins 2000, 125).
The compensation paid to landowners is thus often far higher than the estimated value of land calculated by the government (Martins 1999,
PEREIRA: BRAZIL’SAGRARIAN REFORM	59
124). This policy has amounted to a veritable giveaway to large
landowners, some of them the very idle and unproductive luti- fundidrios whom modern agricultural markets were supposed to punish (Leite 1999, 172). Because the cost of the land is part of the debt con- tracted by those resettled in the land reform program, the former land- less “run the risk of paying for the poor management [and corruption] of INCRA for the rest of their lives” (Rorin 1997, 25). This is a striking example of the maxim offered by Sorj-the	state takes the onus, the dominant classes get the bonus, and the subordinate groups are left with the crumbs-and	indicates that some of the major beneficiaries of
land reform have been landowners rather than the landless. Some observers disagree strongly with the interpretation offered here. Alston et al. (2000, 167) write that “land owners historically have received less than the market value of their land in an expropriation,” partly because INCRA pays for expropriated land in titulos de dividu ugraria (TDAs), which are heavily discounted, and pays cash only for improvements to the property. In the same passage, they also write, “The landowner could also scheme with local INCRA officials or use the courts to set the compensation for expropriated land above its market value. Such actions, however, appear to be very isolated events.”Such an interpretation, however, is belied by the Cardoso government’s own rhetoric, actions, and data. The data about overpayment described
above come from government sources. And in justifying the “market- assisted” land reform program administered by the Ministry of Agrarian Policy President Cardoso decried INCRA’s “corruption.”Government policy reforms therefore seem to be based on an assumption that over- payments for expropriated land were not “isolated events.”
Finally, the Cardoso administration missed an opportunity for sig- nificant policy reform regarding rural violence. Although rural violence appears to have diminished under Cardoso, killings of rural workers and the landless by the military police and landlords’ gunmen are still common in some regions, and usually go uninvestigated and unpun- ished. In the wake of the massacres in Corumbiara and Eldorado de Carajas, human rights activists called on Cardoso to push for a constitu- tional amendment allowing the federal government to intervene in the investigation and prosecution of human rights violations when officials at the state level fail to carry out unbiased investigations. This “federal- ization” amendment, introduced in Congress in 1996, has not been passed. It could represent a major step toward ending the impunity of perpetrators of violence against the rural poor, but the federal govern- ment did not prioritize it (Amnesty International 1998, 32-33).
60	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2 CONCLUSIONS
Moving beyond land redistribution figures to examine other, less-noted aspects of the Cardoso government’s policies in land and agriculture, therefore, we can conclude that the government has largely maintained the general policy tilt in favor of conservative modernization. This policy orientation gives little opportunity to the landless and the poor, punishes small and medium-sized farmers, and generously rewards politically influential large landowners. Brazil may have a capitalist democracy, but its form of capitalism in the countryside is not very democratic. In agri- culture, as elsewhere in the economy, markets are still strongly shaped by political manipulation. For the poor, this results in a system in which access to land is limited, land distribution is highly unequal, property rights to land are precarious, land markets are underdeveloped, access to credit is dominated by large landowners who use their political influ- ence to renege on their loan repayments and tax obligations; and the poor are subject to the possibility of violence at the hands of the military police or landlords’ gunmen, with little protection from the state. Such a conclusion fits with the assessment of many observers that outside of macroeconomic reforms, the Cardoso government’s accomplishments in the area of political and institutional reforms were limited.
The Cardoso government faced daunting social problems and enacted some significant reforms. The extent of land redistribution carried out from 1995 to 2002 was impressive and surprising, whether measured by the official government data or those of the opposition. The acquisi- tion of land by previously landless rural people, as well as the securing of legal title to land by squatters previously without secure property rights, is an important achievement, because it means that marginalized Brazilians have, largely through their own tenacious efforts, obtained at least the possibility of inclusion in the economy and recognition as citi- zens in the political sphere.There was also an important decrease in rural violence during the Cardoso government. The land reform thus represents small victories for hundreds of thousands of people.
As the government redistributed some unproductive land to those people, however, a roughly equal number of small farmers, tenants, and squatters left the land because of prevailing policies of conservative modernization in agriculture. This economic model in itself would not necessarily be undesirable for Brazil as a whole; but without employ- ment opportunities for the unschooled, the process represents the mar- ginalization of a significant proportion of those Brazilians unlucky enough to stand at the bottom of the rural social hierarchy.
In addition to redistributing land, the Cardoso administration enacted a number of related reforms. It facilitated land expropriation, centralized the land-titling system, improved the collection of taxes on
PEREIRA: BRAZIL‘S AGRARIAN REFORM	61
rural properties and progressively taxed unproductive land, and con- trolled unregistered guns. This study suggests that these measures did not have a major impact on Brazil’s agrarian political economy. Not all of them were actively enforced, a historical problem of the Brazilian state. Others were implemented late in Cardoso’s term or halfheartedly applied. Furthermore, an opportunity to federalize human rights abuses, thus diminishing impunity for rural violence, was missed. It is therefore inaccurate to declare the Cardoso government’s agrarian reform a “rev- olution” in the countryside.
This is not to argue that none of Cardoso’s policies resulted in major reforms. The achievement of price stability for eight years, for example, was a notable success. At the same time, it is not unreasonable to judge the government’sperformance at least partly by how it affected the most vulnerable segments of the population, including the rural poor. This article suggests that policies of conservative modernization-marked	by the use of state personnel and resources primarily to serve a small but powerful set of large agricultural producers-largely	continued in the Brazilian countryside. While these policies have gradually become more market and export oriented since the early 1980s,the Cardoso govern- ment did not represent a fundamental break with them. The resulting model is still a highly politicized one, in that access to and repayment of credit depend on political as much as on market criteria. While the Cardoso government bolstered the state’s commitment to compensatory social programs for the rural poor, the productive structure is still dom- inated by the large producers most favored by government policies. In this sense, the agrarian reform has been limited, and will probably even- tually be seen as a modest but not fundamental modification of gov- ernment policies in agriculture.
NOTES
1. This process includes the constitutional allocation of subsoil mineral rights to the national state rather than to individual landowners,and the right of the state to expropriate land not fulfilling a “socialfunction.”From an Anglo- American liberal perspective, of course, such assertions of the state over indi- vidual rights are anathema.
2. Martins admits that the PSDB allied itself with an oligarchical party, the Liberal Front (PFL), and that the decentralization of land reform discussed here might well lead to the reform’sdomination by large landowners in some regions.
3. Agriculture accounts for 28 percent of male and 14 percent of female employment (Brogan 2000, 184). The figure for the share of agriculture in GDP is value added as a percentage of GDP in 1999 and comes from World Bank 2001, 296.
4. Fleischer (2002, 7) reports, “Brazil’sagribusiness sector posted a US$19 billion trade surplus in 2001, with exports of US$23.9 billion and imports of
62	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
US$4.9 billion. This was a 28 percent increase from the US$14.8 surplus posted in 2000.”
5. The U.S. government’s protection of agriculture increased in May 2002 when President George W. Bush signed a bill authorizing a 70 percent increase in subsidies to the sector over the next ten years. See Hook 2002; Sanger 2002.
6. Contrary to the common prejudice, large farms are not necessarily more efficient than small and medium-sized ones. In terms of economic efficiency, measured by comparing output to inputs of land, labor, and capital, small and medium-sized farms often outperform large ones; in pecuniary efficiency, meas- ured by the advantages of vertical integration, tax breaks, and subsidies, large farms do better. In Angus Wright’s words, “This then explains why less ‘eco- nomically efficient’ large farms prevail over small ones. And, of course, what this means is that their advantages are preeminently political and at least subject to policy reform.” Wright 2002.
7. These data are a snapshot intended to illustrate the prevalence of rural poverty that existed at the beginning of Cardoso’s presidency. They are not intended to establish a relationship between Cardoso’s policies and trends in rural poverty. For such an analysis, time-series data from the period 1995-2002 would have to be examined.
8. Sorj makes the valuable point that unlike the Peasant Leagues and other “peasant”social movements of the late 1950s and early 1960s, the MST and its offshoots do not defend rural cultivators’ traditional use rights to land, but instead organize the rural and often the urban poor from all over the country, leading them in land occupations on carefully selected properties in areas where many occupiers have never lived before. Thus, while MST leaders see them- selves as the inheritors of the Peasant Leagues’ mantle, they lead a very differ- ent kind of organization. See Sorj 1998.
9. Leite (1999, 173) lists beneficiaries as 42,827 families in 1995, then 61,674 in 1996;81,944 in 1997;and 34,978 in 1998 (as of June 10, 1998).
10. For an initial assessment of the possibilities of market-assisted land reform, see Pereira 1999.
11. Barreira records the words of a poem about a pistoleiro from the Citer- atura de cordel (popular ballads) that reflects popular conceptions about the rule of large landowners: “One feels sorry for Miranda [the pistoleirol/because he is the product/of a violent world/and a corrupt system.”[DeMiranda tern se @pena/porquele P urnproduto/de um mundo vioCento/de urn sistema corrupto.1 Otavio Menezes, A prisao depistoleiro Miranda, quoted in Barreira 1999, 124.
12. In a recent survey, of the total land area on farms of less than 10 hectares in size, only 65 percent of the land was registered. For land on farms of between 1,000and 10,000hectares,the correspondingfigure was 83percent; and for farms larger than 10,000 acres, 91 percent. Bryant 1998, 39, table 8; data from INCRA 1992. A hectare is roughly 2.5 acres.
13. The lack of land titles is a larger problem in the Northeast, where 64 percent of the farms smaller than 25 acres are located; only 41 percent of the land on such farms is registered. See Pereira 1999, 117-18.
14.In 1995,for example,more than half of all outstanding agricultural loans made by the federally owned Bank of Brazil were for more than R$500,000 (at that time, roughly the equivalent in U.S. dollars). Default rates on these large
PEREIRA: BRAZIL‘SAGRARIANREFORM	63
loans averaged 33 percent nationally. The debt was owed by 1,477 large landowners (less than one-half of one percent of the total of 297,827 borrow- ers), whose default represented 73 percent of the value of all agricultural loans made by the Bank of Brazil that were delinquent at that time. Owners of small and medium-sized farms, in contrast, generally repaid their debts. The default rate for loans up to R$30,000was only 6 percent of the total loan value, while the rate for loans up to R$150,000was 8 percent. The state bank, in effect, sub- sidized the very largest landowners by refusing to subject them to a “hard budget constraint.” Bryant 1998, 43, table 11. Data refer to outstanding loans as of May 31, 1995.
REFERENCES
Alston, Lee, Gary Libecap, and Bemardo Mueller. 2000. Land Reform Policies, The Sources of Violent Conflict, and Implications for Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon.Journal oj’EnuironmentalEconomics and Management 39: 162-88.
Amnesty International. 1998. Brazil: Commhiara and Eldorado de Carajas: Rural Violence,Police Brutality, and Impunity. New York: AI. Index: AMR 19/01/98, January.
Barreira, Cesar. 1999. Crimespor encomenda: viol2ncia epistolagem no cenario brasileiro. Rio d e Janeiro: Relume Dumark.
Borin,Jair. 1997.Reforma agraria no governo FHC. In A crise brasileirae ogov- ern0 FHC, ed. Alvaro Bianchi. S5o I’aulo: Xania Editora.
Brogan, Chris. 2000. Brazil. In Nations of the World:A Political, Economic and Business Handbook. Millerton, NY: Grey House. 181-86.
Bryant, Coralie. 1998. Northeast Brazil: Market Assisted Land Reform: Private Property Rights for the Rural Poor. Unpublished mss. submitted to Public Administration and Development. Washington, DC, April.
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique. 1994. Mdos d obra Brad: proposta de governo. Brasilia: Instituto Brasileiro de Anilises Sociais e EconBmicas/Banco Arbi.
-.	1996. 0 regime n2o i.dos excluidos. Interview transcript. Folba de SZo Paulo, October 13: caderno 5, p. 6.
-.	1997. Reforma agraria: compromisso de todos. Brasilia: PresidEncia da Repubka/Secretdria	de ComunicaCiio Social.
De Souza, Amaury. 1997. Redressing Inequalities: Brazil’sSocial Agenda at Cen- tury’s End. In Brazil Under Curdoso, ed. Susan Kaufman Purcell and Rior- dan Roett. Boulder: Lynne Rienner. 63-88.
Economist. 2001. Managing the Rainforests. May 12: 84. Economist Intelligence Unit. 1999. Country Report: Brazil. November 8: 1.
<www.eiu.com> Fleischer, David. 2001. Professor of Political Science, University of Brasilia;
author of Brazil Focus WeeklyReport,Personal communication. May 18. -.	2002. Brazil Focus WeeklyReport.January 5-11. Folba de S5o Pado. 2002. Credito ainda desafia reforma, diz governo. January
6: A-8. Gonplo,Jose Evaldo. 2000. Violhcia no campo--a@o	orquestrada pelas elites
rurais com o apoio de setores do estado. Partido dos Trabalhadores, Sec- retaria Agraria Nacional. December. <www.pt.org.br/assessor/agrario>
64	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	45: 2
-.	2001. Globalizaglo e reforma agrkria. PT, Secretaria Agriria Nacional. Jan- uary. <www,pt.org.br/assessor/agrario>
Gordon, Lincoln. 2001. Brazil’s Second Chance: En Route Toward the First World.Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Graziano Neto, Francisco. 1998. A dificil interpretaclo da realidade agriria. In Schmidt et al. 1998. 153-69.
Hammond, John L. 2001. The MST and the Media: Competing Images of the Landless Farmworkers’Movement. Paper presented to the Seminar on Con- tentious Politics, Columbia University. April.
Hook, Janet. 2002. Congress Unites on Federal Farm Policy. Times-Picayune (New Orleans), April 27: A-15.
Instituto Nacional d e Colonizagao e Reforma Agriria (INCRA). 1992. Estutisticus cadastrais anuais. Brasilia: INCRA.
-.	2001. Balango da reforma agrkria e da agricultura familiar 2001. <www.incra.gov.br>
Jank, Marcus Sawaya. 2001. Professor, Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, University of SPo Paulo. Comments in the panel dis- cussion “Sustainable Development and Rural Poverty: A Brazilian Perspec- tive,” Woodrow Wilson Center, Washington, DC, May 24.
Latin Focus. 2002. Data on inflation rate and consumer prices. <www.latin- focus.com/countries.Brazil>
Leite, Sergio. 1999. Politicas pdblicas e agricultura no Brasil: comentarios sobre o cenario recente. In 0 desmonte da na@o: balanGo do govern0 FHC, ed. Ivo Lesbaupin. PetrBpolis: Vozes. 153-80.
Margolis, Marc. 2002. A Plot of Their Own. Newsweek International Online. <www,msnbc.com/news> Accessed February 6.
Martins, Josi. de Souza. 1999. Reforma agriria: o impossivel diklogo sobre a hist6ria possivel. Tempo Social, 11, 2 (October): 97-128.
-.	2000. Reforma agraria: o irnpossivel dialogo. S2o Paulo: Editora da Uni- versidade de SPo Paulo.
Maxwell,Kenneth. 1999-2000. The Two Brads. WikonQuarterb (Winter): 50-60. Ondetti, Gabriel. 2001a. Agrarian Reform in Brazil: Present and Future. Unpub-
lished mss. -.	2001b. Taking and Making Political Opportunities: The Rise of the Brazil-
ian Landless Movement. Unpublished mss. Payne, Leigh. 2000. UncivilMovements: 7heArmed Right Wing and Democracy
in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Pereira, Anthony. 1997. 7heEnd of the Peasanty: 7heRural LaborMovement in
Northeast Brazil, 1961-1988.Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. -.	1999. God, the Devil, and Development in Northeast Brazil. Praxis 15:
113-36. Pompeu de Toledo, Roberto. 1998. Opresidente segundo o sociologo: entrevista
de Fernando Henrique Cardoso a Roberto Pompeu de Toledo. SPo Paulo:
Companhia das Letras. Porto, Mauro. 2001. Mass Media and Politics in Democratic Brazil. Paper pre-
sented at the conference “15 Years of Democracy in Brazil,” Institute of Latin American Studies, University of London, February 15-16.
PEREIRA: BRAZIL'S AGRARIAN REFORM	65
Prillaman, William C. 2000. TheJudiciay and Democratic Decay in Latin Amer- ica: Declining Confidence in the Rule of Law. Westport: Praeger.
Rinelli, Michael. 2001. Brazil Economic Briefing (BEB). 01/2001. 7th ed. Wash- ington, DC: Brazilian Embassy. April 12.
Roett, Riorddn. 1999. Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society 5th ed. Westport: Praeger.
Sanger, David. 2002. Bush Signs Farm Subsidies Increase. Times-Picayune(New Orleans), May 14: A-3.
Schmidt, Benicio Viero, Danilo Nolasco C. Marinho, and Sueli L. Couto Rosa, eds. 1998. 0 s assentamentos de reforma agran'a no Brasil. Brasilia: Editora UnB.
Sem Terra (Brasilia). 2000. Por qu&a reforma agraria no Brasil. No. 1 (July):2. Sigaud, Lygia. 2000. A forma acampamento: notas a partir da versPo pernam-
bucana. Novos Estudos CEBRAP no. 58 (November): 73-92. Sorj, Bernardo. 1998. A reforma agraria em tempos de democracia e globaliza-
PO. Novos Estudos CEBRAP no. 50 (March): 23-40. StkdiIe, JoPo Pedro, and Bernardo Manfano Fernandes. 1999. Brava gente: a
trajethria do MST e a luta pela terra no B r a d SPo Paulo: FundaSPo Perseu
Abramo. Viotti da Costa, Emilia. 2000 [19851. 7heBrazilian Empire:Myths and Histories.
Revised ed. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. World Bank. 2001. World Development Report 2000/2001. New York: Oxford
University Press. Wright, Angus. 2002. Professor of Environmental Studies, California State Uni-
versity at Sacramento. Personal communication. April 11.

2009
Development Studies
Journal of Agrarian Change
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land: New Forms of Peasant Rebellions
LEANDRO VERGARA-CAMUS

In this article, the author reviews some of the conclusions of the literature on peasant rebellions in the light of current land struggles of the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST) in Brazil and the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) in Chiapas, Mexico. The author argues that conventional explanations of peasant rebellions are inappropriate for the analysis of current land struggles in Latin America in the midst of the process of neoliberal globalization. Neither struggle can be characterized as ‘quasi-feudal’, nor as conservative reactions, but instead should be interpreted as attempts to create a basis for self-subsistence and autonomy. Consequently, the author proposes Marx’s concept of alienated labour as an alternative explanatory concept, because it highlights one of the main objectives of the members of the MST and the EZLN, which is the control over their livelihood through a struggle for their re-peasantization.
Keywords: MST, EZLN, peasant rebellions, subsistence, autonomy
INTRODUCTION
Latin America has a long history of peasant revolts, rebellions and revolutions. The land struggle currently being carried out by the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers’ Movement, MST) in Brazil and the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional (Zapatista Army of National Liberation, EZLN) in Chiapas, Mexico, share many of the characteristics of previous peasant rebellions. Although the MST and the EZLN struggles for land are not social revolutions in
Leandro Vergara-Camus, Centre for Development Studies, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 800, 9700 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands. e-mail: l.a.vergara@rug.nl
I am indebted to Judith Adler Hellman, Lissa North, Cristóbal Kay and Luin Goldring for their insightful guidance, comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this article. I am also grateful to Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, Cliff Welch, Lúcio Flávio de Almeida and Renata Gonçalves, in Brazil, and to Xochitl Leyva-Solano, Daniel Villafuerte, José Luis Escalona and Mercedes Olivera, in Chiapas, for commenting on some of the initial fieldwork findings and hypothesis upon which this article is based. I would also like to thank the three anonymous referees who provided valuable suggestions to improve the final version of this article.The research and fieldwork were funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Ontario Graduate Scholarship and the Faculty of Graduate Studies of York University in Toronto.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
366	Leandro Vergara-Camus
a strict sense,1 their struggle does represent a radicalization of peasant politics that shows both continuities and ruptures with other peasant rebellions studied by a previous generation of scholars (Moore 1966; Wolf 1973; Migdal 1974; Paige 1975; Scott 1976; Skocpol 1982). Both organizations have strongly opposed the imple- mentation of neoliberal policies, questioned the sanctity of private property, chal- lenged the existing power relations in the countryside and have inserted their struggle within a broader perspective of global social transformation.The fact that the MST and the EZLN have adopted forms of political action that privilege social mobilization over military confrontation should not impede us from using the term rebellion to characterize their struggle for land, because it simply shows that peasant movements adopt forms of struggle in accordance with historical circumstances. Even if they justify their actions on the state’s own terrain by linking it to national symbols, the contemporary discourse on democracy and even the constitutional basis of the current political regimes, the MST and the EZLN still seek to radically transform the existing social order. Furthermore, the political practices encouraged within these movements also represent a radicalization of more traditional forms of politics because they emphasize grassroots politicization and participation within the territorial spaces under their control – namely encampments and settlements in the case of the MST and autonomous indigenous communities and municipalities in the case of the EZLN.
In this article, I will present some of the main features of the struggle for land of the MST and the EZLN by looking at the processes and dynamics that have been debated by students of peasant rebellions. This article does not pretend to survey all the different aspects of the struggle for land of the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas. Neither will it attempt to address the whole range of theoretical writing about agrarian structures and peasant agriculture. Its focus is much more modest. It seeks to revisit a few classics of the literature on peasant rebellions because the questions they raise are still relevant if we wish to understand the nature of the struggle for land and the development alternatives of the MST and the EZLN.
Scholars of peasant rebellions have identified the expansion of capitalism and state modernizing policies as two of the fundamental processes triggering agrarian changes that lead to revolts. However, since most studies were conducted during periods when traditional agrarian social structures characterized the countryside, most scholars inserted their analysis of the process of proletarianization within a framework that also attributed a great importance to peasant–landlord relationships, which were seen as quasi-feudal. As will be argued below, this framework is no longer appropriate to study the current resurgence of peasant struggles in Latin America. In the last thirty years, following a continental trend (Kay 1995, 2000), in Brazil and Mexico ‘traditional landlords’ of the kind Moore, Wolf, Paige and Scott
1	According to Theda Skocpol, social revolutions are ‘rapid, basic transformations of society’s state and class structure, accompanied and in part carried through by class-based revolts from below’ and tend to happen at moments of ‘administrative-military breakdown of pre-existing states’ (Skocpol 1979, 287).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	367
wrote about have essentially disappeared.2 Hence, I will argue that the MST’s and EZLN’s struggle for land cannot be explained by referring to feudal-like relation- ships and that consequently we are now witnessing new forms of peasant rebellions. Thus, I will argue that Marx’s concept of alienation, as it theorizes the origin and the specificity of capitalist forms of exploitation, can provide valuable insights in the process of exploitation, resistance and motivation of landless rural workers or land-poor peasants of the MST and the EZLN.
Scholars who have sought to characterize and explain peasant rebellions have mainly focused on four interrelated issues: (i) the conditions giving rise to peasant rebellions; (ii) the social and political goals of the rebellions; (iii) the class compo- sition of the rebellions; and (iv) the reasons explaining the success of the revolu- tionary movement.There is a large body of literature that has focused on identifying and analyzing the political and organizational processes that led to the emergence, development and success of the MST (Almeida and Ruiz Sánchez 2000; Navarro 2000; Branford and Rocha 2002; Welch 2006) and the EZLN (Collier with Quaratiello 1994; Harvey 1998; Nash 2001; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001). Hence, in this article, I will focus mainly on the first three issues.
In the first section of this article, I will describe the neoliberal restructuring of the countryside that has occurred in Brazil and in Chiapas. I will follow with an overview of some of the debates on the goals and the class composition of peasant rebellions. In the last section of the article, I will provide a characterization of the class composition of the membership of the MST and the EZLN and I will propose the concept of alienated labour as a concept that can illuminate some of the broad objectives of both movements.
THE NATURE OF THE CRISIS OF PEASANT AGRICULTURE UNDER NEOLIBERALISM
Most scholars of peasant rebellions (Moore 1966; Wolf 1973, 1999; Migdal 1974; Paige 1975; Scott 1976; Skocpol 1982) agree that modern peasant rebellions are responses to sudden drastic agrarian changes that disrupt the daily lives of peasants, and that trigger economic and political crisis. Focusing on Latin America, Susan Eckstein has also pointed out that the existence or the absence of exit options for peasants was crucial for determining whether or not a revolutionary movement emerged.When impoverished peasants are able to find work in cities or in agri- cultural enterprises, or when they can migrate to other regions, a revolutionary organization will have difficulty in finding recruits. Conversely, if no exit options exist, peasant rebellions are more likely to develop (Eckstein 2001, 46).
At first glance, if we look at the general structural causes that gave rise to the MST and the EZLN, the origin of these struggles for land does not seem to diverge
2	Of course the disappearance of traditional landlords does not mean that authoritarian and repressive labour regimes do not exist in Latin America anymore. There are numerous regions of Latin America, including some regions of Brazil, where coercion still plays an important role in the subordination of peasants or rural workers.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
368	Leandro Vergara-Camus
from previous rebellions. However, the contemporary crises of peasant agriculture can no longer be seen in terms of encroachment upon the non-capitalist logic of isolated peasant villages by the logic of capitalist market relations. Members of the MST and the EZLN, although they partly rely on non-capitalist social relations for their survival, have engaged in capitalist exchanges for a long time, either through the sale of the crops they produce or their labour for a wage. Hence, it is not the expansion of capitalist relations per se, but rather the nature of the restructuring of agriculture that explains the re-emergence of the struggles for land in Brazil and Chiapas.
As has happened in other regions of the Third World, the profound crisis of the peasant economy, exacerbated by growing unemployment in the countryside and in cities triggered by neoliberalism, has endangered the subsistence of peasant families (Bryceson 2000b; Bernstein 2004; Moyo and Yeros 2005), and has led many sectors of the peasantry to embark on a new wave of land struggles. New land struggles have emerged because the neoliberal restructuring of agriculture was accompanied by a dramatic drop in the price of agricultural products, a reduction in employment opportunities due to mechanization and a reinforcement of the process of priva- tizing land rights.The rise of the MST and the EZLN are collective responses to similarly unstable and unfavourable economic conditions for peasant families gen- erated by neoliberal restructuring in Brazil and Mexico in the last decades. However, since Brazil and Mexico adopted very different paths of capitalist devel- opment and state formation, which can be traced back to different regimes of land property rights, the actual nature of the countryside differed.
In Brazil, the twentieth century is marked by the gradual, but inexorable, establishment of absolute private property rights as the basis for further land concentration, commoditization of land, the generalization of wage labour, and the consolidation of a large capitalist sector. As the ruling class was successful in establishing absolute private property in land by the end of the nineteenth century, Brazil developed agrarian structures dominated by a landed class that owned very large commercial plantations that produced for the market mostly on the basis of the labour of tenant farmers, and wage workers. However, alongside these large commercial farms a great variety of rural producers (family farmers, share-croppers, bóias frias [day-labourers], posseiros [squatters], etc.) were involved in agricultural activities. In the sugar plantations of the North-East region of Brazil, the abolition of slavery gradually gave way to a system of tenant farming, where ex-slaves remained as permanent workers (moradores) within the plantations (Martins 2003, 309).At the end of the nineteenth century in the coffee and sugar plantations of the state of São Paulo, planters introduced the colonato system, which combined salaried work, payments of rent in kind or labour, and special arrangements such as the colono’s right to plant subsistence crops between the aisles of coffee trees (Martins 2003, 305–6). Finally, in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paraná, as a result of a deliberate state policy to encourage European immi- gration, a small peasant sector producing a variety of food and cash crops was able to develop (Martins 2003, 310). This sector, however, persisted alongside – and was subordinate to – the large latifundios.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	369
In the late 1960s, the military junta implemented the ‘modernization of agri- culture’ by providing heavily subsidized credit to large capitalist farmers for the production of cash crops such as wheat, soy bean and corn, as well as for cattle ranching. Throughout Brazil, the modernization of agriculture led to increased mechanization in most sectors and the growth of cattle ranching, both of which drastically diminished the need for labour. As a consequence, between 1960 and 1980, 28 million rural workers and peasants were expelled from the countryside (Sparovek 2003, 24) to cities that were unable to provide employment for these newcomers.
In southern Brazil, where the MST emerged, the modernization of agriculture was closely associated with the expansion of soybean production, which saw the rise of the soybean–wheat farmers who cultivated soybeans during the summer and wheat during the winter (Papma 1992, 144). Since capitalist farmers had easier access to credit and were able to purchase tractors and combine harvesters, they were in a better position to benefit from the soybean boom. Medium and even small family producers, on the other hand, were also integrated to soybean pro- duction, but they held a subordinate position in relation to capitalist farmers because they lacked the means to access modern technology (Papma 1992, 149). At one extreme, large ranchers and capitalist farmers thrived during this period. At the other extreme however, most of the posseiros, sharecroppers and rural workers lost their access to land. Caught in the middle, millions of family farmers clung to their small plots but did not have enough land to redistribute to their children who, in addition to working on the family farm, often worked on-and-off as day-labourers on capitalist farms.
In contrast, in Mexico the massive peasant participation in the Revolution of 1910–17 obliged the new ruling class to accept an agrarian reform that created the ejido form of land tenure,3 which represents a political limitation on absolute private property rights over land.4 In turn, the ejido, by impeding the subordination of land to capital, blocked the complete generalization of wage labour and allowed for less polarized agrarian structures, the development of a diversity of forms of production, and the persistence of a peasant economy much more important than its counter- part in Brazil. Subsistence agriculture has always been much more important in Mexico than in Brazil. This said, as in Brazil, from the 1970s the Mexican state has also implemented policies seeking to modernize agricultural production and stimu- late cattle ranching in order to support industrialization.
3	The ejido is a form of land tenure, dating back to colonial times, that was institutionalized after the Mexican Revolution.The ejido refers to a peasant community that has been awarded by the state a title of collective use right over a given territory. However, even if the ejidatario (most often a male) has exclusive right to his plots of land, before 1992, he could not sell his plot or use it as collateral for loans.The exclusive usufruct right over a parcel of land given to an ejidatario is accompanied by political rights and duties.
4	It was only in 1992 that the liberalization of agriculture culminated with amendments to Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution that signalled the end of the agrarian reform and opened the way for the privatization and concentration of land (Moguel 1992; Ibarra Mendívil 1996; Goldring 1996). However, in contradiction to many predictions, in most regions of Mexico, ejido land has not been privatized and most ejidatarios have preferred to cling to their land, which for many of them represents a safety net from falling income.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
370	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Since the 1980s, Brazilian and Mexican agriculture have been transformed by market and trade liberalization, the specialization of production and the dominance of the world food regime by agribusiness. In both countries, transnational agribusi- ness complexes have also filled the void left by the retreat of the state and have increased their involvement and control of the liberalized market. In both countries, processing companies set production standards and conditions, while the banks of agricultural equipment companies, such as John Deere, have become an important source of credit for modernized agricultural producers (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 103; Rubio 2004, 953). In Brazil, however, even though agricultural credits were cut fivefold during the 1980s (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 96), the state continued to intervene in the market throughout the 1980s and the early 1990s by purchasing and stockpiling food crops and maintaining guaranteed prices (Dias and Amaral 2002, 214; Delgado 2001, 47). As a result, large Brazilian capitalist farmers were protected for several decades and are now fully integrated with the transnational agribusiness sector (Belik and Paulillo 2001, 98), as well as with the national supermarket chains (Dias and Amaral 2002, 217). In Mexico, in contrast, between 1981 and 1997 public investment in agriculture decreased 85.7 per cent (Calva 1999, 511), but as Mexico opened its agricultural market faster than NAFTA proscribed it, heavily subsidized agricultural imports from the United States have pushed small and even medium agricultural producers to migrate (Rubio 2004) or into production for self-consumption (Barkin 2002). Only a small proportion of medium producers were able to find a niche in fruit and vegetable markets through production contracts with agribusiness (Barros Nock 2000, 169).
In Brazil and Mexico, small and medium producers, peasants, squatters and rural workers have had to bear the costs of this restructuring. In Brazil, in addition to the already mentioned 28 million rural workers and peasants who were expelled from the countryside between 1960 and 1980, 10 million lost their jobs in the agricul- tural sector between 1985 and 1995 (Carvalho Filho 2001, 196) and it is estimated that another 4 million people abandoned agriculture between 1995 and 1999 (Petras and Veltmeyer 2003, 75).5 Similarly in Mexico, the number of profit-making agricultural producers dropped from 4 million producers in 1994 to only 300,000 in 2000 (Rubio 2004, 955) and in Chiapas, according to official data, the percentage of municipalities considered of ‘high’ and ‘very high’ marginalization went up from 63.06 per cent of all municipalities in 1995 to 93.16 per cent in 2000 (Gobierno de Chiapas 2003, 27).
In Chiapas during the 1980s, poor indigenous peasants experienced the crisis through a drastic drop in the price of maize and coffee, the two crops from which they derived their monetary income. INMECAFÉ, the state corporation that regulated, financed and purchased coffee production, was privatized in 1989 in the midst of the worst coffee crisis that saw prices fall by 50 per cent in a year, leaving thousands of small and micro producers loaded with debt and without access to credit (Harvey 1995, 42–3). Similarly, the price of maize dropped drastically to the
5	However, smallholder production was far from being eradicated because up to 1995 as much as 69.8 per cent of all production units in Brazil cultivated an area of less than 20 hectares (Buainaim et al. 2003, 322).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	371
extent that in 1987 43 per cent of maize producers were operating at a loss.The number jumped to 65 per cent in 1988 (Harvey 1995, 44). As a consequence, in all regions of Chiapas, this crisis propelled an even more dramatic struggle for land.
In the Lacandona jungle, where the EZLN emerged, the low price of coffee and maize came to exacerbate the already abrasive land conflict between indigenous peasant communities and the state, which dated back several decades. First, President Gustavo Díaz Ordáz (1964–70) promulgated a decree promising ejido titles to the peasants that would colonize and settle in the Lacandona jungle. Then in 1971, his successor, Luis Echeverría (1970–6), halted the possibility of gaining access to land through colonization by attributing 614,321 hectares of the jungle to only 66 families of Lacandon Indians and cancelled the rights of 26 indigenous communities of other ethnic origins that had recently settled in the area (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 113).The indigenous settlers, whose lands were now endan- gered by the decree, did not want to relocate and began an arduous struggle against the government. Subsequently, in 1979, President José López Portillo (1976–82), through another decree, created the ecological reserve of Montes Azules, which meant another relocation of hundreds of indigenous peasant settler communities, and the revocation of their ejido titles.This threat against their land rights in the context of a deep economic crisis was at the root of an important process of communal organization and mobilization that culminated in the development of the EZLN (Harvey 1998, 68–90). Hence, in 1989, when President Carlos Salinas de Gortari (1988–94) granted ejido titles to 26 ‘illegal’ communities settled within the Montes Azules bio-reserve (Collier with Quaratiello 1994, 78), it was, for most of them, too little too late.The state had lost the little legitimacy it had enjoyed in the eyes of the peasantry, had become a class enemy and had effectively been replaced by the EZLN, which was at the time still a clandestine organization (see Collier with Quaratiello 1994, 51).
Thus, beyond some important differences between the conditions and develop- ment of the Brazilian and Mexican countryside, the modernization of agriculture in Brazil and the neoliberal restructuring of the 1980s in both countries led to a crisis of peasant agriculture and the marginalization of peasants and rural workers. In turn, this crisis created favourable conditions for the emergence of the struggle for land by the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas. In the case of the MST, the land struggle started before the implementation of neoliberal policies, but neoliberal restructuring gave it a second impulse and has allowed the MST to continue growing nationally until today. In the case of the EZLN, neoliberal restructuring exacerbated an already existing local land conflict between indigenous peasant communities and the state.The deepening of the economic crisis of the Chiapan countryside has allowed the EZLN to expand its social base outside the initial geographic area of the Lacandona jungle, but only into regions within the state of Chiapas that are populated by indigenous subsistence peasants.
In this context, for marginalized families, access to land represents a kind of ‘insurance policy’ against neoliberal restructuring. In Brazil and Mexico, particularly in Chiapas, the economic crisis reached such a degree that the struggle for land by poor families is now geared toward the simple and dramatic issue of securing their
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
372	Leandro Vergara-Camus
subsistence. In both countries, maintaining or gaining access to land, and thus reclaiming the peasant condition (i.e. re-peasantization), is a political strategy adopted by some sectors of the subaltern classes to resist the ongoing crisis, because they do not see rural–urban exodus as a desirable option.6 However, the Zapatista struggle, because it takes place in a region with little market penetration, where land is not yet commoditized, is mainly a struggle to maintain and re-invent communal rights as a basis of the peasant economy. In contrast, the MST’s struggle, which takes place in a countryside that has long been organized under a capitalist logic, represents a struggle to re-create a space for subsistence based on a peasant economy in times of structural crisis.This focus on subsistence is where both movements are similar in their response to neoliberal restructuring. MST settlers, however, see subsistence and food production for self-consumption as the first stage of a process leading to modern family farming.
The neoliberal restructuring of agriculture that occurred in Brazil and Chiapas provides the conditions that made revolt possible, but it does not in itself tell us why peasants rebelled only in those two regions and not elsewhere in Latin America. Three factors can help explain the peculiarity of the struggle for land by the MST and the EZLN. First, peasant politics and the state’s response to it in Brazil and Mexico run counter to the recent history of peasant politics elsewhere in Latin America. Peasantries in Latin America have participated in guerrilla movements since the 1960s in Colombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Peru. Over a period of several decades, while guerrilla movements were frequently able to destabilize local oligarchic regimes, they never managed to defeat them completely. As a consequence, peasant movements in Central America have accepted that their demand must remain within the limits of liberal representative democracies instead of challenging them like the MST and the EZLN do. Jeffrey Paige, taking issue with Barrington Moore’s (1966) three routes to modern democracy, argues that Central American failed ‘socialist revolutions from below’ exemplify a fourth route to democracy, because the unintended consequence of these revolutions was the establishment of liberal democratic regime (Paige 1997, 316, 329–32). In contrast, Brazil and Mexico are two countries where the state managed to suppress guerrilla movements very early on in the 1960s and 1970s.The Brazilian and the Mexican states were also able to develop or maintain successful corporatist structures in the countryside until the early 1980s (Houtzager 1998; Villafuerte et al. 1999, 154). Hence the demise of these corporatist structures, due both to the implementation of neoliberal policies and the challenge of a new wave of peasant movements, has led to the radicalization of peasant politics two decades later than in other Latin American countries.
Second, the absence of an exit strategy for peasants and rural workers in Brazil and Chiapas provided further impetus for this radicalization of peasant politics. In the case of Brazil, the mere size of the rural population expelled from the coun- tryside eliminates the possibility of speaking of any kind of significant exit option.
6	It is important to note that in Mexico migration to the US has replaced migration to the city as an exit solution, but until very recently this option was not as common among indigenous peasants in Chiapas as it has been in other indigenous regions of Mexico.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	373
For many peasant families wanting to remain on the land, the choice was simply between social marginalization in cities and land occupation with the MST and other peasant organizations. The same is true for indigenous regions of Chiapas. Sources of local off-farm work that had traditionally been important for the subsistence peasants of the Lacandona jungle and for other indigenous regions of Chiapas became ever scarcer as a result of the development of cattle ranching from the 1970s and the coffee crisis of the 1980s. Moreover, in contrast to other indigenous regions of Southern Mexico, in Chiapas migration to the United States did not replace migration to the city as an exit strategy. In 1995 Chiapas was still ranked 27 out of 32 Mexican states in terms of the amount of remittances received from abroad, as indigenous peasants continued to rely more on their kinship network and community for their survival than on migration.7
The third factor distinguishing the experience of the MST and the EZLN from other peasant organizations in Latin America arises from the role played by these peasant movements in the radicalization of peasants and landless rural workers. As was mentioned in the Introduction, there is an extensive literature that has looked at the role of the MST and the EZLN in the politicization and radicalization of rural producers. For the purpose of this article, I simply want to underline how crucial the control of a territorial space by the MST8 and the EZLN has been for the successful politicization and radicalization of their membership. Joel Migdal emphasized that peasant revolutions could emerge only if a revolutionary organi- zation filled the political vacuum created by the decline of traditional village institutions and leaders. For him, peasants would be ready to join a revolutionary organization if it was able to offer concrete solutions to their problems, provide them with material rewards or services, or allow them to reach longer-term goals (Migdal 1974, 237–52). Barrington Moore, on his part, highlighted the importance of the ‘types of solidarity arrangements among the peasants . . . insofar as they constitute focal points for the creation of a distinct peasant society in opposition to the dominant class and as the basis for popular conceptions of justice and injustice that clash with those of the rulers’ (1966, 479). However, he seemed to suggest that the type of solidarity arrangements was more the result of the agrarian structure of a peasant society and less the fruit of the efforts of peasant organizations. The experience of the MST and the EZLN show that by controlling a territorial space – the encampment and the settlement in the case of the MST and a whole network of indigenous communities in the case of the EZLN – these organizations were able
7	This trend has been reversed since the mid-1990s, but in 2003 Chiapas still accounted only for 2.97 per cent of the total amount of remittances sent to Mexico from the United State (Villafuerte 2005, 473). Migration is now an important phenomenon in indigenous regions of Chiapas. However, to my knowledge, there are as yet no reliable data or studies on migration of indigenous peoples in Chiapas. The magnitude of the phenomenon is hence difficult to evaluate. The data collected by Villafuerte, for instance, show that two-thirds of remittances are received by families living in municipalities that are predominantly non-indigenous, and his data do not show how the remaining third is distributed nor the amount of remittances indigenous municipalities receive (see Villafuerte 2005, 479).
8	For a theorization of the importance of the control of a territorial space for the struggle of the MST, see Fernandes (2005).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
374	Leandro Vergara-Camus
to replace the state and provide peasants with political representation and basic services (Robles 2000; Fernandes 2005;Vergara-Camus 2009; Burguete Cal y Mayor 2003). From these ‘autonomous rural communities’ they were able to develop a radical understanding of politics and social change based on the re-creation or strengthening of the bonds of solidarity among peasants and landless rural workers. Very few peasant movements in contemporary Latin America have achieved a similar control over a territorial space that can be translated into a powerful tool for social mobilization. When they have achieved that control, like the indigenous movement in Ecuador, the actions of peasant movements have yielded impressive political results (see Perreault 2003).
PEASANT REBELLIONS: CONSERVATIVE OR REVOLUTIONARY?
Most authors have highlighted that peasant rebellions are often accompanied by – or rooted in – profound moral outrage responding to a sudden increase in levels of exploitation or insecurity. Scott emphasizes the suddenness of the shock these changes create because they are more likely to be seen as a ‘sharp moral departure from existing norms of reciprocity’ (1976, 194). In the case of Latin America, Eckstein has noted that peasants will take the risk of direct confrontation only when the injustice against them is perceived as intolerable, and when local and national institutions and cultural conditions, such as strong kinship and ethnic and cultural bonds, lead peasants to struggle collectively (Eckstein 2001, 15).
However, because peasants revolt it does not mean that their objectives are necessarily revolutionary ones. Scott’s view of the peasant village dynamic, for instance, led him to argue that peasant revolts were ‘best seen as defensive reactions’ (Scott 1976, 10). According to Scott, the moral claim to subsistence is not revolu- tionary because it rests on the norm of reciprocity that links poor peasants with the ruling elite in the village or the region, which obliges the ruling elite to secure and promote the well-being of the lower classes (Scott 1976, 189). As we have seen, Migdal in contrast to Scott did not see peasant rebellions as a priori conservative or even inclined toward reforming the traditional order.
As has been the case with past peasant rebellions, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN also come to the fore through a moral discourse.This discourse is the foundation of the Sem Terra and Zapatista demand for land. In both cases, we find a conception of justice, based on a moral understanding in which land is understood as a right that does not necessarily depend on – or that goes beyond – the existence of a legal framework. In other words, in a fashion that is reminiscent of Scott’s argument, for the Sem Terra and Zapatistas, subsistence needs and the right to a dignified life take precedence over legality (Meszaros 2000;Van der Haar 2001).
However, the struggles of the MST and the EZLN go far beyond the defensive character that James Scott (1976) attributes to peasant revolts. Indeed, in Brazil and Chiapas, one of the first institutions of the capitalist society to be challenged by the struggle of the MST and the EZLN is private ownership of land.The legitimacy of private ownership of land, particularly if it is perceived as constituting a latifundio, is assessed through a moral understanding of justice. Land concentration, regardless
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	375
of its legal character, is considered unjust because it blocks the access of poor people to a decent livelihood. Within this perspective, for Sem Terra and Zapatistas, the right to land is associated with a right to live with dignity, understood as a fundamental human right and thus as having supremacy over property rights. Moreover, this claim to the right to land for subsistence reasons is not directed at traditional landlords or village elites, as Scott would have it.The land struggles of the MST and the EZLN are not struggles demanding that elites live up to their moral obligations towards their subordinates. On the contrary, both movements seek to fundamentally transform or even transcend that relationship by empowering their membership through the creation of ‘autonomous rural communities’ (Robles 2000; Burguete Cal y Mayor 2003;Vergara-Camus 2009).These ‘autonomous rural com- munities’, who practice self-governance over a great variety of issues and break away from traditional forms of subordination, allow their members to secure and protect their access to land and hence resist the full commoditization of land and moneta- rization of relations of production (Vergara-Camus 2007).
More importantly, this non-correspondence between the characteristics of the land struggle of the MST and the EZLN and Scott’s conclusions highlights one of the major limitations of the conventional studies of peasant rebellions in general. Although analysing the impact of the expansion of capitalist relations and state modernizing policies on peasant communities, most scholars of this specific litera- ture continued locating peasant rebellions within rural contexts in which the subordination of peasant to traditional landlords was one of the central forms of exploitation and domination. Scott, more than any of the others, is a good example of this reliance on an underlying feudal-like model. The consequence of the adoption of a feudal model to analyze peasant rebellions is to over-emphasize the conservative character of peasant rebellions, by arguing that peasant rebellions aim mainly at re-establishing a social order ex ante, characterized by a submissive relationship to landlords.
The feudal-like model is inappropriate to analyse the land struggle of the MST and the EZLN because traditional ‘landlords’ – i.e. those who extract rent from tenant farmers or labour services from squatters in exchange for usufruct rights – have lost most of their economic and political power (Kay 1995, 2000) or are far from being the main class enemy of these movements. In Brazil, traditional landlords have transformed themselves into large capitalist farmers or have used their access to land to venture into other economic activities (Palmeira and Leite 1998, 122–5). In addition, in many regions of Brazil, traditional landlords have been replaced by non-agricultural enterprises, which have appropriated a substantial amount of land in order to benefit from tax exceptions (Palmeira and Leite 1998, 123).9 As for the existence of a feudal-like peasant culture, in Southern Brazil where the MST
9	A decade ago, a study that looked at the 46 largest latifundios of Brazil by economic sector found that companies from the financial sector owned 22,133,342 hectares of land, those from the industrial sector 19,991,211 hectares and those from the agricultural sector 6,277,169 hectares. In all these cases, the percentage of cultivated land in relation to the whole property remained very low: 17.16 per cent for properties owned by the financial sector, 18.12 per cent for those of the industrial sector and only 14.42 per cent for those of the agricultural sector (Júlio José Chiavenato, cited by Robles 2001, 152).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
376	Leandro Vergara-Camus
originally surfaced, there is no entrenched history of common peasant culture establishing social limitations on the power of landlords.
In Chiapas, in the Lacandona jungle, the region that gave birth to the EZLN, traditional landlords were almost absent, although reminiscences of serf-like rela- tionships persisted in the outskirts of the jungle until the 1970s. The original Zapatista rebel communities of the Lacandona jungle, and even most of the indigenous peasants of the Highlands, were also not inserted within a rural context that resembles the traditional image of the quasi-feudal landlord/tenant model. Indigenous peasants moved into the Lacandona jungle from the 1950s onward and established ejidos of subsistence peasants, which complemented their income by selling their coffee or cattle in the fincas (haciendas) that surrounded the jungle (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 92). These indigenous peasants from the Lacandona jungle were thus subject to exploitation by modernizing landowners, but more as temporary wage labourers or sellers of cattle than as traditional tenants. Furthermore, as was seen, the main source of contention of these communities was not the power of large landowners but rather the arbitrary decisions and policies of the state.10 Traditional landlords did not dominate the landscape in two other regions where the EZLN expanded after the uprising of January 1994. In the Highlands, beginning in the 1960s, traditional Ladino11 landlords had been slowly expelled, whereas in Northern Chiapas, they had modernized their estates by switching to cattle ranching with its characteristic reduced need for labour. In this latter case, which is studied by Aaron Bobrow-Strain (2007), it could be said that the landed class was the focus of the contention, as the numerous land occupations can attest. However, the indigenous peasants that carried out these occupations in the aftermaths of the Zapatista uprising in Northern Chiapas, as elsewhere in the state, were not in their majority members of the EZLN (Villafuerte et al. 1999, 180– 98).12 Bobrow-Strain, following Jeffrey Paige, characterizes these land invasions as classic examples of a ‘land rush’, which occurs ‘when a landed upper class has been critically weakened . . . [It is] a short intense movement aimed at seizing land but lacking long-run political objectives’ (Paige 1975, 42–3 cited by Bobrow-Strain 2007, 148). Hence, in some degree and notwithstanding the important financial compensations they received in exchange for their land, landowners, even if they were not the principal target for Zapatista grievances, ended up on the losing end of the social, political and cultural transformations triggered by the Zapatista uprising at the regional level.
10	However, the experience of semi-servile subordination to a landlord remained a very vivid memory in the minds of older indigenous settlers who moved into the Tojolabal Highlands in the outskirts of the jungle and the North of Chiapas between the 1950s and 1960s (see Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 129–31). This generation obviously had an influence on the class discourse of the Zapatistas.
11	Ladino is the term used in Chiapas and Central America to refer to the local population of European descent or with non-indigenous racial features. 12	Most certainly, the EZLN had some presence in the North of Chiapas before 1994, but its organization was not as consolidated as in the Lacandona jungle. However, since 1994 the EZLN has managed to expand into Northern Chiapas by providing the political organization to protect some of these land occupations.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	377 Searching for a Revolutionary Social Subject in the Countryside
Determining which sector of the peasantry is more prone to adopt revolutionary strategies has been at the centre of many heated debates among scholars of peasant rebellions. Indeed, in his study on the Russian countryside, Lenin argued that middle peasants were a barrier to socialist transformation ‘because of their vacillating nature on the border of subsistence and profit-oriented production, and because of the brake they placed on the development of a home market, given their tendency to be self-sufficient producers’ (Bryceson 2000a, 10). Lenin added that instead landless rural labourers, because of their class position, could be considered allies of the industrial proletariat in a socialist revolution.
Two of the most influential studies on peasant rebellions, Barrington Moore Jr’s
Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World (1966) and Eric Wolf’s Peasant Wars in the Twentieth Century (1973), provided evidence against the argument about the conservative orientation of peasants and the revolutionary potential of rural labourers. For Moore, Wolf and Scott, landowning peasants were more prone to rebel than landless peasants and rural workers (Skocpol 1982, 352). Wolf’s work is more relevant here because, among the three, he is the one who tried to push and refine this argument the furthest.
According to Wolf, poor peasants or landless labourers cannot be revolutionaries because they have no tactical power (Wolf 1975, 268). Only the ‘land-owning middle peasantry’ or a ‘peasantry located in a peripheral area outside the domain of the landlord control’ has sufficient internal leverage to sustain a rebellion (Wolf 1975, 269). But for Wolf it was basically middle peasants, those ‘who work their own land with labour of their own family’, who were the ‘prime movers to rebellion’, because ‘only they possess the degree of autonomy required to initiate political action and to become viable allies for “outside agitators”’ (Wolf 1999, 235). In contrast to Wolf, Jeffery Paige recognized that under particular circumstances peas- ants could radicalize and even engage in revolts, but only to return to their prior conservatism (Paige 1975, 339). For Paige, it was the migratory estate labourers and the sharecroppers (i.e. the poorest sectors of the peasantry) who formed the principal base of revolutionary movements.13
In a contradictory way, the respective positions of Wolf and Paige in the debate over which sectors of the peasantry were more prone to rebel is grounded in different views with regard to the ties that different rural direct producers maintain with land and with their communities. Indeed, Wolf argued that middle peasants were ‘primary movers of revolutions’ also because their children, who are sent to the city to work, maintain their ties to their village and can introduce to the village revolutionary ideas learned in the city (Wolf 1973, 292; 1999, 235). Conversely, according to Wolf, children of poor peasants, once in the city, simply break their ties
13	Other authors, who are probably closer to historical evidence, have shown that successful revolutionary movements have tended to win support from many kinds of rural producers, such as middle peasants, squatters, sharecroppers and migrant labourers, and sometimes even rich peasants and landlords (Goodwin and Skocpol 1994, 262; Wickham-Crowley 2001, 146–7).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
378	Leandro Vergara-Camus
with their family and village (Wolf 1973, 292; 1999, 235). In contradistinction to Wolf, Paige’s analysis of the migratory estate system shows that it is the ties of poor peasants (migrant estate workers) with land and their communities that allow for peasant communities to be drawn into a revolutionary movement (Paige 1975, 361).
At the beginning of the new millennium, experiences as wage labourers in the countryside or in the city are extremely important in the radicalization of landless rural workers in Brazil and subsistence indigenous peasants in Chiapas. I would contend, however, that these experiences are not as important in terms of access to revolutionary ideas – especially not today – as they are in terms of experiences of alienation and marginalization.The long periods of unemployment and on-and-off casual wage work leads poor peasants and landless rural workers to reassess the advantages of having access to land. In the case of indigenous peasants in Chiapas, these experiences with the vicissitudes of underemployment, that are racially medi- ated, reinforce their sense of alienation from Mexican society.
As early as the late 1960s, some Latin American Marxists argued that expelled peasants would not be integrated into the reserve army of labour but would instead enlarge a marginal population (marginal mass or marginal pole) that is permanently unemployed and reproduced through various activities within what has been called the ‘informal sector’ (Kay 2006, 459–62). Following that trend of thought, Cristóbal Kay has recently argued that as a result of the modernization of agriculture during the last thirty years, which has entrenched seasonal work as the main type of occupation in the countryside, ‘most of Latin America’s peasantry appears to be stuck in a state of permanent semi-proletarianization’ (Kay 2000, 132). Indeed, the particularity of the process of industrialization and agricultural modernization in Latin American countries makes it difficult to talk about proletarianization as the main or the only tendency in the countryside, unless by proletarianization one simply refers to the generalization of experiences of wage-labour within various sectors of the peasantry. To the contrary, even in cases such as Brazil where the process of proletarianization of rural direct producers has progressed more rapidly than in other countries of Latin America, the peasant response to the restructuring of agriculture impedes a linear understanding of the process. Hence, land struggles in the context of incomplete proletarianization are products of dynamic processes of de-peasantization/semi-proletarianization/re-peasantization. In this context, rural direct producers, in response to the instability of their wage-earning situation, shift back and forth between the condition of semi-proletarianized rural workers and peasants, combine both for an extended period, and often seek to regain their peasant condition.
THE MST AND THE EZLN: ALTERNATIVES TO IMPOVERISHMENT AND SOCIAL MARGINALIZATION
In contrast to how past peasant rebellions were portrayed by a previous generation of scholars, the social composition of both the MST and the EZLN is very diverse. Indeed most scholars of peasant rebellions differentiate between peasants and rural wage-labourers, associating the latter with the proletariat. As the previous discussion
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	379
highlights, this clear-cut distinction can no longer be made in Latin America, as the great majority of rural producers combine different activities and class experiences, and move from one condition to the other.14 Nevertheless, some distinctions between the social composition of the MST and the EZLN have to be drawn if we want to understand the specificity of their struggle for land.
Since the early 1980s it is possible to identify two fundamental waves of militants. Most of those who make up the first wave struggled for land in the 1980s, have a family history of land possession, and are thus from an unambiguously peasant background. The first wave of Sem Terra were mainly land-poor peasants, landless peasants (sharecroppers or squatters), and landless rural workers who, in the 1970s, because of land concentration and the mechanization of agriculture, had to migrate to other rural areas or to the cities in search of employment.An important proportion of the people who joined the MST in the 1980s were thus former peasants or rural workers with access to land through a family member. Especially in the early 1980s, Sem Terra have, in their past, experiences with subsistence agriculture and non-monetarized relations of productions somewhat similar to those of Zapatista indigenous peasants. However, this does not apply to all the members of the MST, since many of them come from family farming, which especially in the South is much more integrated within the circuit of modern capitalist farming.
The second wave of MST militants is probably more diverse than the first wave, although the proportion of landless peasants, sharecroppers and the like is lower than in the first wave.This second wave of SemTerra is much more clearly made up of landless rural workers, often with no family history of land possession, while the proportion of urban dwellers with little or very distant connection with the countryside is now growing. This last tendency directly contradicts Wickham- Crowley’s argument (2001, 151) that a peasantry that has been landless for some time will tend not to participate in radical movements. In the case of the current second generation of Sem Terra, it cannot be said that their struggle represents a reconnection with a lost peasant past. Their struggle represents more a de-connection from a current experience of urban marginalization. Regardless of the differences between the two waves of landless people, both share the objective of finding a space for subsistence within a peasant economy in the midst of a profound unemployment crisis.The achievement of this goal depends on gaining access to land and, at least in the beginning, producing food for self-consumption (Vergara-Camus 2009). Once this initial phase of survival is completed, MST settlers become much more preoccupied with finding ways to better integrate into the market through the creation of cooperatives, the diversification of production or through participation in the niche market of agro-ecological production.
In contrast, the EZLN is a movement made up of subsistence indigenous peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin, who migrate temporarily to work in
14	This highlights the shortcomings of the attempt to restrict the use of the term ‘peasantry’ only to small independent landowning producers instead of employing it to refer to a class with internal divisions and a diversity of forms of production, which is closer to the lived experience of most peasantries.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
380	Leandro Vergara-Camus
farms and ranches or cities of Chiapas. The Zapatista movement has enrolled communities in the Lacandona jungle, the North, the Highlands, and the Fronteriza regions of Chiapas. The EZLN has not been able to set up alternative political structures in the non-indigenous regions of the state, such as the Soconusco and Central Valley, which are more integrated into the market and where contingents of rural proletarians are larger.
One of the early discussions around the Zapatista uprising in English-speaking academic circles was the debate around whether the Zapatista rebellion was mainly an indigenous or a peasant rebellion. Some authors argue that the Zapatista move- ment is an identity-based movement (Burbach 1994; Gossen 1996). Others empha- size that class still plays a central role in defining the movement (Veltmeyer 1997; Petras and Veltmeyer 2001). The great majority of authors, however, prefer to highlight that identity and class are two fundamental and inseparable social catego- ries that allow us to understand the character of the Zapatista movement (Nash 2001; Harvey 1998; Otero and Jugenitz 2003). Following this latter trend, I argue that the EZLN is an ‘indigenous peasant movement’ whose membership is essen- tially made of indigenous subsistence peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin.
Many authors (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 105–6; Márquez and Legorreta 1999, 11; Villafuerte et al. 1999, 107) have pointed out the existence of two logics within the Chiapan countryside: the ‘peasant logic’, associated with subsistence farming, and the ‘accumulation logic’, associated with commercial farming. Historically, peasant or subsistence logic marked the agricultural practices of indigenous peasants while the accumulation logic dominated among Ladino landowners. According to the great majority of studies, based on a comparison of data from the 1990 agricultural census with the previous decades, the main ten- dency in the Chiapan countryside was toward the encroachment of the subsistence logic by the logic of accumulation (Leyva Solano and Ascencio Franco 1996, 89, 92, 128, 137;Villafuerte et al. 1999, 108, 110).
Traditionally in Chiapas, as in many other parts of Mexico, the peasant com- munity, which rests to a great extent on female unpaid labour, assumes part of the burden of the survival of their members that work for a wage and thus makes up for part of the reproduction of the agricultural labour force (Otero 1999, 62). Historically, in order to increase the monetary income derived from the sale of agricultural products, men had to seek wage-labour outside indigenous regions. Most of them left their community for short periods of time to earn money for the rest of the year, during which time women and children worked the family plot. Thus, a significant proportion of Zapatistas have had – and still have – experience with wage-labour in fincas and ranches15 but also in urban centres of the region (Palenque, Ocosingo, Comitán,Villa Hermosa), where they seek any employment16 they can find. Hence, in the face of difficulty, the response by indigenous peasants
15	The young Zapatistas from the Northern fringe of the Lacandona Jungle, for instance, migrate temporarily to Tabasco to work in the lime and lemon plantations during harvest-time in February and March. 16	The construction sector is one of the major employers of temporary indigenous peasant labour in local urban centres (Collier with Quaratiello 1994).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	381
in Chiapas has been to pull back from the market and reinforce the communities, which are built around kinship networks (Earle and Simonelli 2005, 21).
New data from the national census of 2000 suggest that, as a result of more than a decade of economic stagnation, an important tendency toward subsistence agri- culture can be observed in many indigenous regions of Chiapas. According to the census of 2000, in Los Altos, 45.5 per cent of all households do not receive any income.This proportion rises to 68.6 per cent when we add households with less than half a minimum salary. In the North, these proportions reach 48.7 per cent and 65.4 per cent, respectively. In the jungle, they are 46.3 per cent and 60.4 per cent (INEGI 2000). In a recent article,Villafuerte has modified his earlier view on the subordination of the ‘subsistence logic’ to the ‘accumulation logic’ within Chiapas agriculture (2005, 462). He now argues that Chiapan agriculture is going through a ‘terminal crisis’, in which the rise in production for subsistence is among the most important indicators (Villafuerte 2005, 470–2). In sum, the tendency within the peasant economy is thus not toward the expansion and generalization of commercial agriculture. Rather, the phenomenon that can be observed is a ‘retreat movement’ toward subsistence agriculture and activities. More and more peasants, particularly in indigenous regions of the jungle, the Highlands and the North, are retreating, as much as possible, from commercial relations – dedicating only a minimal portion of their activity to this purpose.17
Thus, because it emerged and developed in regions of Chiapas with less pen- etration of capitalist relations, the EZLN is basically made up of indigenous subsistence peasants and their semi-proletarianized kin. Most of the indigenous subsistence peasants are ejidatarios whose plots are subject to demographic pressure and decreasing fertility. The semi-proletarian members of the EZLN are mostly young males without rights to land in their communities, who subsist on their parents’ plot and contribute to the family household in labour or with monetary income from their temporary wage work.
Hence, contrary to García de León’s opinion that the support for the EZLN comes from the ranks of the middle peasants and not from isolated poor peasants (García de León 2005, 514–15), I argue that the majority of Zapatistas are subsis- tence peasants and that fewer can be found within the ranks of market-dependent indigenous peasants. From the testimonies that I collected from Zapatistas during fieldwork, the middle peasants – who in Chiapas would be the more market- dependent indigenous ‘peasant/ranchers’ – joined the movement in the first years of the conflict. Many of these more market-dependent peasants thought that they would improve their situation by benefiting from the concessions that the state would eventually make. When the policy of resistance18 was decided, many of them abandoned the EZLN.The fact that the EZLN is made of poor subsistence peasants
17	However, this tendency is not uniform since, as Burguete Cal y Mayor (1999, 290–5) underlines with regard to the Highlands region, a small privileged sector of the indigenous population is taking advantage of the commercialization and ‘Indianization’ of certain economic activities such as transport, usury lending, flower and coffee production, as well as artisanal crafts/handicrafts.
18	The policy of resistance was a decision that was taken by the EZLN in 1997 to refuse any state funding, programmes or negotiation until the federal government complied with its acceptance of the San Andrés Accords on Indigenous Rights and Culture and ratified it into law.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
382	Leandro Vergara-Camus
explains why so many of the choices that the movement has made on issues of land tenure focus on agricultural production, and micro-development projects are geared to reinforcing self-subsistence and self-reliance (see Earle and Simonelli 2005; Vergara-Camus 2007).
Anti-Capitalist Struggles for Different Forms of Autonomy
In the current context of the profound crisis of peasant agriculture and rural and urban unemployment, and considering the experience that Brazilian and Chiapan direct rural producers have had with the market, Marx’s concept of alienated labour (Marx 1992) is very useful to help us understand the roots of the moral and political claim on land put forward by Sem Terra and Zapatistas.
The starting point of Marx’s reflection on alienation is that all human beings possess a creative capacity and that, in fact, that capacity is what distinguishes human beings from other living creatures (Marx 1992, 328). For Marx, human beings exercise that creative capacity through their labour, by transforming nature and their social environment in an infinite number of ways. Human beings fulfil their creative capacity as long as they control their labour, the labour process and the product of their labour. However, with the constitution of the private ownership of the means of production, whereby labourers are expropriated from their means of subsistence, labourers are obliged to sell their labour power to the owner of the means of production, thus alienating their creative capacity to someone else in exchange for a wage. As a result, human beings are alienated in four ways: (1) from their labour, which is not theirs anymore but belongs to someone else; (2) from the product of their labour, which because it also belongs to someone else presents itself as something external to them; (3) from nature and from their nature as creative beings; (4) from other human beings, who are the subjects behind this process of alienation (Marx 1992, 326–31). In all four forms of alienation, disempowerment and the loss of autonomy are the common denominators.
For Marx, the establishment of private property of land was thus the beginning of a long process of expropriation of the direct producers that he documented for the case of England in his chapter on the ‘So-Called Primitive Accumulation’ in Capital (Marx 1990). Only by cutting off the labourers from the land, as a means from which they secured their subsistence, could the process of commoditization of social life expand, forcing direct producers to become simple wage-workers and giving money a social power it had never had before (Wood 1994).
Because peasants, in all their differences and diversity, are often closer to this original process of expropriation of the means of subsistence and production, they are perfect examples of a class that experiences the genesis of the process of alienation and disempowerment in the course of their lives. Having to seek work in several settings, most members of the MST and the EZLN are also exposed to the insecurity of wage work in a context of high unemployment.
In Brazil, during my interviews with landless people living in encampments or with long-time members of the MST who had been successful in gaining access to land many years ago, the desire to be free of the dependence on someone else’s will
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	383
in the effort to sustain their families came up again and again. Similarly, in Chiapas, in my conversations with Zapatistas, the issue of controlling the pace of work in the field also came to light. Within this context, gaining and protecting access to land means gaining control over their labour and the autonomy of taking decisions on issues of agricultural production. However, as has been argued below, the experi- ences of members of the MST and members of the EZLN are very different, and so are their more concrete objectives. The struggle of landless people in Brazil, for instance, aims at regaining the right to citizenship, while the struggle of the Zapatistas is also an anti-colonial struggle.
In Brazil, one of the most determining experiences of Sem Terra is the prolonged experience of unemployment and underemployment, lived as a situation of com- plete loss of control over their life and of marginalization from society. Because of the negative perception that the rural population in general had of landless people, joblessness has also often been lived as a humiliating experience. In a collective discussion with acampadas and acampados19 in the region of Andradina (SP), one acampada summed up the general feeling:
The struggle for land is a struggle for a dignified life. We are not ‘vagabonds’. We are landless.We want to work the land.When you are working the land, you are producing, you are contributing to society, you are moving forward.
In a very fundamental way, access to land is thus a way of regaining the human dignity that is associated with a productive life, but also with the right to participate in a more just Brazilian society. Because many current acampados and acampadas have lived in cities for relatively long periods of time, Brazilian landless people build this moral discourse on the right to land and the valorization – and idealization – of the peasant condition in contrast to urban life. In many discussions with acampados and acampadas, access to land and life in the countryside had the advantage of securing self-subsistence and a peaceful community life, whereas unemployment, poverty, violence, drug abuse and impersonal relationships were seen to characterize city life. Landless people also emphasized the advantage of having access to the means of subsistence in the countryside as compared with the absence of this resource in the city. Many MST members also associated life in the city with the inescapable power of money:
Luis: Winning land resolves the questions of employment and housing and also of hunger. In the city, without money you can’t do anything. In the countryside, there is always a way to have something to eat.
Dona Lidia: Here I have everything for me to eat. In the city if you don’t have money, you don’t have anything. Here my daughter was able to study. She is a teacher. Do you think that I would have achieved this in the city?
Hence, landless people see access to land also as a way to counter the need for – and power of – money that completely dominates life in the city because this power
19	Acampada and acampado could be translated as ‘squatter’ and are the terms used to refer to the landless people living in encampments or land occupations.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
384	Leandro Vergara-Camus
finds at least some limits when one owns a plot of land.The right to work or to have a decent source of income, both derived from the access to land by landless people, is a right that landless people oppose to the blind functioning of the market.This type of discourse, shared by settlers from the early 1980s and current squatters, is one of the ideological foundations of the struggle for land of the MST. However, this claim on land does not form part of a broader system of customs and traditions that one could associate with a moral economy of the Brazilian peasantry.20 This strong association between land and work is more a consequence of the political influence of progressive clergymen who adopted the ‘preferential option for the poor’ within the Catholic Church and who were key leaders in the rebirth of the landless movement in the early 1980s (Almeida and Ruiz Sánchez 2000, 14; Cadji 2000, 32; Navarro 2000, 37). Indeed, in the 1970s and 1980s, Catholic priests, reframing Marx’s distinction between use-value and exchange-value, promoted the distinction between ‘land for production’ or ‘land to work’ (terra para producir or terra para trabalhar) and ‘land for business’ (terra para negôcio). Regardless of who introduced the formal idea of distinguishing ‘land for production’ and ‘land for business’, the idea struck a chord with many landless rural workers because of their own lived experiences.
However, the MST land struggle is not only for the right to work the land, nor is it only against unemployment and marginalization from Brazilian society. It is also for the right to work autonomously, for the right to control one’s own work, and the product of one’s labour. In many discussions that I had with Sem Terra, the sense of being at the mercy of someone else’s will, of being treated as an object and not as a person, was emphasized again and again. Adão, for instance, expressed this view in the following way: ‘Winning land was a satisfaction because I had always worked for someone else. My work would become the profit of someone else.’ If gaining land was presented as a way out of the humiliation of unemployment and marginalization, it was also seen by landless people as a way to take their destiny into their own hands.
Zapatista subsistence peasants share many of the same experiences of alienation and marginalization that Brazilian rural workers have endured. Pedro, a Zapatista from the Northern fringe of the Lacandona jungle, for instance, had decided to return to the village after having worked for a few months in a modern car parts factory in Monterrey, in Northern Mexico.When I asked him why he came back, he told me that he did not like life in Monterrey, that he preferred life in his village, indeed, that ‘life in Monterrey was not life’. He went on to say how, in his community, he did not have to put up with someone telling him what to do. Life, he argued, was also much slower, much more enjoyable in his community, regardless of the hard times they had to endure.
This type of testimony to the value of peasant village life is probably as old as peasant resistance to industrialization and modernization itself. But in the case of indigenous peasants, in addition to the idea of control over one’s life, it also suggests the attachment of indigenous people to a way of life and, most importantly, a way
20	Some collective practices of peasant solidarity and reciprocity, such as labour corvée called mutirão, have existed within the Brazilian peasantry but have always had minimal effects, and are not as generalized and enshrined in cultural practices as they are in other parts of Latin America.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	385
of looking at life (i.e. a worldview) that clashes with the most alienating experiences of modern urban existence.21 This valorization of village life speaks also to the importance of being peasants and part of a community for the constitution of the indigenous identity in regions like Chiapas. For indigenous peoples in Mexico, ever since the conquest, the community has always been a space of refuge from the city, where indigenous people suffer all kinds of discrimination. In addition, many of the features of colonial domination can still be seen today in the different regions of Chiapas. Indeed, since colonial times, Indian peasants and communities have been maintained in a subordinated position by a landed oligarchy of European descent that controls the local state and the local market. Historically, the ethnic and class domination of Ladinos over Indians was exercised through control of the Indian labour force. The development of market relations since the 1960s reinforced this subordination, because Ladino merchants were also in a position to buy cheaply the agricultural products produced by Indian peasants. In turn, they could sell dearly the consumption products that Indians gradually started to need as a result of the growing commercialization of their agricultural activities (Stavenhagen 1975). Throughout the 1980s, with the obvious intention of avoiding the Ladino mer- chants, many peasant organizations from Chiapas used state credit to attempt to organize their own channels of commercialization or ventured into new activities, such as the sale of art crafts (Nash 2001, 95–102). There were some successful experiences, but the dominance of the market and the state by Ladinos has not been eradicated and many indigenous peasants still see Ladinos or Caxlanes as class oppressors.
Xochitl Leyva Solano (2005) has recently looked at the development of an Indianist movement22 within independent indigenous organizations in Chiapas since the 1970s, which led to the construction of an alliance with the EZLN, and the creation of a neo-Zapatista network. Leyva Solano argues that the current indig- enous discourse emerging from Chiapas is a manifestation of similar ‘claims to recognition’ by indigenous peoples in Latin America and that they can be looked at as claims to ‘ethnic citizenship’, where particular ethno-cultural groups demand the adaptation of universal rights to their collective particularism (2005, 574). In effect, to a great extent the San Andrés negotiations between the Mexican government and the EZLN and the development of rebel autonomous structures of power in Zapatista territory since 1994 are mainly about this issue. However, if we seek to understand the Zapatista struggle for autonomy and self-determination within the context of persisting unequal power relations between Indians and Ladinos, the
21	Of course, this is not to say that indigenous peoples in Chiapas and elsewhere in Latin America reject modernity and are not attracted by modern commodities and technology.Their relationship toward modernity, like that of any other subaltern social group, is certainly a very complex and contradictory one, influenced by capitalist hegemonic discourses. The point here is simply to highlight that alienating experiences in the city often lead to a revalorization of community life in the countryside.
22	Indianismo refers to an ‘ideological and political movement, the objective of which is centred on the liberation of the Indian, not the liberation of an individual Indian but the Indian as a member of indigenous civilization, who lives in the collective memory of indigenous groups, and rather than having been destroyed, waits patiently for liberation’ (Velasco 2003, 122 cited by Leyva Solano 2005, 568).
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
386	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Zapatista struggle can be seen as a de-colonization struggle (Burguete Cal y Mayor 1999, 284), as a sort of Indian nationalism articulating the interests of poor indig- enous peasants.This resonance within indigenous communities of the need to right the wrongs of the conquest is why occupations of private land are often presented by Zapatistas as ‘land restorations’ even where there is no concrete history of community dispossession in the particular area where the restoration is taking place. However, as the land restorations of private fincas by Indian communities of the municipality of Las Margaritas in the outskirts of the Lacandona jungle can attest, there are also recuperations that were justified more as an act of justice because their ancestors had been exploited as mozos (semi-servile labourers) in those particular fincas than simply because they were indigenous (Van der Haar 2001, 205).
The indigenous composition of the EZLN gives the Zapatista land struggle a peculiar character.The Zapatista struggle is not only a struggle for land as a source of subsistence and autonomy. It is also a struggle for land understood as a territory, as a space for physical, cultural and spiritual reproduction. In the case of the Zapatistas then, the struggle for land is a struggle to regain control over their labour and the product of their labour, but it is also a collective struggle to take control of their destiny as a people within a reconstituted Mexican nation.
CONCLUSION
As has been shown, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN share many of the features that scholars of peasant rebellions have identified. Notably, as has been the case with many previous peasant rebellions, the MST and the EZLN frame their struggles around a moral discourse that attacks the unjust functioning of the economy confronting the various sectors of the peasantry. However, in both cases, this moral discourse does not arise as a response to the restructuring of traditional relations of subordination between peasants and landlords, but rather as a result of the neoliberal restructuring of the countryside, a phenomenon that endangers the survival of both poor peasants and rural wage labourers.
Hence, the members of the MST and EZLN come from the most impoverished sectors of the Brazilian and Chiapan peasantry that have been hit both by the drastic drop in the price of agricultural products during the 1980s and 1990s and by the reduction and growing instability of temporary wage work experiences in the countryside. In addition, most members of the MST and the EZLN have several years’ experience of wage work in the city, mainly in the informal sector, which is badly paid and highly unstable.
As a consequence, the experiences of alienation and marginalization from society are probably much more important today than they were forty or fifty years ago when Moore, Wolf, Paige, Migdal and Scott analyzed peasant rebellions. For landless rural workers, poor peasants and subsistence peasants, gaining or protecting access to land is a way to regain some degree of autonomy from the cold functioning of the market. Access to land not only allows families to produce food for self-consumption, it also represents a way to regain control over their own life and hence to be in a position to collectively practice an active
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	387
form of citizenship. In the case of the Zapatistas, the exercise of this new citi- zenship requires the recognition of their cultural distinctiveness and the reversal of their colonial subordination. Thus, contrary to what many scholars argued about previous peasant rebellions, the land struggles of the MST and the EZLN are not defensive struggles, even though in the case of the Zapatistas demands include re-claiming some of the rights enshrined in the Mexican Constitution after the Revolution of 1910–1917. Both the MST and the EZLN build rural commu- nities, organized around popular and participatory political structures, which have reached significant levels of autonomy from the state. For all these reasons, the land struggle of the MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Chiapas should be seen as new forms of peasant rebellions.
Theoretically, these features render inappropriate the use of analytical models that study peasant economies through the lens of quasi-feudal relationships. Marx’s concept of alienated labour appears much more fruitful to analyze the struggles for autonomy by landless and subsistence peasant families currently taking place in Brazil and Chiapas. However, it is still useful to look at the agricultural production of MST settlers and Zapatista subsistence peasants in terms of capitalist and non- capitalist dynamics. For these two movements, the existence of spaces of resistance based on subsistence agriculture, which are not completely dominated by the capitalist logic, has permitted the development of responses to the neoliberal crisis of peasant agriculture.These spaces of subsistence have also provided a material basis from which to build something more than ‘economic’ responses. They have allowed the EZLN and the MST movements to envision and implement development alternatives based on alternative models of societies and polities that are rooted in autonomous rural community (Earle and Simonelli 2005; Fernandes 2005; Robles 2000;Vergara-Camus 2007).The right to land, as a means for subsistence and social reproduction, but also as a means to regain human dignity and attain higher levels of autonomy, is at the centre of these development alternatives. Until now, the link between subsistence and development alternatives has not been sufficiently studied. In the face of the continuing crisis of peasant agriculture across the Third World, growing unemployment and the rise of peasant movements, it is bound to become a central political issue.
REFERENCES
Almeida, Lúcio Flávio de and Félix Ruiz Sánchez, 2000. ‘The Landless Workers’ Movement and Social Struggle Against Neoliberalism’. Latin American Perspectives, 27 (114): 11–32.
Barkin, David, 2002.‘The Reconstruction of a Modern Mexican Peasantry’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 30 (1): 73–90.
Barros Nock, Magdalena, 2000. ‘The Mexican Peasantry and the Ejido in the Neo-liberal Period’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 159–75. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Belik, Walter and Luiz Fernando Paulillo, 2001. ‘O financiamento da produção agrícola brasileira na década de 90: ajustamento e seletividade’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 95–120. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/UFRGS.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
388	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Bernstein, Henry, 2004. ‘ “Changing Before our Very Own Eyes”: Agrarian Questions and the Politics of Land in Capitalism Today’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 4 (1–2): 190–225.
Bobrow-Strain, Aaron, 2007. Intimate Enemies. Landowners, Power, and Violence in Chiapas. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Bryceson, Deborah F., 2000a. ‘Peasant Theories and Smallholder Policies: Past and Present’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 1–36. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Bryceson, Deborah F., 2000b. ‘Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour Redundancy in the Neo-liberal Era and Beyond’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 299–326. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Buainaim, Antônio Márcio, Ademar R. Romeiro and Carlos Guanziroli, 2003. ‘Agricultura Familiar e o Novo Mundo Rural’. Sociologias, 5 (10): 312–47.
Burbach, Roger, 1994. ‘Roots of the Postmodern Rebellion in Chiapas’. New Left Review, 205: 113–24.
Burguete Cal y Mayor, Aracely, 1999. ‘Empoderamiento indígena, tendencias autonómicas en la región Altos de Chiapas’. In México: experiencias de autonomía indígena, ed. Arecely Burguete Cal y Mayor, 282–300. Copenhague: Grupo Internacional de Trabajo sobre Asuntos Indígenas.
Burguete Cal y Mayor, Aracely, 2003. ‘The de facto Autonomous Process: New Jurisdictions and Parallel Governments in Rebellion’. In Mayan Lives, Mayan Utopias: The Indigenous Peoples of Chiapas and the Zapatista Rebellion, eds Jan Rus, Hernández Castillo, Rosalva Aída and Shannon Mattiace, 191–218. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Cadji, Anne-Laure, 2000. ‘Brazil’s Landless Find their Voice’. NACLA Report on the Americas, 33 (5): 30–5.
Calva, José Luis, 1999. ‘Funciones de la agricultura en el futuro de la economía mexicana’. In La sociedad mexicana frente al tercer milenio, eds Humberto Muñoz García and Roberto Rodríguez, 505–41. Mexico: UNAM-Miguel Porrúa.
Carvalho Filho, José Juliano de, 2001. ‘Política agrária do governo FHC’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 193–223. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/ UFRGS.
Collier, George A. with Elizabeth Lowery Quaratiello, 1994. Basta! Land and the Zapatista Rebellion in Chiapas. Oakland: Institute for Food and Development Policy.
Delgado, Nelson Giordano, 2001. ‘Política econômica, ajuste externo e agricultura’. In Políticas públicas e agricultura no Brasil, ed. Sergio Leite, 15–52. Porto Alegre: Editorial da Universidade/UFRGS.
Dias, Guilherme Leite da Silva and Cicely Moitinho Amaral, 2002. ‘Structural Change in Brazilian Agriculture, 1980–98’. In Brazil in the 1990s. An Economy in Transition, ed. Renato Baumann, 204–32. New York: Palgrave.
Earle, Duncan and Jean Simonelli, 2005. Uprising of Hope. Sharing the Zapatista Journey to Alternative Development. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.
Eckstein, Susan, 2001. ‘Power and Popular Protest in Latin America’. In Power and Popular Protest. Latin American Social Movements, ed. Susan Eckstein, 1–60. Berkeley, CA: University Press.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano, 2005. ‘The Occupation as a Form of Access to Land in Brazil: A Theoretical and Methodological Contribution’. In Reclaiming the Land. The
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	389
Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Sam Moyo and Paris
Yeros, 311–40. London: Zed Books. García de León, Antonio, 2005. ‘From Revolution to Transition: The Chiapas Rebellion
and the Path to Democracy in Mexico’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3–4): 508–
27. Gobierno de Chiapas-Secretaría de Desarrollo Social, 2003. Desarrollo social en cifras. Tuxtla
Gutiérrez: Gobierno de Chiapas. Goldring, Luin, 1996. ‘The Changing Configuration of Property Rights Under Ejido
Reform’. In Reforming Mexico’s Agrarian Reform, ed. Laura Randall, 271–87. Armonk:
M.E. Sharpe. Goodwin, Jeff and Theda Skocpol, 1994. ‘Explaining Revolutions in the Contemporary
Third World’. In Social Revolutions in the Modern World, ed. Theda Skocpol, 259–78.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gossen, Gary, 1996.‘Maya Zapatistas Move to the Ancient Future’. American Anthropologist, 98
(3): 528–38. Harvey,Neil,1995.‘Rebellion in Chiapas:Rural Reforms and Popular Struggle’.ThirdWorld
Quarterly, 16 (1): 39–73. Harvey, Neil, 1998. The Chiapas Rebelión. The Struggle for Land and Democracy. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press. Houtzager, Peter P., 1998. ‘State and Unions in the Transformation of the Brazilian
Countryside, 1964–1979’. Latin American Research Review, 33 (2): 103–42. Ibarra Mendívil, Jorge Luis, 1996. ‘Recent Changes in the Mexican Constitution and their Impact on the Agrarian Reform’. In Reforming Mexico’s Agrarian Reform, ed. Laura
Randall, 49–60. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe. INEGI, 2000. XII Censo General de Población y vivienda. México: INEGI. Kay, Cristóbal, 1995. ‘Rural Latin America: Exclusionary and Uneven Agricultural
Development’. In Capital, Power and Inequality in Latin America, eds Sandor Halebsky
and Richard Harris, 21–51. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Kay, Cristóbal, 2000. ‘Latin America’s Agrarian Transformation: Peasantization and Proletari-
anization’. In Disappearing Peasantries? Rural Labour in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Deborah F. Bryceson, Cristóbal Kay and Jos Mooij, 123–38. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Kay, Cristóbal, 2006. ‘Rural Poverty and Development Strategies in Latin America’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 6 (4): 455–508.
Leyva Solano, Xochitl, 2005. ‘Indigenismo, Indianismo and “Ethnic Citizenship” in Chiapas’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3 and 4): 555–83.
Leyva Solano, Xochitl and Gabriel Ascencio Franco, 1996. Lacandona al filo del agua. México DF: CIESAS-UNAM-Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Márquez Rosano, Conrado and Carmen Legorreta, 1999. Colonización, apropiación del territorio y desarrollo sustentable en la Selva Lacandona, Chiapas, México. Paper for the Workshop ‘Land in Latin America. New Context, New Claims, New Concepts’. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Martins, José de Sousa, 2003.‘Representing the Peasantry? Struggle for/about Land in Brazil’. In Latin American Peasants, eds Tom Brass and Henry Veltmeyer, 300–35. London: Frank Cass.
Marx, Karl, 1990. ‘Part Eight: So-Called Primitive Accumulation’. In Capital. A Critique of Political Economy. Vol. I, 873–930. London: Penguin Press.
Marx, Karl, 1992. ‘Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts (1844)’. In Early Writings, 279–400. London: Penguin Press.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
390	Leandro Vergara-Camus
Meszaros, George, 2000. ‘Taking the Land into their Hands: The Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian State’. Journal of Law and Society, 27 (4): 517–41.
Migdal, Joel, 1974. Peasants, Politics, and Revolution. Pressures toward Political and Social Change in the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Moguel, Julio, 1992. ‘Reforma constitucional y luchas agrarias en el marco de la transición salinista’. In Autonomía y Nuevos Sujetos Sociales en el Desarrollo Rural, eds Julio Moguel, Carlota Botey and Luis Hernández, 261–75. México: Siglo XXI.
Moore Jr, Barrington, 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press.
Moyo, Sam and Paris Yeros, 2005. ‘The Resurgence of Rural Movements under Neoliber- alism’. In Reclaiming the Land. The Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds Sam Moyo and Paris Yeros, 8–64. London: Zed Books.
Nash, June C., 2001. Mayan Visions. The Quest for Autonomy in the Age of Globalization. New York: Routledge.
Navarro, Zander, 2000. ‘Breaking New Ground Brazil’s MST’. Nacla Report on the Americas, 33 (5): 36–9.
Otero, Gerardo, 1999. Farewell to the Peasantry. Political Formation in Rural Mexico. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Otero, Gerardo and Heidi A. Jugenitz, 2003. ‘Challenging National Borders from Within: Political Class Formation of Indigenous Peasants in Latin America’. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 40 (5): 503–24.
Paige, Jeffery M., 1975. Agrarian Revolution. Social Movements and Export Agriculture in the Underdeveloped World. New York: The Free Press.
Paige, Jeffery M., 1997. Coffee and Power. Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in Central America. Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Palmeira, Moacir and Sérgio Leite, 1998. ‘Debates econômicos, procesos sociais e lutas políticas’. In Política e reforma agrária, eds Raimundo Santos and Luiz Flávio Carvalho Costa, 92–165. Rio de Janeiro: MAUAD Consultoria e Planejamento Editorial.
Papma, Frans, 1992. Contesting the Household Estate. Southern Brazilian Peasants and Modern Agriculture. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Perreault, Thomas, 2003. ‘Community Organization, Agrarian Change, and Politics of Scale in Ecuadorian Amazon’. Latin American Perspectives, 30 (1): 96–121.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer, 2001. ‘Are Latin American Peasant Movements Still a Force for Change? Some New Paradigm Revisited?’ Journal of Peasant Studies, 28 (2): 83–118.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer, 2003. Cardoso’s Brazil: a Land for Sale. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publisher.
Robles, Wilder, 2000.‘Beyond the Politics of Protest:The Landless Rural Workers Movement of Brazil’. Canadian Journal of Development Studies, XXI (3): 657–91.
Robles, Wilder, 2001. ‘The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) in Brazil’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 28 (2): 146–52.
Rubio, Blanca, 2004. ‘La fase agroalimentaria global y su repercussion en el campo mexi- cano’. Comercio Exterior, 54 (11): 948–56.
Scott, James, 1976. The Moral Economy of Peasants. Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Skocpol, Theda, 1979, States and Social Revolutions. A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skocpol, Theda, 1982. ‘What Makes Peasants Revolutionary?’ Comparative Politics, 14 (3): 351–75.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.
The MST and the EZLN Struggle for Land	391
Sparovek, Gerd, 2003. A qualidade dos assentamentos da reforma agrária brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas e Letras Editora e Gráfica.
Stavenhagen, Rodolfo, 1975. Social Classes in Agrarian Societies. New York: Anchor Books. Van der Haar, Gemma, 2001. Gaining Ground. Land Reform and the Constitution of the Community in the Tojolabal Highlands of Chiapas, México. Amsterdam: Rozenberg Publisher. Veltmeyer, Henry, 1997. ‘New Social Movements in Latin America: The Dynamics of Class
and Identity’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 25 (1): 139–69. Vergara-Camus, Leandro, 2007. ‘Neoliberal Globalization, Peasant Movements, Alternative
Development and the State in Brazil and Mexico’. Unpublished PhD Dissertation,York
University, Toronto, Canada. Vergara-Camus, Leandro, 2009. ‘The Politics of the MST: Autonomous Rural Communities,
the State and Electoral Politics’. Latin American Perspectives, 26 (3). Villafuerte Solís, Daniel, 2005. ‘Rural Chiapas Ten Years after the Armed Uprising of 1994:
An Economic Overview’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 32 (3 and 4): 461–83. Villafuerte Solís, Daniel, Salvador Meza Díaz, Gabriel Ascencio Franco, María del Carmen García Aguilar, Carolina Rivera Farfán, Miguel Lisbona Guillén and Jesús Morales
Bermúdez, 1999. La tierra en Chiapas. Viejos problemas nuevos. México: Plaza y Valdés. Welch, Cliff, 2006. ‘Movement Histories: A Preliminary Historiography of Brazil’s Landless
Labourers Movement (MST)’. Latin American Research Review, 41 (1): 198–210. Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P., 2001 [1989]. ‘Winners, Losers, and Also-Rans: Toward A Comparative Sociology of Latin American Guerrilla Movements’. In Power and Popular Protest. Latin American Social Movements, ed. Susan Eckstein, 132–81. Berkeley, CA:
California University Press. Wolf, Eric, 1973. Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century. New York: Harper Torchbook. Wolf, Eric, 1975.‘On Peasant Rebellions’. In Peasants and Peasant Societies, ed. Teodor Shanin,
264–74. Wolf, Eric, 1999. Pathways of Power. Building an Anthropology of the Modern World. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. Wood, Ellen Meiksins, 1994. ‘From Opportunity to Imperative: The History of the Market’.
Monthly Review, July–August, 14–40.
© 2009 The Author Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change,Vol. 9 No. 3, July 2009, pp. 365–391.

2006
Political Science
Latin American Politics and Society
Repression, Opportunity, u d Protest: Explaining the Takeoff of
Brazil's Landless Movement
Gabiel Ondetti

ABSTRACT
During the mid-l990s, Brazil experienced a rapid intensification of protest for land reform. Official land reform efforts also accelerated, and the issue became a central topic of public concern and debate. This article seeks to account for the abrupt intensification of collec- tive action and to explain its relationship to the other changes, focusing on the political impact of two massacres of landless pro- testers in 1995and 1996.These incidentsforced authoritiesto accel- erate land reform and to exercise somewhat greater caution in repressing the movement. The shifts in state behavior then helped to accelerate collective action. This argument lends weight to the idea that state repression against a social movement can sometimes serve to engender even greater protest. It also identifies a previ- ously undescribed causal mechanism, political opportunity, linking repression to protest.
During the mid-l990s, Brazil experienced a rapid intensification of grassroots protest for agrarian reform. Land occupations had been growing gradually for several years, led by an organization called the Movement of Landless Rural Workers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Ruraak Sem Terra, MST). In late 1995 and 1996, however, occupations increased dramatically. The total number of occupations in 1996 was close to three times that of 1995. After this abrupt leap they continued to increase at a more gradual pace through 1999. By early 2000, some 60,000 families were camped on occupied properties or at the margins of public roads waiting to be settled on small plots of farmland. The landless movement had become arguably the largest rural movement in Brazilian history and one of the most influential social movements in contemporary Brazil, rural or urban. During this period, moreover, two other major shifts occurred in Brazil related to land reform. The issue itself emerged from relative obscurity to become a central topic of public concern and debate, and official agrarian reform efforts acceler- ated markedly relative to earlier periods in Brazilian history.
The rise of the land issue was particularly surprising, given the events of the previous decade. The issue of rural land distribution, which had contributed to the implantation of a military dictatorship in 1964, reemerged in 1985 with the announcement of a major new reform
61
62	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
plan by the first civilian president following the coup. President Jose Sarney’splan, however, was buried by landlord opposition. Brazil’s landholding structure, one of the most concentrated in the world, remained untouched. By the early 1990s, agrarian reform seemed largely forgotten as a national political issue.
The abrupt intensification of collective action for land reform and its relationship to the two other changes are the focus of this article. The empirical case sheds light on an interesting theoretical puzzle: why state repression intended to squelch protest for change sometimes ends up inflaming it instead. More specifically, this study identifies a particular causal mechanism through which repression can trigger greater protest, and suggests some conditions under which it is likely to operate. The article thus answers the recent call in the literature to devote more effort to understanding the causal mechanisms and processes that shape episodes of “contentious politics” (McAdam et al. 2001; McAdam 2003).
This study argues that two changes that took place in Brazil during the first half of the 1990s provided a moderately more favorable social and political context for movement expansion. These changes were the neoliberal restructuring of the agricultural sector and a move toward less conservative and more urban-based national governments. Collective protest for land would probably have grown much more gradually in the mid-l990s, however, had it not been for a third factor: the powerful political impact of two brutal massacres of landless protestors by official security forces, at Corumbiara in August 1995 and Eldorado d o Carajis in April 1996.These two episodes outraged domestic and international public opinion, mobilized civil society, dnd focused attention and con- cern on the land issue; they thereby obligated Brazilian authorities to accelerate the pace of reform and exercise greater caution in repressing the movement. These changes provoked, in turn, a major intensification of land occupations by people who wished to be included in the reform process and were determined to force authorities to make good on their policy commitments.
This interpretation of the landless movement’s growth during this period lends additional weight to the idea that repression, though intended to discourage protest, can, at times, serve to engender more of it. This idea is fairly well established in the literature on social move- ments and political conflict (Gurr 1970; Lichbach 1987; Goldstone and Tilly 2001). Existing analyses in this vein have emphasized the impact of repression on the perceptions of actual or potential activists about the legitimacy of established authorities and the efficacy of using protest as a means to bring about change. When repressive actions provoke even greater outbursts of collective action, these analyses suggest, it is because such tactics exacerbate discontent, goading activists into intensifying their efforts and drawing previously passive observers into active dissent.
ONDElTI: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	63
This analysis, however, suggests that official repression can also foment protest more indirectly. By currying additional support for the social movement in question among politically influential third parties, acts of repression may end up forcing state authorities to be more responsive to the movement’s demands for change. This shift toward greater accommodation may, in turn, prompt broader or more deter- mined attempts by the movement to pressure the state for concessions. In other words, instances of repression can serve to strengthen a social movement not only by galvanizing actual or potential members, as exist- ing theory suggests, but by improving the broader “politicalopportunity structure” and thereby creating new incentives for activists to intensify their pressure on the state.
THEREPRESSION-PROTNESXTUS
The relationship between state repression and protest activity is a puzzle that has intrigued social scientists and defied easy explanation. At an empirical level, we can find numerous examples of instances in which repression did its job, discouraging committed activists and intimidating other potential “troublemakers.” Unfortunately for constituted authori- ties, however, we can probably also find in the history of just about any country episodes in which repression had precisely the opposite effect, inflaming protest action and diffusing it more broadly. As one scholar put it, “deterrence works. And then again, deterrence doesn’t work” (Lichbach 1987, 266).
This empirical puzzle is matched by a theoretical dilemma. Each of these reactions to repression can be explained by one of the major the- oretical perspectives on contentious collective action. For example, resource mobilization theory, which has tended to stress the calculated, strategic character of social movement activity, can readily account for why repression might reduce protest, since it raises the costs of protest and thus diminishes its desirability in the eyes of activists. Deprivation- oriented theories can explain why repression might cause greater protest, since repressive actions might deepen the sense of grievance against the government or regime among actual or potential dissidents. Neither of these perspectives by itself, however, at least in a pure version, can explain both outcomes (Lichbach 1987; Khawaja 1993). Over the years, a significant amount of scholarly effort has been devoted to developing a model that can bring both outcomes under one theoretical roof.
A number of authors have focused on the overall intensity of repres- sive action applied by the state. Early on, the discussion centered on whether the repression-protest relationship resembled a U-curve or an inverted U. Proponents of the latter view argued that rising levels of repression initially provoke greater anger among dissidents, accelerating
64	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
protest (Gurr 1970).At some point in the process of escalation, however, “anger gives way to fear,” and protest dies down. Other studies reached the opposite conclusion: repression initially slows protest by impeding organization and recruitment, but beyond some threshold it becomes counterproductive, underscoring the regime’s illegitimacy and helping dissident groups to attract new supporters (Lichbach and Gurr 1981).
A more recent approach to solving the puzzle involves focusing on the degree of consistency with which repression is used (Lichbach 1987; Rasler 1996;Francisco and Lichbach 2001). According to this view, poli- cies of straight repression are likely to intimidate protestors into sub- mission, while sweeping concessions will tend to undermine activism by granting dissidents much of what they seek. Responses that blend repression and concessions, however, are likely to inflame protest because they both provoke anger and signal authorities’ vulnerability to pressure without satisfying demands for change.
Some authors focus on more contextual factors. Gupta et al. (1993), for example, stress political regime type. They make the case that authoritarian regimes are more successful in using repression against protest. Democratically elected governments cannot easily muster the intensity of repressive action needed to intimidate activists into submis- sion, so repression only ends up provoking greater anger and resist- ance, Opp and Roehl (1990) focus on more micro-level factors. They argue that two variables affect whether repression will provoke protest: whether repression is perceived as unjustified or illegitimate by those directly affected in their social environment, and whether those affected are integrated into social networks that generally encourage protest activity. Other theoretical approaches have also been developed. The primary interest here, however, is to identify the exact character of the causal connection they posit between repression and increased protest activity. When official repression does aggravate protest, why does it d o so?What are the causal mechanisms involved?
As a rule, scholars who have addressed this issue see state repres- sion as provoking protest through its impact on the perceptions of actual and potential activists about the character of state authority and the legitimacy of using protest to bring about a desired change. Violent repression against protestors may prompt anger and moral outrage among its direct victims, their friends and relatives, and the broader society (Lichbach 1987; Opp and Roehl 1990; Khawaja 1993; Rasler 1996). It can thus lead not only to a desire on the part of activists to strike back, perhaps with more forceful methods, but to a more funda- mental questioning of the legitimacy or desirability of the government or political regime by the broader society. As a result, “the apathetic become politicized, the reformers become radicalized, and the revolu- tionaries redouble their efforts” (Lichbach 1987, 269). Protest intensifies
ONDMTI: BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	65
and spreads outward to previously uninvolved social groups and geo- graphical areas. This basic causal chain is what most researchers mean when they refer to a “backlash”from repression.
Some scholars have also stressed the grassroots social dynamics repression may give rise to, which may provide additional incentives for engaging in collective protest. For example, the diffusion of pro-protest sentiments as a result of repression may generate social incentives for individuals to get involved in activism, as a result of the prestige such involvement may bring in the individual’ssocial circle (Opp and Roehl 1990, 524). Repression directed against a particular social group, as Khawaja (1993) points out in his case study of protest in the Palestinian West Bank, may also end up strengthening that group’sidentity “byoper- ating as a symbolic reminder of a group’s shared circumstance vis-2-vis authorities and their agents of control.” As a result, repression “alsohelps foster an environment conducive to further collective action by over- coming social cleavages and rearranging previously factional groupings into a unitary whole” (Khawaja 1993, 66). Thus, although state repres- sion and violence may impose high direct costs on protestors and their families, it may also set in motion “micromobilizationprocesses” that can have a positive impact on protest (Opp and Roehl 1990;Rasler 1996).
These arguments focus on the relatively direct impact of state repression on the perceptions of actual and potential activists. What this article will argue, however, is that these theoretical treatments, though in themselves rather convincing, do not capture the full range of causal mechanisms through which state repression can provoke greater protest. In particular, they omit any discussion of how repressive actions may affect the broader political environment of a particular social move- ment. It can be argued that instances of excessive or otherwise ill-con- ceived repression can also end up provoking greater protest by putting authorities on the defensive politically and forcing them to become more responsive to a movement’s demands for policy change.
THEDEVELOPMOEFNTHE LANDLESS MOVEMENT, 1970-2002
Brazil’s rural land tenure structure is among the most concentrated in the world.’ Although a major land reform has never been carried out, the issue has surfaced repeatedly as a source of conflict. In the early 1960s, Brazil experienced its first episode of widespread agrarian activism, concentrated principally in the poor northeast. That move- ment, however, was repressed by the military regime that took power in 1964. Early signs that military authorities might implant their own reform quickly gave way to an agricultural policy based on moderniza- tion and frontier expansion. The gradual opening of the regime in the
66	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
second half of the 1970s was accompanied by a mounting wave of protest in both urban and rural areas (Sader 1988; Medeiros 1989; Keck 1992;Doimo 1995;Navarro 1996;Pereira 1997).
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, activists in the smallholder regions of southern Brazil began organizing large land occupations and road- side camps. Catholic activists inspired by liberation theology were cru- cial in organizing the movement, which became known as the “landless” movement.2 In early 1984 the organizational work culminated in the cre- ation of the MST, which aspired to be a national organization but was initially a southern entity (Wagner 1988;Navarro 1996; Fernandes 2000; Hammond 1999; Branford and Rocha 2002; Wright and Wolford 2003).
The return to civilian rule in 1985 brought optimism about the prospects for land reform, but this was ultimately short-lived. Soon after taking office, President Jose Sarney announced an ambitious agrarian reform plan, promising to settle 1.4 million landless families. Unfortu- nately for land reform proponents, the announcement provoked a major landowner countermobilization, led by the newly formed Democratic Rural Union (Uniao Democratica Ruralista, UDR). Sarney, a consewa- tive northeasterner leading a heterogeneous governing coalition, easily backed downU3The landowners virtually paralyzed the program, and their lobbying efforts helped impose a major defeat on proagrarian reform forces in the constitutional convention of 1987-88. The inten- tional vagueness of the new constitution made it difficult for federal authorities to expropriate privately owned lands4By the end of Sarney’s term, the government had settled fewer than 90,000 fa mi lie^.^
Despite the narrowing of the political space, the landless movement grew significantly during the second half of the 1980s. The driving force was mainly the MST, which expanded geographically and strengthened its internal organization. In addition to consolidating itself in the South, the MST gained a foothold in every other major region. By the end of the decade, it had some representation in 18 of Brazil’s 26 states. The MSTs basic characteristics, established during the 1980s, did not change greatly in subsequent years (Ondetti 2002). The organization combines national- level leadership with substantial state autonomy. Its leadership includes many who have gained land through the struggle; others have joined purely out of ideological commitment. Although the MST has never advo- cated armed struggle, its leaders hold a deep conviction that confronta- tional tactics are essential for achieving social reform under capitalism. At least in its internal communications, the MST advocates socialism.
From the beginning, the MST adopted as its central tactic the mas- sive land invasion, or occupation.6 In planning an occupation, MST activists spend weeks or months recruiting families in the countryside and smaller cities. They target a diverse social base, including small- holders and sharecroppers who have lost access to land, rural wage
ONDE’ITI: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	67
laborers, and even the urban unemployed.’ Typically, careful scouting leads to the identification of a large property believed to be unproduc- tive or otherwise eligible for agrarian reform.*Late at night, MST activists and their recruits, using cars, trucks, and buses, descend on the prop- erty. Occupations range in size from 50 to several thousand families. Once on the land, the families set up a large encampment made up of wooden huts covered with black plastic sheeting or palm fronds.
Policing of mass protest, including land occupations, is generally the responsibility of “militarypolice” forces, which are controlled by the government of each state. When forced by police or landowner repres- sion to leave an occupied property, the landless generally move their camp to the margin of a public road, where it is clearly visible to passersby and the news media. The idea is to stay together until land is won and to exert a maximum amount of pressure on authorities. During hard times for land reform, families have sometimes endured ten or more occupations, spread out over three to five years. While camped, the landless create an internal camp organization and engage in a vari- ety of other pressure tactics, such as marches, road blockages, and the occupation of government buildings.
The objective of all these tactics is usually to force the government to implement the constitutional clause mandating the expropriation of large, unproductive properties for agrarian reform. When successful, ucumpudos receive family-sized parcels of land in government-spon- sored settlements. Non-MST groups use similar tactics, but their occu- pations tend to be smaller, their camps less disciplined, and their lead- ers less militant. Some are linked to rural workers’ unions or smaller “landless”organizations, while others are autonomous.
Initially highly dependent on the Catholic Church, the MST became more independent in the second half of the 1980s.From the beginning, the MST leadership has had close ties to the two major organizations of the Brazilian left, the Workers’ Party (Partido dos Trubulhudores, PT) and the militant Unified Workers’ Central labor confederation (Central
Unicu dos Trubulhudores,CUT), both formed in the early 1980s. How- ever, its leadership has often been critical of the official rural union con- federation, CONTAG, which it considers excessively submissive to authorities. In terms of funding, the MST has relied mainly on foreign nongovernmental organizations and contributions from its settlers.
As the late 1980s and early 1990s wore on, the prospects for land reform seemed increasingly bleak. Sarney’s plan had helped make land reform a major issue of public debate, but as it became clear that this plan would not go forward, interest tended to wear off. Public debate focused increasingly on a mounting economic crisis. Sarney attempted a number of stabilization plans, but none was successful. His tentative fiscal adjustment, however, had a significant impact on agriculture. The
68	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
military regime’s generous credit program, initially pruned during the early 1980s, suffered new cuts. Other programs, including price sup- ports and government marketing systems, were also cut back (Coelho 2001; Dias and Amaral 2000).
Both neglect of land reform and efforts to tackle the economic crisis deepened under the next president, Fernando Collor de Mello, elected in late 1989.A conservative populist from the Northeast, Collor did well in the more backward regions and among both the disorganized poor and elite sectors (M0isi.s 1993). Elected to stop inflation and attack cor- ruption, he had little patience for social causes. Despite Collor’svague campaign promise to settle five hundred thousand families,land expro- priations were virtually halted. The federal police, an investigative force usually not involved in land conflicts, was used to harass MST leaders. Since the late 1980s,the MST had responded to the increasingly difficult political context by adopting a more radical posture, reflected in a deter- mination not to abandon occupied land, even in the face of repression. Nevertheless, facing an even more hostile government, it tended to put more emphasis on internal issues, including settlement production. The promotion of collective agricultural production became a particular pri- ority (Medeiros et al. 1994; Brenneisen 2001; Branford and Rocha 2002). Land occupations dropped significantly in the first year under Collor, then began to climb again slowly (CPT 1990, 1991).
Collor implemented harsh stabilization measures and began a pro- gram of liberalizing reforms. Agriculture was an important target as tar- iffs were slashed, price supports weakened, and markets for a number of important products deregulated. Subsidized credit was also cut fur- ther (Coelho 2001). These measures helped initiate a restructuring of the farm sector. They had mixed effects on more capitalized producers, who were hurt by subsidy cuts but who benefited from access to cheap imported inputs, enabling them to increase efficiency in response to competitive pressures. For poorer producers, mainly small family farm- ers, the effects were more uniformly negative, tending to push them out of agriculture (Dias and Amaral 2000).
Collor’s efforts failed to overcome Brazil’s economic troubles, and his political support deteriorated. In 1992 a massive corruption scandal erupted, leading to Collor’s impeachment and eventual resignation, in late December. He was replaced by his little-known vice president, Itamar Franco. A moderate with populist tendencies, Franco formed a more progressive coalition and promised to prioritize social issues. Although settlement results were very modest under Franco, advances were made in terms of land reform legislation.Most important, Congress passed a bill needed to fill the gaps in the constitution and facilitateland expropriations. Franco also named a moderate leftist to preside over the National Institute for Colonization and Reform (INCRA), and he met
ONDETII: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	69
with the MST, the first president to d o so. He announced a plan to settle 80,000 families, but, like many other aspects of his government, the actual results were disappointing, totaling about 20,000 families. Never- theless, landless activists experienced the Franco period as an improve- ment after Collor’s belligerence (Stedile 2000). Land occupations began to show signs of accelerating, especially in 1994 (see figure 2 below).
Desperate to slow Brazil’spersistent high inflation,Franco switched Fernando Henrique Cardoso, his prestigious foreign minister, to the finance ministry. A prominent progressive intellectual, Cardoso had entered politics during the dictatorship and, in 1988,had helped to form a new party, the Brazilian Social Democratic Party (Partido du Social DemocraciaBrusileira,PSDB),which promised an ethical style of poli- tics and moderate social reform. In early 1994, Cardoso announced a new stabilization plan, known as the Real Plan. At this point, conserva- tives were deeply concerned about the overwhelming lead held by PT candidate Luiz InPcio Lula da Silva in polls for the October presidential election. They were therefore more than happy to support the moder- ate Cardoso when, based on the anticipated success of his stabilization plan, he resigned his post and launched his candidacy for president. The candidate formed an explicit alliance with the powerful and con- servative Party of the Liberal Front (Partido da Frente Liberal, PFL) and a smaller conservative party, the Brazilian Labor Party (Partido Trubal- hista Brasileiro, PTB).
Cardoso laid out a broad platform with liberalizingeconomic reform at its center. In terms of land reform, the campaign literature proposed to settle 280,000 families, beginning with 40,000 in the first year and building up to 100,000in the last. While this program, if implemented, would represent a major change relative to past governments, agrarian reform was far from a central element of the campaign, and it received little media attention. When agrarian reform was mentioned, it was usu- ally in reference to the PT‘s bold proposal to settle 800,000landless fam- ilies. The MST, noting Cardoso’sconservative allies and neoliberal proj- ect, did not take his land reform program seriously. Its newspaper, the
Jornal Sem Terra,warned that, if elected, Cardoso would “bury”agrar- ian reform (lornal Sem Terra 1994).The Real Plan worked its expected electoral magic. As inflation declined in the months before the election, Cardoso’s support quickly rose, and Lula’s dwindled. Cardoso’s sweep- ing first-round victory was achieved with the backing of largely the same sectors that Collor had won over in 1989,plus a broader swath of the urban middle class, giving Cardoso an ample base of support.
In office, Cardoso’spriorities were to maintain macroeconomic sta- bility and to push forward market reforms. Despite having suggested during the campaign that reducing social inequality would be a priority, Cardoso introduced no major social programs. Although Cardoso did
70	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
officially launch his program in late March 1995, early signs of the gov- ernment’s intentions were generally unpromising. Cardoso appointed PTB president Jose Eduardo de Andrade Vieira to lead the Ministry of Agriculture,to which the INCRA was subordinated. In January, Andrade Vieira, a wealthy banker and landowner, told reporters that budget con- straints would keep the INCRA from reaching Cardoso’s settlement goals. To make matters worse, in May Andrade Vieira replaced a pro- gressive INCRA president with a large landowner, Brasilio de Ara6jo Neto, reportedly with ties to the UDR. By the middle of 1995,the INCRA had made little progress toward the goal of settling 40,000 families that year (lornal doDUP1995).
In July the MST held its third five-year congress. Despite the lead- ership’s pessimism about the new government’s intentions, the tone was optimistic (Stedile 2000). The MST had weathered the difficult Collor years and had become a truly national entity. Its leaders agreed that the key to further progress lay in activating the latent support for land reform in Brazilian society by taking the struggle to the cities, where the bulk of the population resided. Their belief in an underlying reserve of sympathy for the land reform cause was not unfounded. Since the early 1960s, public opinion polls in Brazil have registered substantial majori- ties (generally 60 to 70 percent) in favor of land reform. Even in the early 1970s,when the military dictatorship was at the height of its pop- ularity, 68.8 percent of respondents in a national poll said they were “completely in favor” of agrarian reform (CESOP 1995, 11).
Before the MST’sstrategy could be put into practice, however, the land reform unexpectedly surged as a topic of national debate. The key event in bringing about this change occurred on August 9, 1995,in the
munic@ioof Corumbiara, in the state of Rond6nia. Before dawn, police converged on a landless encampment located on an occupied property. In the ensuing conflict, 11 occupiers, including a 7-year-old girl, and 2 policemen were killed. Three of the landless were apparently executed and several were tortured and humiliated. The occupation had been organized by militants who had earlier split from the MST.
As details of the incident were gradually revealed, Corumbiara came to occupy headlines all over Brazil. Survivors interviewed spoke of being awakened by a barrage of gunfire before daylight, of an occupier being forced by police to eat the spilt brain tissue of a dead compan- ion, of a militant being taken away by police, never to be seen again. In response to these accounts, editorials and commentaries underscored the government’s responsibility to halt the appalling violence associated with land struggles. Many also stressed the need to begin in earnest the long-delayed refo,rm of Brazil’s agrarian structure (Beraba 1995). Two weeks after the killings, the influential National Conference of Catholic Bishops (CNBB) issued a statement condemning the violence at
ONDETTI: HKAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	71 Figure 1. Coverage of the Land Issue in Folhu de Sao Putdo, 1994-1999
1200	---__
___--
__-. __-
01	..~--,---.,--.-,vw	.-- ,	.7--- 0102a3a4a102 030401020304a102030401a2030401020304
1994	1995	1996
Source: Folha99 CD-Rotn Archive
1997	1988	1999
Corumbiara and calling for agrarian reform. The PT Ixgan organizing ;i campaign in Brasilia to press for land reform, culminating in the deliv- ery of a proreforin document t o the president in mid-September. Cov- erage of the massacre and the reactions to it by society and the state was responsible for the first significant surge in media attention t o the land question under Cardoso, as can be seen in figure 1,which depicts the total volume of coverage of this issue in the Folha de Suo Puulo, Brazil's largest daily newspaper."
The weeks following Corumhiara brought an increase in land occu- pation activity, particularly in the crucial state of S k i Paulo, where the MST intensified its offensive in the Pontal do Paranapanema region."' These events put pressure on Cardoso t o take firm measures.The Octo- ber edition of the fornal Sem Terru reflected the MST's surprise at the abrupt rise of the land question in recent months.
Newspapers that until then had been fierce adversaries o f c)ur strug- gle began t o publish editorials criticizing the timidity and slowness of the government in addressing this question. Spacc niultipliecl in newspapers and magazines to inform society about the ;it>surdityof the concentration of the lkazilian landholding structure. If someone were t o arrive in Brazil cluring these days, tie would certainly get the impression that the necessity of agrarian reform had just been discovered at this moment. (.JorrialSpm Tewu 1995a)
Quarter
>
72	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
Subsequent editorials argued that with the decisive shift in public opin- ion, landowners were now isolated and Cardoso was being forced to address the demands of pro-land reform forces.
At the end of September, Cardoso replaced Araujo Net0 with his own personal adviser, Francisco Graziano. The MST and the media interpreted this as a sign that the president was taking personal control of land reform (lornal Sem Terra 1995b). Graziano pledged to acceler- ate the pace of settlement efforts and quickly and energetically set about doing so. In late November, however, a scandal (unrelated to land reform) erupted, resulting in Graziano’s resignation and replacement by a little-known career INCRA functionary. In the months that followed, the pace of settlement seemed to bog down.
The government was shaken out of its lethargy only four months later. On April 17, 1996,another massacre of landless protestors occurred, this one even more violent and shocking that Corumbiara. It took place in the munic@io Eldorado do CarajPs in southeastern Para, a region known for deadly land conflicts. Military police attacked a group of some 1,200 MST demonstrators blocking a highway, killing 19 and injuring more than 60. As with Corumbiara, forensic evidence suggested that sev- eral landless had been executed. Unlike Corumbiara, this time there was film footage, shot by a local television news crew. Eldorado was the largest single incident of land-related violence in Brazil in several decades.
The media furor generated by Eldorado was almost instantaneous, and far exceeded the reaction to Corumbiara. Images of the massacre and its product, a truckload of mangled corpses, haunted the press for weeks. The story dominated domestic coverage and was reported by major foreign news outlets, including CNN. As figure 1 suggests, Eldo- rado set off the largest spike in coverage of the land question in the Folba de Srio Paul0 through 1999. Articles, editorials, columns, and op- ed pieces on the incident came out in droves. The main themes of the commentary were indignation about the killings and criticism of the government’s failure to address the land issue, even after Corumbiara. Criticism of the MST was initially muted. Even the Folha editorial page, generally pro-Cardoso and not a particularly enthusiastic defender of land reform, chided the president for neglecting his commitment to social justice and asserted that “all of the countries that have developed or are developing-from	the United States to today’s Asian ‘tigers’- have done some kind of agrarian reform” (Folba de Srio Paul0 1996a).
Only three days after the massacre, Cardoso convened a meeting of the heads of the three branches of government to, as his spokesman put it, “remove the obstacles in the way of agrarian reform and combat impunity” (Folba de SiZo Paul0 1996b). A few days later, the president gave in to an old demand of progressive groups and removed the INCRA from the historically conservative Ministry of Agriculture. He cre-
ONDETI’I: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	73
ated a new ministry, the ExtraordinaryMinistry for Land Policy, to house it, Cardoso met with MST leaders and reaffirmed his commitment to his original settlement objectives. He also pledged to push forward legisla- tion to speed the process of reform and restrain police violence.
The president’s reaction did nothing to slow the growing interest in and concern about the land issue in Brazil and among foreign observers. Media coverage continued intensely through the end of 1996 and beyond. Vqu, Brazil’s largest weekly newsmagazine, published more stories on this issue in 1996 than in the previous five years combined. The content of domestic coverage was somewhat mixed but, on the whole, beneficial for the movement. On the negative side, following the initial reaction to Eldorado, criticism of the MSTs tactics and radical ide- ology grew (Veju 1996). In addition, some publications raised doubts about the efficacy of land reform, suggesting that previous attempts had produced mediocre results, However, much of the coverage was at least implicitly positive. Articles examined the problems of farm workers and smallholders and profiled the movement’s social base (Folha de Siio Puulo 1996~).Progressive columnists argued that land reform could contribute to resolving many of Brazil’s problems, including social inequality and urban violence.” Even pieces that expressed reservations about land reform usually refrained from sweeping rejections of this policy, pointing instead mainly to problems of implementation, such as high costs, political obstacles, official corruption, and the need for a wide array of ongoing support programs to assist settlers.
Just as important, the media also helped convey to the larger public expressions of support for land reform and the MST from civic leaders, human rights activists, union leaders, politicians, and artists, reflecting the impressive mobilization of domestic and international civil society around this issue. In Brazil, support came not only from the traditional left but from a diverse array of other groups and individuals. The Insti- tute of Brazilian Architects, for example, gave the MST its 1996 “person of the year” award (/ornu1Sem Terra 1997).World-famous photographer Sebastiio Salgado published a striking book of photographs on the struggle for land and donated the profits to the MST. Pop singer Chico Buarque launched a CD dedicated to the movement, and renowned architect Oscar Niemeyer designed a monument to commemorate Eldo- rado. Internationally, the MST received support from human rights and development organizations. As Cadji notes, Corumbiara and Eldorado were fundamentally important in the formation of an international advo- cacy network surrounding the struggle for land in Brazil (Cadji 2000). Even Pope John Paul 11,not generally a champion of progressive causes, urged Cardoso to devote more attention to the land issue.
That Brazilian society had awakened to this issue was also evident from other indicators. Polling firms began to devote questions and sur-
74	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY Figure 2. Land Occupations in Brazil, 1990-2002
48: 2
Source:CPT
800 I 500
599
581
I
200
100
0
I 11 I990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Year
1
146
81 81 89
veys to land reform, which had been largely ignored since the 1980s. The results consistently demonstrated that at least 80 percent of adult Brazilians supported land reform (IBOPE 1998). Public support for the MST was less pronounced but also substantial.**In August 1996, the struggle for land received perhaps the ultimate form of cultural recog- nition in Brazil when it became a central theme of one of the most suc- cessful telenovelas of recent years, The King of Cattle. The series por- trayed landless militants in a sympathetic light, which was striking considering that the station that produced the program, TV Globo, was notorious for its conservative outlook.
As these events were unfolding, land occupation activity was increasing rapidly in the countryside. The change began in late 1995 and was initially spearheaded mainly by the MST. It was concentrated prin- cipally in a few states, especially Silo Paulo. A much more striking increase came in 1996 (figure 2). The number of occupations increased by 173 percent, and the bulk of them took place between May and October. The upsurge was not concentrated in any particular state or region but generalized across the country (table 1). In terms of the number of families participating in occupations, only the Southeast showed a slight.decline in 1996.This was due mainly to the MST's mas- sive occupations in the Pontal do Paranapanema the previous year. Another notable change in 1996 was the growth of occupations organ-
398
-~
1
463
ONDE'ITI: BRAZIL'SLANDLESSMOVEMENT	75 Table 1. Land Occupations and Families Participating by Region,
1995-1996
1995	1996	% Change Region	Occupations Families Occupations Fadies Occupations Families
South 15 Southeast 37 Center-West 26 Northeast 57 North 11 Brazil 146
Source: CPT
3,134	52 10,512	68 3,771	68 11,057	157 2,002	53 30,476	398
13,823 8,947 10,321 23,091 6,898 63,080
247	341 84	-1 5 162	174 175	109 382	245 173	107
ized by groups other than the MST. Although MST occupations had gen- erally made up about two-thirds of the total since the late 1980s, that proportion fell to only 44 percent in 1996. l 3
Large landowners and their allies, though now on the defensive, were not passive. One of their complaints was that in the wake of the Eldorado do Carajis incident, some state governments had become reluctant to use their military police forces to expel land occupiers (Xavier 1999).Ina few states, landowners revitalizedthe UDR or formed new organizations to defend properties and push for official repression. Ingeneral, though, landowners preferred to use their institutional polit- ical weight to pressure the government to try to limit occupations and to block or water down legislative initiatives in Congress. Leaders of the powerful congressional agricultural caucus warned the president that his agrarian reform initiatives and his government's failure to crack down on land occupations could cause problems for the rest of his leg- islative program (Folha de S6o Paul0 1996d).
Apart from land reform, important changes were occurring in Brazil- ian agriculture. The government's macroeconomic policies provoked a debt crisis in the farm sector, undermining output, especially in 1996. Following a debt renegotiation, however, commercial agriculture rebounded strongly (Coelho 2001; Malin 2002). Trade liberalization con- tinued, and commercial producers responded by increasing productiv- ity. Output grew rapidly without a significant expansion in cultivated land. Agricultural exports boomed.
Small family farmers and wage laborers-the	rural poor-generally did not do as well. Increased agricultural imports depressed food prices, and productivity gains on large farms reduced the demand for wage labor. Between 1995 and 1997, both family farmers and wage laborers suffered declines in income (Del Grossi and Graziano da Silva 2000,
76
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2 Figure 3. Brazil’s Agricultural Workforce, 1981-1998
. - . . . . . . . , . .. , 4
..
OJI1 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1998 1997 1998
1
Source: Helfand and Castro de Resende 2001
table	l ) , l 4	The	total	agricultural	workforce	shrank	by	8.4	percent between 1992 and 1997 (Laurenti and Del Grossi 2000, table l).15	The decline was national in scope, but the Southeast and South, the most uniformly modern agricultural regions, suffered the largest losses (Lau- renti and Del Grossi 2000, table 3). These were spread fairly evenly between family and wage labor (Carneiro 2000). Most of the decline occurred in 1996,when production stagnated, but employment did not rebound when output growth accelerated in later years (see figure 3). Rural unemployment rose at an average rate of 7.4 percent per year between 1992 and 1997, and rural nonfarm employment also grew rap- idly (Graziano da Silva and Del Grossi 2001).16Urban job growth might have helped to offset the decline of farm employment, but urban unem- ployment, following a brief decline in 1994, began to climb again in 1995.It accelerated in 1997and more sharply in 1998,with the onset of
recession (Neri et al. 2000). Following Eldorado, the Cardoso government sought to give the
impression that it was proceeding rapidly with agrarian reform, using a combination of concrete measures and advertising. Authorities sought to isolate the MST politically, denouncing its tactics as unde- mocratic and politically motivated. The MST, for its part, continued to exert pressure and accused the government of inflating settlement fig- ures and ruining small farmers with its neoliberal policies. In early
Year
ONDE’ITI: BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	77
1997,the MST organized a national march, which reached Brasilia on April 17, the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre. Although it served as a blow to the government’s isolation tactics, the march had little evident effect on policy.
Land occupations continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate, in 1997 and 1998. The proportion of occupations linked to the MST continued to decline, but the MST’s role in politicizing the land question, its abil- ity to coordinate its actions nationally, and its great combativeness meant that for the public, it was almost synonymous with the move- ment. At the end of 1998,federal officialsboasted of having exceeded their goals by settling more than 287,000 families. This figure, they claimed, exceeded the combined totals of all the other post-1964 gov- ernments. They also pointed to resources invested in support programs and a number of legislative victories related to land reform. Critics argued that the government was padding its settlement totals through a number of tactics (Pereira 2003, 51-52).
Cardoso’s second term, beginning in 1999, brought significant changes in both land reform-related policies and the land reform move- ment. Spending on land reform was cut sharply. Special credit and tech- nical assistance programs for settlers were eliminated. The MST responded by intensifying protest and, in May 2000, Cardoso struck back with unprecedented force. Most important, he issued a decree making all occupied rural properties ineligible for expropriation for at least two years. Authorities also began an investigation of the MST’s use of federal settler credits to fund its operations, a practice that had long been known and tolerated. At the end of 2002, as Cardoso prepared to leave office, the INCRA published a report claiming to have settled some six hundred thousand families in eight years (INCRA 2002). A growing body of evidence suggests, however, that the figure was substantially inflated (Sparovek 2003): .
Land occupations declined after Cardoso’s2000 crackdown, a trend that continued through 2002. Other types of protest for land, including road blockages and occupations of state INCRA offices, seemed to increase, but not enough to offset the decline. In mid-2000 a temporary upsurge in media attention to the land question focused on high-profile MST initiatives and Cardoso’s counterattack. Generally, however, after 1997, coverage was reduced. The tone of coverage, moreover, seemed to grow more aggressively anti-MST. Cardoso’scrackdown, for example, was unabashedly celebrated by Veja, the Folha, and other major news outlets. Available public opinion data tentatively suggest a decline in support for the MST and its tactics beginning in about the late 199Os.l7 In the face of such negative trends, MST activists participated energeti- cally in the 2002 national election campaign and rejoiced at the PT‘s vic- tory, though they worried about the party’s growing moderation.
78	LATIN MERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2 EXPLAININTGHE UPSURGOEF
COLLEC~AVCETION
How did the abiupt mid-1990s increase in grassroots collective action for land reform relate to the acceleration of agrarian reform and the apparent intensificationof public interest in the agrarian question during roughly the same period? Surprisingly,there have been almost no sys- tematic attempts to explain these developments. Apparently the only other scholar who has addressed this question explicitly, and then only in passing, has underscored the impact of an employment crisis in both the rural and urban sectors (Fernandes 1998, 2000). Contemporary media reports sometimes pointed to the effects of Cardoso’s land distri- bution program in encouraging workers to stake claims to underused land ( Veju 1998). Each of these arguments is partially correct, but misses crucial elements of the story. The rapid upsurge of protest for land reform actually responded to three basic factors: the social impact of agricultural restructuring, a progressive change in the character of national governments, and most important, the jarring political impact of the major landless massacres of 1995 and 1996.
The evidence regarding the impact of agricultural restructuring is mixed. On the one hand, the difficulties facing poorer agricultural fam- ilies during the early and mid-l990s, reflected in the data on employ- ment and incomes presented above, could reasonably be expected to generate pressure for land reform. For unemployed wage workers or sharecroppers rendered landless by increasing mechanization, land reform might have been seen as a source of food and income. Small- holders who had lost their land to creditors as a result of falling food prices might have seen land reform as a way to start over, with access to grants, infrastructure, and subsidized credit unavailable to them before. Although some poor rural families undoubtedly responded to poor economic conditions by leaving agricultural regions for urban areas, the urban sector was not in a very good position to absorb addi- tional labor during the mid-l990s, since unemployment was on the rise.l8 Actually, a good many families involved in MST occupations during the 1990s were attempting to move in the opposite direction, from city to countryside.
On the other hand, the regional distribution of the reduction in the agricultural labor force does not match the distribution of the increase in land 0ccupations.~9For example, comparing the data for 1992 and 1997, the South, which saw the second-largest reduction in its agricultural work force (13.4 percent), had the second-smallest increase in occupations (204 percent). In contrast, the Northeast, which experienced the smallest reduction in its labor force (3.7 percent), saw easily the largest increase in land occupations, a stunning 911 percent. Paradoxically,the situation
ONDElTI:BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	79
almost reverses itself if we compare 1995 to 1996, the year occupations surgedmost powerfully.The Southhad the second-smallestdecline in its labor force (5.3 percent) and the second-largest increase in land occu- pations (247 percent), while the Northeast saw the largest decline in its labor force (10.2 percent), but only the third-largest increase in land occupations (174 percent). Substituting the number of occupying fami- lies for the number of occupations does not help, because the regional patterns of change in the two variables are similar.*O
There are explanations for this lack of correspondence that do not involve abandoning the link between agricultural restructuring and protest entirely. In particular, the internal diversity of the major regions may hide the impact of agricultural change on protest for land in cer- tain areas.21One of these is undoubtedly the coastal sugarcane region of the Northeast. It is well established that sugarcane experienced a major restructuring as a result of the neoliberal reforms of the late 1980s and early 1990s, which sharply reduced federal subsidies to this crop (Carvalho 2000; Wolford 2004). The impact was particularly great on northeastern producers, who were highly dependent on government support. One of the consequences of this change was reduced demand for wage labor. It is certainly not coincidental that the bulk of land occu- pations in the Northeast during the second half of the 1990s was con- centrated in the coastal sugarcane regions of the major sugarcane-pro- ducing states, especially Pernambuco.
Even if we accept that agricultural change played some role in the movement's upsurge, however, we must keep in mind that the drop in the number of people employed in agriculture was rather mild relative to the explosive increase in grassroots protest for land during the mid- 1990s. Moreover, when the movement took off,urban unemployment was growing only gradually, and the economy was expanding. When land occupations declined sharply in 2000, in contrast, the overall employment situation was worse. Given the very mixed evidence, it would seem wise to offer the cautious conclusion that agricultural restructuring and the social problems it caused helped create a certain latent potential for a rapid increase in land occupations in the mid- 1990s, but did not play a decisive role in provoking this change.
Another factor in improving the context for movement growth was the shift toward less conservative and somewhat more urban-based national governments after the fall of President Collor in late 1992.. Although subsequent coalitions, especially under Cardoso, have also included the major conservative parties, they have been broader and have had a somewhat more democratic and socially oriented image to live u p to. Their ability to resist pressures for land reform was therefore arguably weaker than that of the civilian governments that immediately preceded them. Since the later Sarney years, Brazil had been governed
80	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
by frankly conservative coalitions. The protest movement that helped drive out Collor represented not only a reaction against corruption but a broader rejection of “traditional”clientelist politics, especially charac- teristic of the less developed and more conservative states. This brought a desire for cleaner and, to some extent, more socially responsive lead- ership. Itamar Franco responded to this demand by forging a more pro- gressive coalition. Later, Cardoso and his PSDB were able to appeal effectively to the climate of the period by combining control over infla- tion with a reputation for honesty and sensitivity to social issues.
Cardoso’scoalition included virtually all of the conservative sectors that had supported Collor and Sarney. In addition, Cardoso, perhaps more than any other postwar president, had a mandate for restricting state spending. The MST and other leftist groups therefore viewed his election as a defeat, and were pessimistic about the prospects for land reform. Tellingly, there was no significant increase in land occupations during the first several months of Cardoso’s presidency. Nevertheless, his government also had the backing of moderately progressive sectors. These valued the president’s progressive background and the PSDB’s tepid social reformism, and were uneasy about the alliance with the clientelistic PFL. Foreign observers believed even more strongly in Car- doso’s progressive, modernizing credentials. Thus, although the gov- ernment initially gave few signs of strong commitment to land reform, it was arguably somewhat more vulnerable to pressure for this policy than either Sarney or Collor.
As this discussion suggests, both the political and social conditions for the struggle for land appear to have been at least moderately more favorable by the mid-1990s than they had been in Brazil for a number of years. In this context, and with the MST working earnestly to expand the movement, it would have been logical to expect, under Cardoso, at least a continuation of the gradual rise in land occupations, and proba- bly some acceleration. That collective action actually grew explosively in late 1995 and especially 1996 was mainly the indirect result of the Corumbiara and Eldorado do Carajas massacres. By outraging domestic and international public opinion and focusing attention and concern o n the agrarian question, these incidents applied pressure on Cardoso to accelerate land reform. The clear signs that the government was being forced to redistribute more land incited the MST and other actors to intensify or initiate land occupations. The decline in repression on the part of state governments intimidated by the political fallout from Eldo- rado facilitated this growth.
Broad public support for land reform, as noted, existed well before the 1990s. However, the massacres served to increase sharply the per- ceived urgency of the land problem and, perhaps, to introduce it to a generation of Brazilians too young to remember earlier episodes of
ONDE’ITI:BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	81
agrarian conflict. A variety of the indicators already described would seem to support this view, including the dramatic increase in media cov- erageoftheissueafterthemassacresandthegreatsuccessof TheKing of Cattle.That the surge in coverage was sustained and appears to have generalized across much (if not all) of the major print news media sug- gests that editors were acting on what they perceived to be a demand for information on the subject from their readers. Publications like the Folha de Siio Paul0 and Veja at times seemed to be trying to temper public enthusiasm for land reform, but their critiques were usually rather carefully qualified, presumably out of deference to widespread public sympathy for the cause.
The massacres had this effect because their extreme violence and drama gave them tremendous news appeal. Their occurrence in the con- text of a struggle for land, furthermore, made it natural for them to be seen as symptomatic of a highly unequal landholding structure. Never- theless, the process was by no means altogether spontaneous. Progressive actors, including newspaper columnists, movement activists, religious leaders, and politicians, did much to underscore the gravity of these acts of violence and to frame them as symbols of the urgent need for land reform. These actors responded out of indignation, but also out of a desire to take advantage of the impact of the massacres to advance the cause of land reform. PT leaders probably also viewed the rise of the land reform issue as an opportunity to recover from the party’s 1994electoral defeat by attacking Cardoso’s claim to represent progressive change.
The broader political context helped to strengthen the reaction to the massacres. Cardoso’sappeal was tied not only to low inflation but to the promise of social reform and a general modernization of society. The massacres called attention not only to the seriousness of the land problem but to the lack of major new social initiatives. They pointed, in other words, to the expectations Cardoso’s election had created but failed to fulfill. At a deeper level, they contradicted an emerging con- ception of Brazil as a modern, urban, and democratic society-a	con- ception that the Cardoso government, with its enlightened, technocratic image, promised to bring to full fruition. The massacres were, as a result, deeply disturbing to sectors of the population, especially edu- cated urbanites, who embraced this optimistic vision.
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to reduce the impact of these events to a product of contextual circumstances. Eldorado, in particular, was highly unusual, both because it was so large and because, unlike so many otber instances of rural violence, it was caught on video, and its grisly product, a truck laden with corpses, became the subject of many powerful photographic images.
Society’sresponse to the massacres exerted pressure on Cardoso to speed up agrarian reform, because it posed the threat of undermining
82	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
his government’s popularity and electoral prospects. In the wake of Eldorado, for example, the president’s approval rating dropped by almost 20 percentage points (Veju 1997b). It is for this reason that the two main changes in control over land reform policy under Cardoso, the naming of Graziano as INCRA president in 1995 and the creation of a new land reform ministry in 1996, occurred. The causal connection between the impact of these events and the acceleration of land redis- tribution is widely accepted by analysts of the land question in Brazil (Teixeira 1999; Cadji 2000). High-level INCRA officials interviewed for this study, including a former president of the INCRA under Cardoso, also argued that the impact of the massacres on public opinion repre- sented a powerful impetus to intensify settlement efforts (Lins 2000).
Journalists often said that Cardoso’s response to Eldorado d o Cara- jiis was also motivated by a desire to limit the damage the incident might cause to Brazil’s international image, presumably a key to his outward- oriented economic policy. In support of this view, it was sometimes noted (not without some irony) that the tone of Cardoso’s public state- ments on Eldorado was initially rather dismissive-until	he found out that it was being reported internationally on CNN (De Freitas 1996). Although it is indeed quite plausible that Cardoso was worried about international opinion, domestic politics was probably the key factor influencing his reaction.
Unfortunately, from the authorities’ point of view, the clear evi- dence that the government was being forced to accelerate land distri- bution promoted an increase in land occupations. The sharp initial reac- tion of the media and civil society to each incident suggested that pressure for land reform was mounting rapidly, and the subsequent pledges by federal authorities to push reform more aggressively vali- dated this impression. The promise of greater land redistribution, when combined with the preference given by the INCRA to people already camped, sent a strong message: that those willing to occupy farmland would have a good chance of being rewarded with a plot of land instead of repression. It thus inspired activists to redouble their efforts to recruit landless families and made it easier for them to convince the landless that their efforts would be rewarded.
The MST, as the most organized and militant actor in the move- ment, was the first to react, in late 1995. The effect widened in 1996, particularly after Eldorado, as many other groups entered the move- ment or intensified their participation. These groups sought not only to capitalize on the 8tate’s anticipated largesse but to keep the MST from monopolizing the available land. If landowners’ complaints are to be believed, the reticence of some state governments to repress occupa- tions after Eldorado also contributed to the upsurge, reducing the risk of arrest or injury.
ONDElTI: BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	83
MST documents and interview data support the link between the state’sactual or anticipated response to the massacres and rising protest. That the MST saw the impact of Corumbiara as an opportunity is reflected in the almost euphoric tone of the editorials in its newspaper in late 1995, one of which was quoted earlier. These clearly portrayed the period as one of political opening, which had to be exploited by intensifying pressure. When asked why occupations had grown in the mid-1990s, MST leaders followed the “party line,” stressing the impact of neoliberal reforms on popular welfare. When questioned directly about the effect of the massacres, they argued that these had contributed greatly to the movement’s growth by raising public consciousness about the land problem, but they did not elaborate on the exact causal con- nection (Mauro 2000).
Rural unionists were usually more willing to admit explicitly that the actual or anticipated changes in land reform policy had contributed to the growth of occupations. A rural union leader in southeastern Par& for example, explained that federal initiatives to speed up land reform in the region after Eldorado had directly provoked a sharp revival in land occupations (Da Costa 1999).
Just as the upsurge of land occupations was due partly to the polit- ical impact of the massacres, so their downswing, beginning in 2000, was related to the gradual fading of the effect these incidents pro- voked.22As the massacres receded into the past and media and public attention shifted to other issues, the government felt freer to implement policies opposed by proreform forces and to crack down on MST actions that it had once felt obliged to tolerate for fear of a political backlash. Cardoso’ssecond-term cuts in land reform spending and his offensive against the MST reflected this change. The slowdown in occu- pations responded to the perception that the government was growing increasingly resistant to grassroots pressure for land redistribution. Other factors also contributed to the harder line. The media’s growing emphasis on the MST’s tactical “radicalization”and the broad scope of its radical political goals helped the government to justify a tougher stance.23In addition, the acceleration of land reform and the publicity surrounding it arguably gave Cardoso greater political cover to confront both the MST and land occupations in general.24
THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS
State repression clearly played a major role in the acceleration of protest for land reform in Brazil in the mid-l990s, although it was by no means the only factor involved. The empirical account thus underscores the idea that repressive actions intended to quell protest activity can some- times provoke a backlash, giving rise to more protest rather than less.
84	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
However, the nature of the causal mechanism connecting the repressive actions of legal authorities to the intensification of protest differs from the ones identified by the existing literature on this question. This sug- gests a need to develop further our understanding of how repression can spur protest. In particular, the case of the Brazilian landless move- ment shows how instances of repression against a social movement may escalate protest by increasing support for the movement’s cause among politically influential third parties and forcing the state to adopt a more conciliatory policy.
In elucidating the causal links between repression and protest, this study follows the research program recently defined by McAdam et al. (2001).While this program has many facets, at its core is the idea that existing theories of “contentiouspolitics” have placed too much empha- sis on causal variables and have not devoted enough attention to the character of the mechanisms that link cause and effect. McAdam et al. propose a program of inquiry that focuses on identifying particular causal mechanisms and longer causal processes that recur across differ- ent types of contention and cultural contexts. Taken as a whole, this is an ambitious research agenda, which is beyond the modest theoretical pretensions of this article. However, this study follows McAdam et a1.k basic emphasis on “getting causal connections right” by identifying a particular causal link, which, although not in itself new to scholars of collective action, has not previously been seen as part of the causal process linking repression to greater protest action. In addition, this study offers some hypotheses about the conditions under which this causal link, rather than the others discussed in the literature, is likely to operate. These pertain to both the nature of the movement involved and the character of the state.
How well do the theories outlined in this article explain the causal connection between repression and protest in the case of the takeoff of the Brazilian landless movement?To be sure, the effects of repression predicted by the literature were not altogether absent. The massacres at Corumbiara and Eldorado d o CarajAs undoubtedly generated moral out- rage and anger among land reform activists. There is also some evi- dence that the Eldorado incident helped to strengthen the MST’s group identity, engendering a greater sense that the group was representing an oppressed social category. April 17, the date of the incident, for exam- ple, has been consecrated as a kind of internal holiday for the organi- zation, commemorated with demonstrations, ceremonies, and protest events. The massacres also outraged many people not directly involved in the movement, sullying the image of the Cardoso government and state authorities in RondGnia and Par&
These effects, however, were not the main reason the massacres contributed to intensifying protest for land reform. The nature of the
ONDETTI: BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	85
struggle for land in Brazil itself militates against this conclusion. Partici- pation in the movement is usually a long-term investment by individu- als and families seeking a better economic future. The core tactic, acumpur,often requires abandoning home and employment and living in a crude hut for months or years at a time. It is unlikely that tens of thousands of Brazilian families, many with several children in tow, would have undertaken such a venture to express their anger about the killings in RondBnia and Par& The accounts of activists also discourage such a conclusion. For example, movement leaders in southeastern Par5 said the initial reaction to the Eldorado killings among local landless people was fear and a desire to avoid conflict with the police. Only when it became clear that the federal government would intervene ener- getically to accelerate reform did land occupations begin to multiply.
The key causal link between repression and protest, rather, is more indirect, operating through its impact on what has been called the “structureof political opportunities”facing the movement. This concept, well established in the literature, is based on the idea that protest activ- ity rises and falls in response to the vulnerability or receptivity of gov- erning elites to pressure for change (Tilly 1978;McAdam 1982;Tarrow 1983, 1994; McAdam 1996). When people with a demand to make o n the state expect authorities to react to pressure with concessions, rather than repression or indifference, they become willing to invest heavily in protest, believing that it will pay dividends. When the opposite is true, protest tends to languish, because the expected costs are seen as out- weighing the probable benefits. Authorities’ disposition to respond to protest positively or negatively, in turn, is seen by political opportunity theorists as a function of a variety of political factors. Changes in the structure of political opportunities can be quite narrow, affecting a par- ticular group or movement; or very broad, in exceptional cases giving rise to revolutionarymobilization.
Political opportunity theory provides a more accurate depiction of the causal link between state repression and the expansion of the land- less movement in Brazil in the mid-1990s. At least for a time, the mas- sacres of 1995 and 1996 helped make Brazilians, along with foreign observers of the country, more acutely aware of the land problem in the countryside and the government’s failure to address it adequately. Rising concern about and interest in this issue pushed authorities to accelerate land redistribution, making it easier for landless families to obtain land by engaging in occupations and camps. In addition, at least in some states, the fear of triggering a new Eldorado seems to have made state governments more cautious about using their police forces to repress land occupations, thereby reducing, if only slightly,the risks involved in the struggle for land. With these changes in state behavior, the expected benefits of protesting for land rose and the prospective costs declined,
86	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
generating stronger incentives for potential land reform beneficiaries to pressure the state. Partly as a result, land occupations grew rapidly.
The case of the landless movement’s growth in the mid-1990s thus illustrates how repression can give rise to greater protest through its impact on the political opportunity structure facing a social movement. Under what circumstances is this particular causal mechanism, rather than the ones identified in extant theories, likely to operate? This is a difficult question to answer without identifying and reviewing a large number of episodes in which state repression provoked increased social protest activity, a task that is beyond the scope of this paper. However, based on the analysis of the landless movement here, four general con- ditions can be tentatively identified in which political opportunity is par- ticularly likely to be the link joining state repression to increased protest. The first two have to do with characteristics of the movement involved, the others with characteristics of the state.
The opportunity-driven connection is more likely to operate, first of all, when the movement involved seeks relatively limited reforms, rather than broader system change. One of the reasons the literature on the repression-protest nexus has ignored this causal link is that much of it focuses on cases in which a movement seeks a basic restructuring of the political system, such as revolution, secession, or decolonization. For example, some of the more frequently cited case studies examine the antiapartheid movement in South Africa (Olivier 19911, protest against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank (Khawaja 1993), or the Iranian revolution (Rasler 1996). In such cases, significant concessions to the movement may be extremely costly to authorities and are therefore less likely to occur simply from public disapproval of the overzealous use of repression. The political situation is simply too polarized to permit much flexibility.
The opportunity-driven link is also more likely to be significant when the movement does not itself employ violent tactics. The use of violence may well be seen as legitimate by the movement itself and the group whose interests it purports to represent, but, other things being equal, movements that employ violent forms of struggle are less likely to be viewed sympathetically by outside observers. The adage “live by the sword, die by the sword” will often be seen as a sufficient defense of the use of harsh official repression in such cases. Consequently, repression employed against overtly violent groups will tend not to create the kind of public backlash and political opening seen following the massacres at Corumbiara and Eldorado.
The third condition involves political systems in which responsibil- ity for concessions and repression lie in separate, relatively autonomous spheres of government. These systems would seem to favor the kind of opportunity-driven process outlined in this study. In this setting, it is
ONDETI?: BRAZIL’S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	87
more likely that acts of extreme repression against a movement will occur even though the state as a whole is not vehemently opposed to the movement’s objectives, and may thus be disposed to cede some ground under pressure. Of course, the need to compensate for an episode of politically damaging repression may result from a simple mis- calculation by a centralized authority. However, it would seem to be more likely to arise where responsibility for accommodation and repres- sion is institutionally separate, so that the two may more easily work at cross-purposes. This is the situation in Brazil with regard to conflicts over land because land reform policy is dominated by the federal gov- ernment, while responsibility for maintaining public order lies with the states. However, a separation between accommodative and repressive functions need not be based on federalism. At least hypothetically, it could also be rooted in a horizontal distribution of power, as, for exam- ple, in a parliamentary system with strong ministers.
The fourth condition in which the political opportunity link is more likely to arise is that of more democratic political systems. In authori- tarian regimes, the institutions and mechanisms needed to inform the public of a repressive event and to transmit the public’s disapproval to authorities are, by definition, less well developed. Freedom of the press, of speech, and of assembly are more limited, and the threat of removal from office through routine electoral processes may be absent. Arguably, the decentralization of responsibilities described above is also less likely to be present under authoritarianism.The predominant focus of most studies of the repression-protest nexus on nondemocratic poli- ties is therefore another factor that may help explain why this panicu- lar causal mechanism has not been highlighted in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS
Inthe mid-l990s, agrarian reform made a surprisingly abrupt and force- ful return to the Brazilian political stage, as collective action for land, public concern about the issue, and official land reform policies all underwent a substantial intensification. This study has focused on explaining the first of these changes while also trying to understand the relationship between it and the other two.It has also attempted to use this empirical case to enrich the theoretical debate on the relationship between state repression and protest.
The account of the intensified protest for land reform is broad-based. It has argued that two shifts that occurred in Brazil during the early and mid-l990s, the neoliberal restructuring of agriculture and the move toward less conservative national governments, provided a moderately favorable social and political context for the landless movement’s expan- sion. The explosive growth of collective action for land, however, did not
88	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
arise spontaneously from this context. Instead, it was stimulated by the potent political impact of the two major massacres of landless protesters that occurred during this period. Because they provoked outrage and raised concerns about the land issue both domestically and abroad, the massacres forced authorities to accelerate land redistribution and to exer- cise greater care in the repression of land occupiers. These shifts created a more favorable political context for pressure for land reform and, as a consequence, helped set off a major increase in land occupations.
The empirical analysis adds weight to the idea that state repression can backfire, giving rise to even greater pressure for change. However, this is not simply a case to confirm existing theory. It also illustrates a causal mechanism that has been absent from previous analyses. Repression can provoke greater movement activity not only by galvanizing actual and potential movement members into action but by transforming the broader political context in which the movement functions. Specifically, instances of excessive or ill-conceived repression can end up stimulating greater support for the movement from other sectors of society and, as a conse- quence, forcing state authorities to be more receptive to the movement’s demands. This change, in turn, may create incentives for activists to increase their pressure on the state. This study tentatively points to some conditions in which this causal process may be particularly likely to arise, but confirming them is clearly a question for further research.
I would like to thank the Social Science Research Council, the Fulbright- Hays program of the U.S. Department of Education, and the Institute for the Study of World Politics for supportingmy two-and-a-halfyears of field research in Brazil. I also thank Evelyne Huber, Indira Palacios, Anthony Pereira, Kurt Weyland, and three anonymousreviewers for their insightful comments. I ,would also like to express my deep gratitude to the countless people who aided my research efforts in Brazil.
1. According to the 1995-96 agricultural census, properties of more than one thousand hectares make up 1 percent of the total but cover 45 percent of thetotalagriculturalland(Malin2002,180).Thegovernmentof FernandoHen- rique Cardoso claimed to have brought about a significant reduction in land inequality between 1995 and 2002, but this claim is disputed (Sparovek 2003).
2. The name was derived from an earlier movement organization in the state of Rio Grande do Sul called the Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Farmers, o r MASTER), which arose in the early 1960s and was extinguished by the military regime.
3. The president was selected in early 1985 by a special electoral college. Former president of the progovernment party during the dictatorship, Sarney had been vice president on the ticket headed by Tancredo Neves, a leader of the moderate opposition party. Ironically, Neves died before he could take office,and Sarney became the first postdictatorshippresident.
ONDE’ITI:BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	89
4. Constitutionally, only the federal government can expropriate rural land, and this is mainly limited to large properties not meeting minimum stan- dards of agricultural productivity. The 1988 Constitution failed to define a legal framework to regulate the expropriation process, leaving this task to Congress.
5. The data on settlements are from the federal government’s National Institute for Colonization and Reform, or INCRA. Their accuracy has been called into question, especially in recent years. See Teixeira 2002; Sparovek 2003.
6. The term invasion is used by opponents of the movement and much of the press. Landless movement activists and sympathizers prefer occupation because it has less connotation of illegitimacy or illegality.
7. The latter have become more numerous in recent years, as the MST has focused its recruiting in towns and smaller cities. This shift is rooted in a number of factors, especially the growing urbanizatiop of the population, the MST’s increasing presence in agricultural regions dominated by wage labor (since wageworkers often live in urban areas), and the organizational advantages of conducting recruitment in towns and cities, where workers are more demo- graphically concentrated and landowner vigilance is limited or nonexistent.
8. In addition to large private properties suspected to be unproductive, the movement also targets properties that belong to the state or federal government. In some cases, these are illegitimately occupied by private individuals or firms.
9. These data were compiled using a CD-ROM archive of the newspaper. Itwassearchedusingtheterms agrarianreform,MST, landless,andINCRA.The results indicate the total number of items containing at least one of these terms, including articles, editorials, letters to the editor, and photo captions.
10. The Pontal do Paranapanema is known for having many illegitimate large landholdings, fruit of a land-grabbing process dating back to the nine- teenth century (Fernandes 2000). This characteristic made it particularly vulner- able to land reform.
11. In the Folha de Sa‘o Paulo, for example, columnists Carlos Heitor Cony, Marcel0Beraba,andJaniodeFreitasallwroteinfavoroflandreform. Vejacon- tained fewer unambiguous endorsements of land reform, but for an exception, see the feature interview with renowned intellectual Celso Furtado ( V@a1997a).
12. For example, a study by the polling firm Vox Populi, conducted in May 1996 in eight major state capitals, showed that 59 percent of respondents approved of the MST, compared to only 24 percent who disapproved (lornal Sem Terra 19%).
13. The data on total occupations reported in figure 2 can be compared to the data on MST occupations reported in Petras 1998.
14 In contrast, agricultural employers, and particularly large employers, increased their incomes during this period. However, these changes were not statistically significant.
15. These data come from the federal government’s annual household survey, known as PNAD. Unfortunately, PNAD does not include the North region, which consists mainly of the Amazon basin. In terms of evaluating national trends in agricultural labor, this is not very problematic, since this region contains only a small percentage of the total workforce. The government’s agri- cultural census data cannot safely be used to measure the evolution of the agri- cultural labor force in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The census was not con-
90	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
ducted in 1990, and in 1995-96 it was done during a different time of year, making a comparison with earlier censuses risky (Helfand and Brunstein, n.d.1.
16. Therapidgrowthofruralnonfarmemploymentinsomeregionsinthe 1990s is often seen in relatively benign terms because, on average, these jobs yield higher incomes than agriculture (Graziano da Silva 1999). However, this trend is at least partly symptomatic of declining opportunities for lower-class people to make ends meet in agriculture.
17. A report in Veja (19991, for example, refers to polling data that show a decline in public approval of the MST from close to 80 percent in 1996 to 58 percent in 1998 and 28 percent in August 1999.
18. A comparison of the 1995-96 and 2000 censuses suggests that the rural population shrank by 6.3 percent during this period (Teixeira 2001, 2).
19. Of course, the lack of agricultural labor force data for the North com- promises this analysis somewhat.
20. With regard to 1995-96, the regional breakdown of the percentage change in families occupying can be seen in table 1. With regard to 1992-97, the percentages are: Center-West 542 percent, Northeast 424 percent, Southeast 262 percent, South 137 percent, and North 96 percent (CPT annual reports).
21. A statistical analysis using smaller geographical units (such as the munic@io)might help shed additional light on this question.
22. Occupations have intensified since the PTs Lula took over the presi- dency. Expectations of increased land redistribution, combined with the gov- ernment’s nonenforcement of Cardoso’s antioccupation decree, are behind the change (Mauro 2003).
23. Beginning in 1998, frequent references appeared in the media to the MST’s “radicalization.”Significanttactical shifts did occur, especially involvement in looting and increased use of occupations of federal office buildings. These responded to the leadership’s frustration with what it perceived as the inade- quacies of Cardoso’s land reform program. However, the increasingly negative coverage also resulted from the major media’s dismay that the increased distri- bution of land seemed only to fuel the movement’s growth.
24. This argument is tempered because opinion polls suggested that most people did not believe the government’s claim that it was engaged in a major restructuring of the landholding system. A poll taken by the firm Datafolha in early May 2000 in SPo Paulo, for example, showed that only 12 percent of respondents viewed the government’s land reform program as “goodor excel- lent”; 52 percent felt that it was “bad or terrible” (Folha de Sao Paul0 2000).
REFERENCES
Beraba, Marcelo. 1995.A batalha de Corumbiara. Folha deSa‘oPaulo,August 11: sec. 1, p. 2.
Branford, Sue, and Jan Rocha. 2002. Cutting the Wire: 7be Story of the Landless M o m e n t in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Brenneisen, Eliane Cardoso. 2001. Rela@ies de poder, dominaGa‘o e resistgncia: o MST e 0s assentamentos rurais. Cascavel: Edunioeste.
-. -.
1, p. 4. 1996~S.emterra. Specialsection.June 30. 1996d. Ruralistas ameacam parar reformas. May 5: sec. 1, p. 11.
. 2000. Paulistano ap6ia reforma agriria, mas rejeita invasio. May 13: sec.
ONDE'ITI: BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	91
Cadji,Anne-Laure. 2000. Brazil's Landless Find Their Voice. NACLA Report on the Amt?ricas33, 5: 30-35.
Campanhola, Clayton, and Jose Graziano Da Silva, eds. 2000. 0 nom rural brasileim: uma analise nacional e regional.Jaguariana: Embrapa.
Carneiro, Francis0 Galrio. 2000. Brazil: An Assessment of Rural Labor Markets in the 1990s. Unpublished mss. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Carvalho, Cicero Pericles de Oliveria. 2000. Anulise da reestructuraGa'oprodu- diva da agroindzistrja sucro-alcooleira alagoana. Macei6: Edufal.
Centro de Estudos de Opiniio Pdblica (CESOP). 1995. Reforma agr6ria no Brasil: 1962-1995. Opinia'o pliblica 4, 1: 5-17.
Coelho, Carlos Nayro. 2001. 70 anos de politica agricola no Brasil (1931-2001). Revtsta Politica Agn'cola 10, 3 (July-September): 3-58.
Commissio Pastoral da Terra (CPT). 1990. Conflitos no cam-Brasil.	Annual publication. Goiinia: CPT.
-.	1991. Conflitos no c a m p B r a s i 1 . Goiinia: CPT. [Land occupation data also from these annual reports 1991-2003.1
Da Costa, Francisco de Assis Soledade. 1999. Southeast Regional Coordinator, Rural Workers' Union Federation of the State of Par6 (FETAGRI). Author interview. Marabi, Pad, October 27.
De Freitas,Janio. 1996.A omissio confessada. Folha deSa'o Paulo, April 21: sec. 1, p. 7.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo, and Jose Graziano Da Silva. 2000. Evolu~ioda renda das familias agricolas e rurais: Brasil, 1992-1997. In Campanhola and Graziano da Silva 2000. 79-100.
Dias, Guilherme Leite da Silva, and Cicely Moitinho Amaral. 2000. Mudancas estruturais na agricultura brasileira, 198Cb1998. In Brasil: uma decada em transiGao, ed. Renato Bauman. Rio de Janeiro: Campus. 223-53.
Doimo,AnaMaria.1995.A vezeamzdopopular:movimentossociaisepartic- @a@opolitica no Brasilpds- 70. Rio d e Janeiro: Relume-DumarB.
Fernandes, Bemardo Mancano. 1998. G&ese e desenmlvimento do MST. Sio Paulo: MST.
-.	2000. A fomza@o do MST no Brasil. Petrcipolis: Vozes. Folha de Sdo Paulo. 1996a. 0 outro lado da moeda. August 21: sec. 1, p. 1. . 1996b. TrCs poderes v i o tentar agilizar a reforma agrPria. August 21: sec.
1, p. 4. Francisco, Ronald A., and Mark Irving Lichbach. 2001. Choice or Chance? Micro-
rationality and Macrorandomness in Polish Conflict, 1980-1995. Paper pre- pared for presentation at the American Political Science Association annual meeting, San Francisco, August 30-September 2.
Goldstone, Jack A., and Charles Tilly. 2001, Threat (and Opportunity): Popular Action and State Response in the Dynamics of Contentious Action. In Silence and Voice in the Study of ContentiousPolitics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 179-94.
Graziano da Silva,Jose. 1%.	0 now rural brm'him.2nd ed. Campinas: Unicamp.
92	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
Graziano da Silva,Jose, and Mauro Eduardo Del Grossi. 2001. Rural Non-Farm Employment and Incomes in Brazil: Patterns and Evolution. World Lkvel- opment 29, 3: 443-53.
Gupta, Dipak K., Harinder Singh, and Tom Sprague. 1993. Government Coer- cion of Dissidents: Deterrence o r Provocation? Journal of Conjlict Resolu- tion 37, 2: 301-39.
Gurr, Ted. 1970. WhyMen Rebel. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Hammond, John L. 1999. Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmwork-
ers’ Movement. Bulletin of Latin American Research 18, 4: 469-89. Helfand, Steven, and Luis F. Brunstein. n.d. The Changing Structure of the Brazilian Agricultural Sector and the Limitations of the 1995/96 Agricultural
Census. Paper written as part of NEMESIS, a project on spatial economics
at the Instituto de Pesquisa EconBmica Aplicada (IPEA), Rio de Janeiro. Instituto Brasileiro de OpiniBo Pfiblica e Estatistica (IBOPE). 1998. Pesquisa de opiniPo pdblica sobre a reforma agriria. Summary of national poll con-
ducted March 5-8. Rio d e Janeiro: IBOPE. Instituto de ColonizagBo e Reforma Agraria (INCRA). 2002. Balun60 global de - gestcio: relatciriofinal. Brasilia: INCRA.
J-ornal Sem T m a (SPo Paulo). 1994. Uma eleiGBo histbrica. July: 2. - . 1995a. Vamos tirar a reforma agraria d o papel. October: 2. - . 1995b. A reforma agriria avanga. November: 2.
.1996.MST tem mais credibilidade do que politicos e policiais.July.
, 1997. MST e homenageado d o ano d o Instituto de Arquitetos. January. Jornal do DIM (Brasilia). 1995.Jose Serra diz nPo a reforma agrara de FHC. Sep-
temberactober: 1. Keck, Margaret E. 1992. The Workers’Pan‘yand Democratization in Brazil. New
Haven: Yale University Press. Khawaja, Marwan. 1993. Repression and Popular Collective Action: Evidence
from the West Bank. Sociological Forum 8, 1: 47-71. Laurenti, Antonio Carlos, and Mauro Eduardo Del Grossi. 2000. A evoluggo das
pessoas ocupadas nas atividades agricolas e nPo-agricolas nas areas rurais
do Brasil. In Campanhola and Graziano da Silva 2000. 15-66. Lichbach, Mark Irving. 1987. Deterrence or Escalation: The Puzzle of Aggregate Studies of Repression and Dissent. Journal of Conjlict Resolution 31, 2
(June): 266-97. Lichbach, Mark Irving, and Ted Gurr. 1981. The Conflict Process: A Formal
Model. Journal of Conjlict Resolution 25 (March): 3-29. Lins, Marcos. 2000. Former president, INCRA. Author interview. Brasilia, April 28. Malin, Mauro. 2002. Agricultura e reforma agraria. In A era FHC: um balanGo,
ed. Bolivar Lamounier and Rubens Figueiredo. SBo Paulo: Cultura. 179-214. M-auro, Gilmar. 2000. Member, MST National Directorate. Author interview. SPo
Paulo, May 11.
. 2003. Author interview. Cajamar, SBo Paulo, August 13. McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the DeYelopment of Black Insur-
gency, 1930-1970.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. -.	1996. Conceptual Origins, Current Problems, Future Directions. In Com- parative Perspectives on Social Movements, ed. McAdam, John McCarthy,
and Mayer Zald. New York: Cambridge University Press. 23-40,
ONDE3"I: BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	93
- .2003. Beyond Structural Analysis:Toward a More Dynamic Understanding of Social Movements. In Social Movements and Networks: Relational Approaches to CollectiveAction, ed. Mario Diani and McAdam. New York: Oxford University Press. 281-98.
McAdam, Doug, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly. 2001. Ihe Dynamics of Con- tention. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Medeiros, Leonilde. 1989. Hist6ria dos movimentos sociais no campo. Rio d e Janeiro: Fase.
Medeiros, Leonilde, Maria Valeria Barbosa, Mariana Pantoja Franco, Neide Esterci, and Sergio Leite. 1994. Assentamentos rurais: uma d i i o multidis- cfplinar. Slo Paulo: Editora da UNESP.
Moises, Jose Alvaro. 1993. Elections, Political Parties and Political Culture in Brazil: Changes and Continuities. Journal of Latin American Studies 25, 3: 575-611.
Navarro, Zander, ed. 1996. Politica, protest0 e cidadania no campo. Port0 Alegre: Editora da UniversidadeAJfrgs.
Neri, Marcelo, Jose Mircio Camargo, and Mauricio Cortez Reis. 2000. Mercado de trabalho nos anos 90fatos estilizados e inte?preta@es. Rio de Janeiro: Ipea.
Olivier, Johan L. 1991. State Repression and Collective Action in South Africa, 1970-1984. South African Journal of Sociology 22: 109-17.
Ondetti, Gabriel A. 2002. Opportunities, Ideas, and Actions: The Brazilian Land- less Movement, 1979-2001. Ph.D diss., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Opp, Karl-Dieter, and Wolfgang Roehl. 1990. Repression, Micromobilization and Political Protest. Social Forces 69, 2: 521-47.
-Pereira, Anthony. 1997. Ihe End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast Brazil, 1961-1988.Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. . 2003. Brazil's Agrarian Reform: Democratic Innovation or Oligarchic Exclusion Redux? Latin American Politics and Society 45, 2: 41-65. Petras,James. 1998.The Political and Social Bases of Regional Variation in Land Occupations in Brazil. Journal of Peasant Studies 25 (July): 124-33.
Rasler, Karen. 1996. Concessions, Repression, and Political Protest in the Iranian Revolution. American Sociological Review 61 (February): 132-52.
Sader, Eder. 1988. Quando noms personagens entraram em cena. Slo Paulo: Paz e Terra.
Sparovek, Gerd. 2003. A qualidade dos assentamentos ah reforma agraria brasileira.Slo Paulo: Piginas & Letras.
Stedile, Jolo Pedro. 2000. Member, MST National Directorate. Author interview. Slo Paulo, December 15.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1983. Social Protest and Policy Response During Cycles of - Protest. Western Societies Paper no. 15. Ithaca: Center for International
Studies, Cornell University.
. 1994. Power In Movement: Social Movements, CollectiveAction and Poli-
tics. New York: Cambridge University Press. Teixeira, Gerson. 1999. Primeiro governo FHC: dossi& reforma agriria e agri-
cultura. Partido dos Trabalhadores. Lideranca da bancada na Cdmara Fed- eral. Unpublished mss.
94	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
- . 2001. 0 Oxodo rural no Brasil durante o period0 FHC. assessoria tCcnica da liderangd da bancada do PT na CPmara dos Deputados. Unpublished mss.
-,	2002. Por u,m projeto democritico, popular e soberano para o agririo brasileiro. Partido dos Trabalhadores. Lideranga da bancada na CBmara Federal-Nbcleo Agririo. Secretaria Agr5ria Nacional. Unpublished m s .
Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Englewood Cliffs: Pren- - tice-Hall.
Veja (Siio Paulo). 1996. A sombra violento do MST. August 28.
. 1997a. Mundo d e Amanhii. January 8. 1997b. A voz ronca da ordem. May 28. 1998. Caso d e policia. April 8. 1999. Marchando para tris. October 20.
-. -. -. Wagner, Carlos. 1988. A saga doJoco Sem Terra. Petropolis: Vozes. Wolford, Wendy. 2004. Of Land and Labor: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane
Plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 32, 2: 147-70. Wright, Angus, and Wendy Wolford. 2003. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless
Movement and the Strugglefor a New Brazil. San Francisco: Food First. Xavier, Carlos. 1999. President, Agricultural Federation of the State of Pari
(FAEPA). Author interview. BelCm, Pari, November 7.

2007
Economics
Texto Contexto Enferm
ACCESS TO PRE-NATAL CARE AND CERVICAL CANCER PREVENTION
ACTION AMONG WOMEN FROM BRAZILIAN LANDLESS
WORKERS MOVEMENT 
Sayuri Tanaka Maeda


Ana Luiza Vilela Borges2, Eunice Nakamura3, Daniela Miyahiro4, Lucila Fernandes Silva5
1 Economista. Doutora em Enfermagem. Professora Doutora do Departamento de Enfermagem em Saúde Coletiva da Escola de Enfermagem da Universidade de São Paulo (USP). São Paulo, Brasil.
2 Doutora em Saúde Pública. Professora Doutora do Departamento de Enfermagem em Saúde Coletiva da Escola de Enfermagem da USP. São Paulo, Brasil.
3 Doutora em Antropologia. Pesquisadora do Programa de Apoio a Projetos Institucionais com a Participação de Recém-Doutores da Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior no Departamento de Enfermagem em Saúde Coletiva da Escola de Enfermagem da USP. São Paulo, Brasil.
4 Enfermeira especialista em Saúde Coletiva. Enfermeira da Secretaria da Saúde da Prefeitura de Estância Balneária de Praia Grande, SP. São Paulo, Brasil.
5 Enfermeira. Enfermeira da Secretaria da Saúde da Prefeitura de Cajamar, SP. São Paulo, Brasil.
KEYWORDS: Rural population. Women’s health. Delivery of health care. Health services accessibility.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE:
População rural. Saúde da mulher. Assistência à saúde. Acesso aos serviços de saúde.
PALABRAS-CLAVE:
Población rural. Salud de la Mujer. Prestación de atención de salud. Accesibilidad a los servicios de salud.
ABSTRACT: This is a qualitative research that aimed to investigate Brazilian Landless Workers Movement women’s access to pre-natal care and cervical cancer prevention. Interviews were done in 2005 with five womeninthecityofCajamar,Brazil.Thethematicanalysisofcontentmadeitpossibletoevidencethat access barriers such as territorial delimitation and geographical distance let women use false addresses as mechanisms to receive care. Pap smear tests were performed only during pregnancy. Health care provided for these women was fragmented and they received care solely because of their reproductive condition. Access to health services must be understood as continuous and complete assistance in all phases of a woman’s life and they consist of a challenge to reach rural women. Improving access to information and education for these women corresponds to the possibility of exercising the universal right of access to health care based on the principle of equity.
RESUMO: Trata-se de estudo qualitativo com o objetivo de investigar o acesso das mulheres do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra ao pré-natal e prevenção do câncer de colo uterino. Foram realizadas entrevistas com cinco mulheres, no município de Cajamar, Brasil, 2005. A análise temática de conteúdo evidenciou que a base territorial e a distância geográfica constituíam barreiras de acesso, condicionando-as a lançarem mão de endereços fictícios para obterem o atendimento. A realização do exame de Papanicoloau esteve restrita à gestação. O atendimento à saúde mostrou-se fragmentado, sendo que foram atendidas somente por sua condição reprodutiva. A concepção do acesso encerra múltiplas facetas e o serviço deve abranger as diversas fases da vida da mulher, constituindo em um desafio oferecer cobertura às mulheres da população rural. Melhorar o acesso à informação e à educação corresponde à possibilidade do exercício do direito ao acesso universal à saúde baseado no princípio da eqüidade.
RESUMEN:InvestigacióncualitativacuyoobjetivofueinvestigarelaccesodelasmujeresdelMovimiento de los Trabajadores Sin Tierra a la atención Prenatal y prevención del cáncer cervical. Fueron entrevistadas cinco mujeres en el municipio de Cajamar, Brasil, en 2005. El análisis temático de contenido evidenció que la delimitación poblacional basada en el territorio y en la distancia geográfica constituyen barreras de acceso para la atención de salud, factor que las llevó a la utilización de direcciones falsas para conseguir ser atendidas. La realización del examen de Papanicolaou estuvo restricta a la gestación. La atención de salud de esas mujeres se mostró fragmentada, siendo atendidas apenas por su condición reproductiva. El concepto de acceso engloba múltiples facetas y el servicio debe abarcar las diversas fases de vida de la mujer, constituyendo un desafío ofrecer atención de salud a las mujeres del área rural. Mejorar el acceso a la información y a la educación posibilita que ejerzan su derecho universal a la salud, basado en el principio de equidad.
Endereço: Sayuri Tanaka Maeda Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar, 419 05.401-001 - São Paulo, SP e-mail: rime_yuri@yahoo.com.br
Artigo original: Pesquisa Recebido em: 15 de fevereiro de 2007 Aprovação final em: 18 de julho de 2007
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.
- 434 -
INTRODUCTION
The 1988 Federal Constitution of Brazil incor- porated various concepts, principles and guidelines regarding the field of Health. The adopted conception of health considers it a result of diverse determinants and not simply the absence of illness, so health was considered as resultant from the conditions of alimen- tation, housing, education, income, environment, work, transportation, leisure, freedom, access and property of land and access to health assistance.1
The major advance in Brazilian health care services occurred from the recognition that health is a right of all citizens and the responsibility of the Government. In order to guarantee that right a Unified National Health System or Sistema Único de Saúde (UNHS/SUS) was created incorporating health as a universal social right.2
Considering that health is a right of all Brazilian citizens and that the UNHS/SUS is responsible for delivering health assistance in all national territory, it is assumed that all health problems should be resolved mainly considering population health needs.
Brazilian Landless Workers Movement
One of Brazil’s great particularity is its social and economical heterogeneity. Brazil remains one of the most unequal societies in the world. Alongside the industrialised and world’s leading exporter of many farming products country, there is a poor one, with a huge gap separating the two sides. Geographi- cal distribution of Brazilian population has rapidly shifted. There has been a major rural-urban migration and most people now live in cities with the great in- dustrialisation and developments in agriculture.3 For instance, in the sixties, almost 60% of its population lived in the countryside while in 2000 only 18% were living in rural areas.4 The main reasons for leaving rural areas are unemployment, lower salaries and poor infrastructure of the public services.3,5
The Brazilian agricultural sector is, indeed, characterised by great inequity of land distribution as rural land ownership has been concentrated in the hands ofa wealthy few. Aiming deep agrarian reforms which mean land distribution, governmental tech- nical and financial support for rural production and better quality of life in the countryside, a large mass movement was launched in 1984 called Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra in Portuguese or Rural Landless Workers Movement (MST).
Maeda ST, Borges ALV, Nakamura E, Miyahiro D, Silva LF
MST emerged from many popular rural mo- vements originally in four states of the country. Nowadays, it consists of 500.000 families in 23 out of 27 federal units of Brazil – 350.000 already settled down and 150.000 camped out waiting for a governmental resolution. MST strategy regards occupying unused land to create settlements of landless and poor people where they establish co- operative farms, build houses, schools and clinics. Members also march along the country in order to put pressure on the government and speed up the agrarian reform programme.6
Specifically in the case of rural workers who belong to MST, the limited access to health services is closely related to the geographical area where camps and settlements are located. The role of life conditions in the health-disease process should not be forgotten as well as the fact that the more une- qual a society is the more different the needs of its population will be.7 The structure of a movement that does not allow a fixed housing, plus the discri- mination faced by the workers of MST in urban areas and their impoverished condition might make their access to health services difficult. Health care in Brazil has been structured in terms of territory, what makes the city a unit in charge of providing the service delivery to its inhabitants and covering its geographical restricted area. So the financial resources are designed to be shared on territorial or geographical basis. In this case, as it is a moving population, health assistance to MST members is not foreseen in the local budget since there are no additional funds to amplify service capacity.8
A study conducted in partnership between MST and the University of Brasilia showed that people from MST still face some health problems that have already been eradicated as well as sub nutrition and hunger as causes of infant mortality and many infectious diseases due to the lack of basic sanitation.8 They verified that 32.6% of the camps and 23.7% of the settlements did not count on any health service. Considering specifically women’s health, most of the female workers from MST had full access to pre-natal care but only half of them started it in the first trimester. On the other hand, cervical cancer prevention care was provided only for 25.0% of camped women. One should be aware that Brazilian Health Ministry recommends the start of pre-natal care as soon as possible with a minimum of six appointments and smear tests at least one every three years.
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.
Access to pre-natal care and cervical cancer prevention action among...
Therefore, this study takes as reference that the individual’s health is a social responsibility and in order to implement the model of health care proposed in the UNHS/SUS, health must be assu- med as a social matter and access the fundamental category to be reached in all levels of the health care system and a base of all health policies.9
In the search for answers to comprehend the gap between the UNHS/SUS theoretical guidelines, principles and concepts and the real condition of access to the health care services, this study propo- ses to investigate the access to reproductive health care, taking the pre-natal care and cervical cancer prevention action as parameters, from a particular experience of a small women group of MST.
METHODS
This is an exploratory qualitative research conducted with five 18 to 45 year-old women who had already been through a pregnancy in term and agreed to be interviewed. These women were living in Sister Alberta Camp, part of the MST, located near km 27 of Anhanguera Highway, on the outskirts of Sao Paulo City, quite close to City of Cajamar. The camp consisted of 56 families in 2005 July, when the interviews were done.
Life conditions in the camp were very poor as it had no basic sanitation, no access to clean water nor to electricity. The workers were living in tents made of plastic materials without any bathroom.
Data were collected through interviews given in the camp, in fact, inside the tents. A semi-structured questionnaire was used as a guide and the questions focused women’s social and demographic features, history at the movement, reproductive history and assistance to reproductive health services history.
Collected data analysis was based upon Bar- din proposal in order to find out what lies behind matters spoken out by the interviewees. Interviews were considered enough when the saturation point of the subject was observed by the researchers.10
An oral presentation of the results was given to the camp leaderships after the ending of the data collection. This research was approved at the Com- mittee for Ethics in Research at School of Nursing at University of Sao Paulo, Number 437/2005/CEP- EEUSP, and took into consideration all the recom- mendations for an ethical procedure, including the signature of the informed consent.
- 435 -
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.
RESULTS Life history
Frequent migrations, family fragmentation and poor life conditions marked these women’s childhood. During the interviews, it was possible to verify they were rural-based individuals because they were familiar with primitive rural work. They abandoned this poor life condition in search for better opportunities in bigger cities like Sao Paulo City. Life in a large city was very hard and so the only remaining option was to live in the suburbs, in poor areas, with no basic sanitation. Because of such poverty, migrations were frequent.
Oh it was nice! I liked it [...]. But I really felt like setting roots. We didn’t have any roots. So I found it so nice to live in a house, you know, stay there for a long time, not moving [...]. One day we were here, the other day we were there! It’s hard! It’s so good to make friends, have roots and I have never had that. All the persons I have known during my life remain in the past. This is bad, isn’t it? (Interviewee F).
According to these women, the entrance to MST occurred in a moment of great poverty, with unemployment, hunger and roofless. The contact with MST happened through the base service that usually travels around poor areas giving explana- tions about the movement and inviting people to take part in it.
The move to the camp was certainly an im- portant moment in their lives as in MST they could count on social assistance and a network.
I was facing many problems and I was almost going to live in the streets with my children when a man came to me and said: There is a place I’m gonna take you and there you’ll live in a tent but they’ll give your children milk, food, clothes and then they’ll give you some land to live [...]. When I arrived here in the camp I was treated so well [...]. I was unemployed, not knowing where to go. I was too unhappy. I was feeling really bad. Five children, not knowing what to do, not having anyone to call for help. When I arrived here I was pretty much depressed. I cried and cried. Here I got my self-steem back. I have done many courses and improved my life (Interviewee F).
The respect among the components of the movement and the possibility to share not only material things but also life projects – an ideological feature of the movement – was currently observed in their interviews.
Everybody knows each other here. Everybody is respected by each other here (Interviewee C).
- 436 -
Access to health services
The interviewed women showed some unders- tanding about principles and guidelines of UNHS/ SUS related to health assistance delivery, especially regarding the municipal territory. Although they knew about those principles, the geographical dis- tances and economic difficulties were factors that led these women search for health assistance at the nearest health centre.
I went to a health centre which belongs to Sao Paulo City so I had to give an address from a friend that lives in that city (Interviewee B).
It takes an hour and a half walk to Morro Doce [where the health centre is located] [...]. It’s too hard to carry a child and too expensive to reach Morro Doce (Interviewee B).
Access to pre-natal care
The pre-natal care described by the in- terviewed MST women consisted of six or less appointments with a doctor during pregnancy. Interviews showed they had access to pre-natal assistance but not to the whole structure basic health attention could offer as they initiated pre- natal care at the third month of pregnancy, they did not take any vaccination and could not tell what the aim of pre-natal care represented. They expressed that all decisions about their bodies were taken singularly by the health professional. One woman emphasised how ashamed she felt during the physical exam.
An interesting point is that they would submit themselves to anything in order to keep their foetus healthy. They considered pre-natal care important simply because they believed it was related to the new-born weight.
So my first child was born with many health problems because of the lack of pre-natal [...]. In the second pregnancy, I managed to do it so the boy was born weighting 3800 (g), he was born strong and robust (Interviewee B).
The access to pre-natal care was assured be- cause they had looked for assistance in the City of Cajamar, which was closer, instead of the City of Sao Paulo, which was, in fact, responsible for promoting health assistance to the population of Sister Alberta Camp.
To assure access to pre-natal care, women also created some mechanisms, such as giving false addresses in Cajamar territory. Other times, a health professional made the access easier to these women
Maeda ST, Borges ALV, Nakamura E, Miyahiro D, Silva LF
in the health centre, allowing their enrolment even knowing they lived in another city.
There was this man when I tried to make an appoint- ment [at the health unit] for the pre-natal care. I even found it strange. He said: Aren’t you from the movement? I couldn’t have done your enrolment here [...]. I even found it odd. Then I said: but you have already done [...]. He said: Ok, never mind! (Interviewee C).
It is clear that women workers from MST had access to pre-natal care although this access refers only to the number of appointments. Other signs that could suggest good quality care as vacci- nation or sooner beginning of assistance have not been mentioned.
Access to cervical cancer prevention
Access to cervical cancer prevention was not assured to these women in an unrestricted way once they have only done the Pap smear test during pre-natal care.
Although women had a basic knowledge about the purpose of the exam, they only related Pap to pregnancy or to the period immediately after delivery because it was done mainly during the pre-natal or post-natal care.
Pap smear test I did [...] of him, of him as well and of her [pointing to her three children]. There was a urine inflammation but no other problems, thanks to God [...] (Interviewee C).
Despite the fact that they stated the importan- ce of such cancer screening, they did not attribute its value as priority the same way they did to pre- natal care. Besides, women did the first Pap smear test only after the first pregnancy.
It was when my daughter Lurdinha was born [...]. They told me to come back 40 days after delivery so I could do the smear test [...]. Lurdinha is now nine, so it has been nine years since I did the test (Interviewee D).
It was also said that the delay in getting an appointment to do the smear test the same as in getting the exam result back turned out to be a condition that could complicate the access to cancer prevention. It is important to mention that once again the access was guaranteed both by artifices and by the good will of health professionals.
I was passing in the street, I got the address of that street and I showed it at the reception at the health centre. I told them I had already been a patient there. I talked to the nurse in order to do the smear test and she told me that I just had to be there very early in the morning (Interviewee F).
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.
Access to pre-natal care and cervical cancer prevention action among...
Other important barriers for these women doing the smear test were the feeling of shame, embarrassment and fear. The fact they considered themselves healthy or the fact they did not have any gynaecological problems were also a reason for not doing a cervical cancer preventive exam.
Oh, I don’t feel anything. Why would I do the Pap smear test before I have a problem? I’ve never been with a doctor anymore, I’m very careless. That’s why I don’t do the test. I feel really embarrassed [...] (Interviewee D).
DISCUSSION
Access was the central category of analysis in this research, according to some life histories related by a group of women from MST Sister Alberta Camp, located in the limit between the cities of Sao Paulo and Cajamar, Brazil, and their specific experience to access pre-natal care and to cervical cancer prevention.
Analysing this category from these particular MST women experiences it was possible to make the following reflections considering principles of Brazilian Unified Health System.
Universalization of care: territory based access
It is assumed that all interviewed women had access to the pre-natal care even though they had to use some mechanisms to enter into a health centre as its clients. This situation has also been detected in an urban population of women attending to pre-natal service at District of Butanta, Sao Paulo City.11 Therefore, it should be comprehended that organising a health system in geographical and/or spatial territories, in order to properly achieve health needs, must be understood as a way to plan health care and not to restrict access.
Integrality of actions
The referred access concerned only to the mi- nimum of six medical appointments recommended by the Brazilian Health Ministry.12 It was not possi- ble to consider this pre-natal care had high quality as it began in the third month of pregnancy, also because there was neither vaccination, nor reference of laboratory exams or health education.
A study conducted in Caxias do Sul, South of Brazil, showed that women had a medium of 6.2 pre-natal appointments and half of them initiated
- 437 -
pre-natal care before the second trimester of preg- nancy.12 This result is quite different from those shown in this study, revealing how poor the quality of pre-natal care these MST women was faced to.
Pregnancy might have been the only contact these interviewed women had with health services since they had Pap smear tests only during pre- natal care. Therefore, pregnancy must be seen as a valorous opportunity for the health services to promote woman health, but not the only one. Ac- cording to the principals of UNHS/SUS, complete care assistance means continuous and articulated preventive and curative actions for individuals and groups in all levels of complexity. However, health care delivered to these women was fragmentised and they were assisted solely because of their reproduc- tive condition instead of being assisted as a whole individual with various needs.
Another problem related to the necessary completeness is the delay in doing the smear test and getting results back, conditions that can make users abandon preventive practices and treatment not only among rural workers but also among the urban ones.
According to Brazilian Health Ministry cer- vical cancers are the fourth cause of death among women in Brazil.13 The decline of this kind of cancer incidence and mortality could be possible if prevention and early detection of cervical lesions were made. But it is not so easy because we must considerer the gap observed in this research between the right to health assistance access and individual motivation. There are some barriers of women doing the Pap smear test because of feelings of em- barrassment, shame and fear, probably for tension and physical discomfort.14
Therefore the access of these women to reproductive health care, especially pre-natal care and cervical cancer prevention action, depends on the delivery of these actions but it is also related to women needs and feelings on doing prevention.
That is the reason why excellence in health assistance to women can be achieved if health care is spread over all female citizens not only during preg- nancy or reproductive age. It would indispensable that access to health services could be understood not simply as a health care system entrance in a particu- lar moment in women history but as a continuous and full assistance in all phases of woman’s life in order to definitely transform women health.
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.
- 438 -
CONCLUSION
We believe that access has to be discussed from the extending concept that highlights its social dimen- sion.9 Both pre-natal care and cervical cancer preven- tion should then support social aspects by providing and developing educational health activities as a tool to decrease limitations in basic care assistance. Home visiting is another factor that could be considered to improve access of women living in rural areas.15
Not only the interviewees but in general many women from MST have had poor access to health services, especially concerning to reproductive heal- th care. They are certainly too far from the Brazilian Health Ministry recommendations. The inclusion of rural population in the health care service pro- grammes should not be considered an innovative action but a legally guaranteed right acquired since the 1988 Constitution, which is still necessary to be incorporated by Brazilian States and Municipals.1
In conclusion, improving universal access to health care includes also access opportunities to health education. Although interviewees of MST have had very little schooling, their potential for learning cannot be disregarded. Improving informa- tion about the constitutional rights may represent a chance to develop self-care and a possibility of exercising the universal right of access to health care services based on the principle of equity.
REFERENCES
1 Ministério da Saúde (BR), Conselho Nacional de Saúde. O SUS como política social. In: Anais da 11a Conferência Nacional de Saúde [relatório final]. Brasília (DF): MS; 2000. p.15-9.
2	Mendes EV. A descentralização do sistema de serviços de saúde no Brasil: novos rumos e um outro olhar sobre o nível local. In: Mendes EV. A organização da saúde no nível local. São Paulo (SP): Ed. Hucitec; 1998. p.17-56.
3 Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. Brasil: censo 2000. Rio de Janeiro (RJ): IBGE; 2006 [acesso em 2007 Mar 21]. Disponível em: http:// www.ibge.gov.br
Maeda ST, Borges ALV, Nakamura E, Miyahiro D, Silva LF
4	Veras RP. Brazil is getting older: demographic changes and epidemiological challenges. Rev. Saúde Pública 1991 Dez; 25 (6): 476-88.
5 UnitedNationsPopulationFund.Thestateofworld population 1999: six billion, a time for choice. New York (NY/USA): UNFPA; 1996.
6 Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra [página da Internet]. São Paulo (SP): MST; 2007 [acesso em 2007 Fev 3]. Disponível em: http://www. mst.org.br
7 Stotz EM. Os desafios para o SUS e a educação popular: uma análise baseada na dialética da satisfação das necessidades de saúde 2004 [acesso em 2006 Nov 12]. Disponível em: http://www.redepopsaude.com. br/redepopsaude/desafiossus.htm
8 Universidade de Brasília. Saúde dos Trabalhadores rurais de assentamentos e acampamentos da reforma agrária. Brasília (DF): UnB/Centro de Estudos de Saúde Pública; 2001.
9	Hortale VA, Pedroza M, Rosa MLG. Operacionalizando as categorias acesso e descentralização na análise dos sistemas de saúde. Cad. Saúde Pública 2000 Jan-Mar; 16 (1): 231-9.
10 Bardin L. Análise de conteúdo. Lisboa (PT): Ed. 70; 1997.
11 Maeda ST. Gestão da referência e contra-referência na atenção ao ciclo gravídico-puerperal: a realidade do Distrito de Saúde do Butantã [tese]. São Paulo (SP): USP/Escola de Enfermagem; 2002.
12 Trevisan MR, De Lorenzi DRS. Perfil da assistência pré-natal entre usuárias do Sistema Único de Saúde em Caxias do Sul. Revista Brasileira Ginecologia Obstetrícia 2002 Jun; 24 (5): 293-329.
13Ministério da Saúde (BR), Instituto Nacional de Atenção ao Câncer, Programa Nacional de Controle de câncer de colo de útero e de mama. Conhecendo o viva mulher. [acesso em 2007 Jul 6]. Disponível em http:// www.inca.gov.br/conteudo_view.asp?id=140
14 Pinho AA, França Júnior I, Schraiber LB, D ́Oliveira AFPL. Cobertura e motivos para a realização ou não do teste Papanicolaou no município de São Paulo. Cad. Saúde Pública 2003 Nov-Dez; 19 (2 supl.): 303-13.
15Giacomozzi CM, Lacerda MR. A prática da assistência domiciliar dos profissionais da estratégia de saúde da família. Texto Contexto Enferm. 2006 Out-Dez; 15 (4): 645-53.
Texto Contexto Enferm, Florianópolis, 2007 Jul-Set; 16(3): 433-8.

2008
Geograpny
Journal of Agrarian Change
‘Late Mobilization’: Transnational Peasant Networks and Grassroots Organizing in Brazil and South Africa
BRENDA BALETTI, TAMARA M. JOHNSON AND WENDY WOLFORD

In this paper, we analyze the political dynamics of the contemporary ‘trans- national peasant network’ through a comparison of two movements: the Brazilian Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) and the South African Landless People’s Movement (LPM). We argue that transnational visions of ‘peasants’ often obscure relations between or within rural movements. One tangible benefit of the transnational peasant network is the exchange of ideas, experiences and information, but this exchange does not happen in a vacuum, rather it happens in the historically-situated, power-laden context of an uneven world system. Organized in 1984, MST activists from Brazil helped to train, educate and inspire South African activists after the LPM formed in 2001, but key elements of the MST’s success were inappropriate or unworkable in the South African context. Ultimately, the transfer of movement knowledge from the MST to the LPM may have worked against the long-term success of the latter.
Keywords: transnational networks, social movements, movement of landless workers, movement of landless peoples
INTRODUCTION
One of the most surprising developments of late twentieth-century globalization has been the increasing presence and visibility of landless peasant movements around the world. Even as small farming decreases in importance as a global economic sector and as people increasingly move out of the rural areas and into urban centres, landless workers and small farmers have come together to demand access to land and new economic development policies that prioritize sustainable local communities and food sovereignty. From Brazil to Mexico to South Africa and the Philippines, grassroots social movements and non-governmental organizations
Brenda Baletti, Tamara M. Johnson and Wendy Wolford, Department of Geography at the Univer- sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Saunders Hall CB 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 2759, USA. e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu. The authors would like to thank five anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments as well as Jun Borras for his review and encouragement. Any errors in the paper are the responsibility of the authors.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
concerned with this broad range of issues have articulated their efforts through transnational meetings and organizations, such that there is now an easily identifiable ‘Transnational Peasant Network’ (hereafter the TPN) organizing the global struggle for rural peoples and their ‘right to have rights’ (Desmarais 2007; Edelman 1998).
This is a historic moment for transnational activism more broadly: global-scale movement networks have generated considerable excitement in scholarly and political arenas because of their potential for circumventing local or national-level politics in the name of universalistic goods such as human rights, access to land, environmental conservation, women’s rights, etc. Such universals are deployed in part to counter the universal(izing) logics of orthodox globalization. Because we are only beginning to see and understand these networks, much of the early work on them focused on the empowering ability of place-based movements to ‘scale up’ (Smith 1993), largely taking the ‘transnational’ potential of social move- ments for granted. It is only recently that the diverse relationships and localized contexts in which these transnational networks are situated are being analyzed (see Edelman 2005a, 2005b; Featherstone 2003; Routledge et al. 2007). This is an important direction because transnational social networks are attempts to create something new – as David Featherstone says, they are ‘generative’ of a new form of politics – at the same time as they are a compilation of historical relationships and characteristics (Featherstone 2003). Although this may appear to be an obvious point, we think that it has considerable implications for the study of the TPN.
In this paper, we analyze the political dynamics of the contemporary TPN through a comparison of two movements: the Brazilian Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) and the South African Landless People’s Movement (LPM). Organized in 1984, the MST has the largest domestic following of any social movement in the transnational network and this has placed it at the forefront of the broader international struggle. For a brief period following its formation in 2001, the LPM also garnered considerable international attention for its potential to mobilize grassroots interests for agrarian reform in South Africa. We argue that both the localized and transnational contexts are important for an analysis of the two movements – neither the MST nor the LPM can be properly understood outside of the transnational context (specifically, the context of the TPN), and the way in which both movements have engaged with transnationalism can only be properly understood within the context of localized political, social and economic conditions in Brazil and South Africa respectively – but we go a step further to develop a theory of ‘late mobilization’ (after Alexander Gerschenkron’s 1952 arguments about ‘late development’). Our theory of late mobilization is an attempt to bring geography and history together in our study of transnational movements. Place and scale matter, but so does timing: within an inter-connected world system, what one country/region/group does at one time affects all of those that follow, often in very deliberate ways (also see McMichael 1990).
Within a transnational network, one of the most tangible benefits is the exchange of ideas, experiences and information (Keck and Sikkink 1998), but this exchange does not happen in a vacuum, rather it happens in the historically-situated,
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	291
292	Brenda Baletti et al.
power-laden context of an uneven world system. In our comparison of the MST and the LPM, therefore, we argue that the latter is the ‘late mobilizer’, and as such it has experienced both advantages and disadvantages of engaging with the TPN. Organized in 1984, MST activists from Brazil helped to train, educate and inspire South African activists after the LPM formed in 2001, but key elements of the MST’s success were inappropriate or unworkable in the South African context. On the one hand, the MST’s experiences and advice helped the LPM to develop strategies and gain visibility; on the other hand, the LPM had difficulty translating its spectacular international success into an organic grassroots cam- paign. Ultimately, the transfer of movement knowledge from the MST to the LPM may have worked against the long-term success of the latter.
We argue that the MST owed its success in Brazil to three main elements: first, the MST developed through the leadership of young sons and daughters of small farmers – ‘organic’ leaders who maintained a strong ideological coherence as they struggled for a collective peasant future; second, the movement has persisted in using direct-action land occupations as the primary strategy for pressuring the government to expropriate land – these occupations provide the movement with a coherent public face as well as an opportunity for movement members to build solidarity; third, since its inception, the movement has insisted on maintaining its autonomy from the Brazilian state, ensuring that the leader- ship was not co-opted by the ‘feckless’ politics of Brazil’s electoral system (Mainwaring 1995). The MST then successfully translated its national success into a new peasant internationalism. The movement broadened its message and widened its support base throughout the 1990s.
As the MST became an important transnational actor, movement activists travelled to places like South Africa to support and advise rural activists there. Unfortunately, the MST’s main strategy for mobilization – the land occupation – backfired in the South African context. The nearby example of racial tension in Zimbabwe made occupying land politically explosive in South Africa. Occu- pations were also difficult for the LPM to organize because the movement was unable to draw on the MST’s other two elements of success: a leadership devel- oped through grassroots experience and autonomy from civil society organiza- tions and the state.
These difficulties of translation are not a necessary effect of late mobilization, of course. And they are certainly not responsible for the success or failure of land reform in the two countries. Our argument specifically concerns social mobilization, and here we argue that transnational organizing cannot be seen as an unqualified good. Instead, researchers and movement activists need to try and understand under what conditions transnationalism offers advantages or disadvantages. Just as early development practitioners did not always examine the specificities of the context in which development was to take place (Ferguson 1994), we argue that the rush to embrace transnational organizing may lead to the neglect of geographical and historical specificities.
In the rest of the paper, we describe the political and economic context of land distribution in Brazil and draw upon interviews conducted with MST activists
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
in order to outline the three factors that contributed most to the movement’s success. After outlining the MST’s transformation and importance, we then describe the LPM from its origins and location within a bitter debate over land restitution and reform in the wake of the 1994 end to apartheid in South Africa. We analyze two interviews with critical movement leaders in order to develop and situate our analysis.
FROM SQUATTERS TO SEM TERRA: THE RISE OF THE MST IN THE 1990s
Brazil has one of the most unequal distributions of land ownership in the world. This inequality is a legacy of Portuguese colonization and plantation society, which introduced and embedded racialized social hierarchies into land ownership and labour relations (Schwartz 1985). Sugarcane production provided the economic engine of growth in the early colonial years, and land tenure patterns reflected the Portuguese crown’s preference for large landholdings. Alongside the planta- tions, however, a small-holding peasantry was allowed to develop. In the early 1800s, small-holders fleeing the ravages of population growth and agricultural depression made their way to Brazil, cultivating and settling the country’s south- ern frontiers. Although plantation owners tried to keep the new immigrants from acquiring their own land so that they would have labour for their crops (Viotti da Costa 2000), a peasant class developed in the south of Brazil as well as along the new settlement frontiers (in the north and centre-west). As late as the 1950s, the Brazilian population was predominantly rural (75 per cent), although 85 per cent of that population lived and worked on only 10 per cent of the land.
This inequality in land ownership generated ongoing rural discontent that erupted in the 1960s when popular mobilization for access to land spread throughout Brazil and Latin America. At this time, peasants and rural workers grew increas- ingly radical, organized by the rural trade unions, various factions of Brazilian Communist groups, and the Catholic Church (Forman 1975; Maybury-Lewis 1994; Pereira 1997; Santos and Costa 1998). Many governments in Latin America began to implement agrarian reforms at this time (de Janvry 1981; de Janvry et al. 2001; Grindle 1986), but in Brazil, timid attempts at reform threatened the powerful landed elite, and in 1964, a military coup installed an authoritarian dictatorship that would hold power for 21 years (Hall 1990; Reis 1990). Once in power, the military government developed a two-pronged strategy to address rural unrest: on the one hand, the rural poor (or, peasant agitators) were re-located to new frontiers of colonization, such as the Amazon rainforest region, and on the other hand, large-scale farms were targeted for state-led modernization in an effort to increase efficiency and reduce Brazil’s reliance on small farmers.
By the late 1970s, the authoritarian state began to weaken. As the military gradually withdrew from power, landless peasants and rural workers began to form squatter settlements throughout the country, concentrated in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paraná (Fernandes 1999). With the restoration of democracy in Brazil in 1985, widespread demands for access
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	293
294	Brenda Baletti et al.
to land returned with renewed force, becoming part of the ‘national political culture’ largely because of the formation of new social movements such as the MST (Gohn 1997; Novaes 1998). Activists with the MST mobilized rural workers to occupy unproductive plantations, using Article 186 of the Brazilian Constitution to argue for the right to ‘unproductive’ property that was not being used in a way that benefited the ‘social good’ (see Branford and Rocha 2002; Fernandes 1999; Wright and Wolford 2003). Over time, the MST developed a sophisticated ‘repertoire of contention’ (Tilly 1978) that included the symbolic appropriation of spaces such as landed property, government buildings and public thoroughfares.
In the late 1990s, the political will for agrarian reform in Brazil increased because of national and international outcry over two violent massacres. In 1995, ten landless squatters were killed in Corumbiara, Rondônia, and just one year later, 19 landless squatters were killed as they marched to the capital city of the state of Pará along the state highway. These two incidents – the second one captured on video-tape – were partly responsible for the increased visibility of rural poverty, violence and the MST (Ondetti 2001; Pereira 2003). In 1997, president Cardoso settled 80,000 families, almost twice as many as were settled in his first year in office (Cardoso 1997), and from 1994 to 1998 the annual budget for agrarian reform was more than quintupled (Seligmann 1998). Luis Inacio ‘Lula’ da Silva, who won executive office in 2002, promised to continue agrarian reform efforts, although the experience under this administration has been mixed (Deere and Medeiros 2007).
During the mid-1990s, as the MST gained national visibility, the movement also gained international visibility. Partly as a result of the international outcry over the massacres, the MST’s organizational efforts and influence skyrocketed. Over the course of the 1990s, the MST went from being considered a small, marginalized movement of ‘vagabonds’ and squatters to one of the ‘most powerful and well-organized social movement[s] in Brazil’s history’ (Petras 1997, 18). Today the movement has approximately two million members (although these numbers are contested, and some estimates are significantly lower) who are settled in government-funded land reform settlements or living in temporary ‘encampments’ awaiting final resolution of their claim to land. Over 17,000 people attended the MST’s Fifth National Congress in 2007.
In internationalizing its struggle for land, the MST sees itself as representing all of those who have been marginalized by the global project of modern industrial capitalism. And through an extraordinary expansion of its base, the movement has become a significant actor in the social movement world system, engaging as part of the anti-neoliberal, anti-globalization movement. It has also been one of the most influential, active groups organizing Vía Campesina (Peasant Way), the international peasant umbrella movement.
THE METHODS TO THE RISE: LEADERSHIP, OCCUPATIONS AND AUTONOMY
There were many reasons for the MST’s success in Brazil and internationally, but three stand out. First the MST developed very strong circuits of leadership
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘professionalization’, where new leaders move around the country, studying at MST formational centres and building new ties with local activists and move- ment members; second, the MST has continued to emphasize land occupations as its primary strategy, these occupations serve as sources of new leadership, movement solidarity and political presence; and third, the MST has insisted on maintaining its autonomy from both the state and established elements, such as the Catholic Church or non-governmental organizations, in ways that allowed it to develop apart from the personalistic and unreliable politics of official power.
Strategies for Success #1: Leadership
Many academics and observers have attributed the MST’s rapid rise to its dedi- cated leadership (Petras 1997; Wright and Wolford 2003). Most MST leaders are recruited out of left-leaning institutions – such as organized religion, rural trade unions or the Worker’s Party – or out of the land occupations themselves. Many of the earliest leaders were the sons and daughters of small farmers who were introduced to the movement through the Catholic and Lutheran Churches (Houtzager and Kurtz 2000).
Once the movement began organizing occupations, young men and women who participated learned of the movement’s goals and ideology. They were some of the most committed members, and they were also – perhaps ironically – the ones least likely to win access to land when the government expropriated a property (Rosa 2007). The government was legally bound to prioritize families over single adults or youth, and so young men and women without partners or children were passed from occupation to occupation, radicalizing their political views as they went. Once recruited, MST leaders were expected to travel anywhere, anytime for the good of the movement and the struggle. This political mobility helped the movement to expand its membership from the south to the rest of the country by the mid-1990s.
As the MST grew, development of such young leaders remained a movement priority. This can be seen in the pages of the MST’s own newspaper, published every month since the late 1980s. A monthly column in the Jornal Sem Terra (Landless Newspaper) highlights the grassroots organizing of its homegrown activists (militantes) in an interview with a different one each month from across the country. All of the activists tell similar stories of their initial contact with the movement through participation in occupations or demonstrations, falling in love with the movement, rising to leadership through formal training by the movement and then working as organizers. It is through the work of these leaders that direct action remains a primary movement strategy because, although the movement is strategically scaling up, these leaders continue to work locally in the struggle for land, mobilizing people for occupations, organizing in the set- tlements, and recruiting and training new leaders who then move to new places to carry out these same activities.
In June of 2007, we interviewed Julia (not her real name), an MST leader in the state of Paraíba who was an excellent example of the MST’s dedicated leadership.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	295
296	Brenda Baletti et al.
We interviewed Julia in her office in João Pessoa, the capital of the state. The city sits in the humid tropical coast, surrounded by sugarcane and, increasingly, settlements. Julia was clearly exhausted. She had been up since 4:00 am arranging regional affairs for the transnational social movement, Vía Campesina. She had recently been appointed the MST representative for Vía Campesina in the state, and because it was just getting started there was a lot of work. Julia was also coordinating a visiting charitable group from Italy: nine young Italian men and women who had donated money to the MST had come to Paraíba to see the work their money had done. Reluctantly, Julia sat down for the interview, shak- ing out a cigarette and crossing her arms tightly in front of her.
Julia grew up far from João Pessoa in the southern state of Santa Catarina. Raised in a small village without electricity, she grew up working on her family’s farm. Her family did not have much, she said, but she always worked hard and never missed a day of school. When she was old enough, she began to study religion with plans to become a nun, but exposure within the church to Liberation Theology inspired her to activism and she became a militant in the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra, hereafter CPT), a church movement that (among other things) works as a facilitator for the landless in their struggle for land. Two years later, however, Julia left the CPT simply because, as she said, ‘the MST was born’.
Julia heard about the MST through her religious work, and in 1989 the move- ment sent her – along with 19 other activists from the south (including Jaime Amorim, the well-known state leader in Pernambuco who grew up across the street from Julia) – to the northeast to help to establish the first settlements in the region. At the time, the MST was a young, small movement, and this was appealing to Julia because it was, in her words ‘a movement of the people not for them’ (although Julia, like many of the most visible movement leaders, had not herself acquired land through the movement). During the 1990s, Julia lived and worked in Bahia, Pernambuco, Maranhão and Paraíba, educating the movement’s grassroots base and training its leaders. Even after 18 years of living in the northeast, far from her family, Julia is still willing to go wherever the movement needs her. It is through this model of moving leaders from place to place to educate and train other militants that the movement has attained – as she says, ‘hegemony in all of Brazil’.
Recruiting and training new young leaders is a key strategy of the movement, and a primary responsibility for many leaders. Another northeastern leader that Brenda and Wendy interviewed explained the importance of passing leadership responsibilities on to the younger generation: ‘it is a question of adaptation, if [we don’t get new leaders], we will be getting old and the settlements will get old too, because they will start to do things that are based in the heads of the old people, you know. . . . The idea is to be preparing the [young people], for them to go ahead and assume the responsibilities’.
Strategy of Success #2: Land Occupations
The MST has developed a broad set of strategies to promote its agenda, but land occupations continue to be the movement’s primary political weapon (Fernandes
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
2007). Occupations are well-planned events that generally follow a standard script. Activists hold meetings and organize among the ‘base’ for months before choosing an area for occupation. Usually the property chosen is one that is not fulfilling its social (Constitutional) function to be productive or one with uncer- tain title. Then activists prepare as the selected day arrives. They notify all of the participants, telling them to be ready at a moment’s notice, to keep their bag by the door, ready for when the bus or van or truck rolls by. The occupation itself usually happens at night when there is less chance of detection. Once on the property, activists organize the construction of small black plastic tents where each family will be living until negotiations with the government (or with the landlord’s private guns) begin. Occupations are often coordinated throughout a broader region – the state or even the country – in an attempt to scale up all of the localized demands for land. As one regional leader in the northeast said:
We aren’t the ones who decide how everything [in an occupation] goes. There are state guidelines too, you know. For example, when we occupied here [in Paraíba], we didn’t only occupy the one property here. This is the capacity that we have: we occupied here and occupied other properties in other regions of the state simultaneously. They are planned actions, planned with other regions of the state so that we can have more power.
Occupations provide the space for movement production and reproduction: it is here that many (though certainly not all; see Wolford 2006) movement members realize what the movement is really about (Fernandes 2007). They may have joined the occupation because their friends or church organizers encouraged them to, or because they were desperate to do anything that might win them land, but once there, people are often caught up in the intensity of the political moment. Movement leaders hold meetings regularly during occupations in order to keep people busy and prepare for the possibility of eventually winning access to the land. During occupations young leaders are recruited. Both in our interviews and in our experience, leaders tell similar stories of first encountering the movement through an occupation that ended with their parents winning a plot of land and them beginning to work to organize the movement base.
Strategy of Success #3: Autonomy
When the MST held its first National Congress in 1985, there was discussion as to whether the movement should work from within the Catholic Church or strike out on its own. Prominent leaders later recalled church organizers them- selves arguing for the movement’s independence: the MST needed to develop its own struggle, one that was not tied to traditional alliances or old ways of ‘doing politics’ (Branford and Rocha 2002, 21). As the movement grew stronger, and as democracy in the country consolidated, there were more calls for the move- ment to work more closely with the government: two prominent rural sociolo- gists argued that the MST was missing a historic opportunity to entwine rural workers’ interests with the federal state (de Souza Martins 2003; Navarro 2002).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	297
298	Brenda Baletti et al.
To every suggestion of political affiliation, the MST has remained resolute. As the movement’s most prominent leader, João Pedro Stedile, said, ‘our analysis of the farmers’ movements of Latin America and Brazil taught us that whenever a mass movement was subordinated to a party, it was weakened by the effects of inner-party splits and factional battles. . . . The movement had to be free from external political direction’ (2002, 80).
The movement’s project to build hegemony has involved building alliances with other organizations such as different religious organizations, rural and urban trade unions, and politicians. These alliances, however, generally function as goal-specific partnerships not integration or even affiliation. Support from other well-known organizations such as the Central Workers’ Union (CUT), the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT), or well-known academics and politicians from the Workers Party demonstrates popular support for the movement, but the movement’s autonomy has never yet compromised its autonomy.
The MST’s commitment to autonomy can be seen in discursive claim of a lack of dependence on both civil society and the state. The MST claims autonomy from the state, but this does not mean that they do not negotiate with the state, or that the MST’s occupations and settlements are not dependent on the state for resources. They receive food baskets in the occupations, land in settlements, credit for settlers, and political strength and support from the state, but they claim these things as rights rather than as aid or as favours. By negotiating with the state from an external rather than dependent position, the MST maintains its claim to autonomy.
Julia also talked about the movement’s position with respect to the federal government. The movement’s three biggest enemies, she said, ‘are the execu- tive, the legislature, and the judiciary’; in other words, the government itself. She also critiqued the inefficiency of the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA), the main governmental agency charged with exe- cuting agrarian reform. Julia argued that INCRA was incompetent in terms of getting land expropriated and providing the settlers with agricultural assistance, largely because she believed that a majority of INCRA employees were against the project of distributive land reform.
Another activist in the northeast explained his distrust of the federal govern- ment in this way:
1
Legally, INCRA could come [to the settlement] more, but we don’t allow it. This is how it is: I could allow an INCRA employee to come here and say that this man who lives next door should stay in the settlement [note: this was in reference to an ongoing dispute on the settlement]. But we are the ones who should decide, because after this government employee comes here and says . . . that this other guy has rights, then the employee gets back in his car and goes away, and those of us who live here still have the problem. . . . And so the community has certain autonomy, and INCRA goes and paints and embroiders [or whatever it does].1
Interview, July 2008.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
LAND FOR THOSE WHO WORK IT TOO: THE SOUTH AFRICAN CASE
As in the Brazilian case, the control of land was the backbone of colonial policies in South Africa. In South Africa, however, racialized policies of dispossession carried over into the independent state and made it difficult for a significant or coherent land-owning peasantry to develop. As a result, the contemporary demand for land in South Africa is less organized around a return to farming per se than around a broader struggle for citizenship, political rights, labour reform and social welfare policies. This difference between the Brazilian and South African experi- ences made it difficult for LPM activists to copy the MST’s strategies for success.
Although Europeans had been settling in southern Africa since the 1600s, the process of alienating natives from their land only began in earnest when diamonds were discovered in Kimberley in 1867 and gold was discovered in what is now Johannesburg in 1886. The discovery of mineral wealth in South Africa piqued British imperial interest in the region, and as a result, land in the surrounding region became more valuable. Three years after the formation of the Union of South Africa, the Natives’ Land Act of 1913 was passed in order to control Black activity on and possession of land. This legislation restricted the area for lawful African occupation: unless special permits were acquired, native Africans were forced to live on reserves (Bantustans) that comprised a mere 7 per cent of the land area. The Land Act, followed by new legislation in 1936, also eliminated sharecropping and rent tenancy, replacing them with labour tenancy (Sihlongo- nyane 2005; Thwala 2006). Many scholars point to the Land Acts as decisive moments in the proletarianization of the South African peasantry. Proletarianiza- tion was critical for the development of capitalist agriculture, as dispossessed peasants often became wageworkers on White farms or mine workers (Ntsebeza 2007). Dispossession also reduced competition among White farmers and created a class of wage labourers to work on White-owned farms and in mines. Although the Land Acts may not have successfully dispossessed all Africans or stopped them from acquiring land, it did have the effect of further differentiating the African peasantry into a class of landowners and evicted peasants who moved into the freehold lands, many of whom became migrant labourers (Hart 2002). Unequal access to land was therefore an essential component of the political economy of South Africa (Thwala 2006).
Black migration to urban areas was also highly regulated and, for the most part, discouraged. The Bantu Consolidation Act of 1946, which identified Africans who were allowed to remain in urban areas for over 72 hours, created passbooks to record and monitor the movement of Black South Africans into the cities. This segregation was solidified in 1948 when the National Party gained power and created the Homeland System. The Homeland System was comprised of ten territories that separated the Black population by ethnicity in the hopes that the territories could serve as potential African nations. A new Native Laws Amend- ment Act of 1957 tightly controlled the recruitment and movement of Black workers from reserves in rural areas to urban employers in ‘white South Africa’.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	299
300	Brenda Baletti et al.
Cousins (2006) argues that ‘de-peasantization’ in South Africa was intentional and an integral part of segregationist and Apartheid policies throughout the twentieth century. Whether or not it was intentional, subsistence farming among rural people became less common as a primary source of livelihood and people in the reserves were increasingly forced to rely on non-agricultural work. Between the 1960s and 1980s, the situation worsened as approximately 1.75 million rural people were displaced, removed primarily from White-owned farms (65 per cent) and African freehold land (35 per cent), effectively eliminating even labour tenancy and squatting (Hart 2002, 89). Although 70 per cent of people in the rural homelands had access to land, more than 50 per cent of those people had access to less than one hectare, which discouraged subsistence farming, and encouraged livelihood strategies in rural labour and mining (Ntsebeza 2007).2
The rural population in South Africa today continues to be economically dif- ferentiated with localized groups exploiting different bundles of livelihood strat- egies including: agriculture, migration, agricultural labour, remittances, formal employment, pensions and micro-enterprises (Cousins 2006). Because of this, several researchers have argued that the agrarian question in South Africa should be ‘delinked’ from agriculture and connected to a broader range of demands (Hart 1996, 269; Cousins 2006). People do not fit easily into the category of worker or peasant – or even a hybrid of the two – but, as Henry Bernstein has pointed out for the Global South more generally, are forced to make their living ‘across different sites of the social division of labour: urban and rural, agricultural and non-agricultural, wage employment and self-employment’ (Bernstein 2004, 205).
Today, 13 years after the fall of Apartheid, the land question in South Africa is still a critical one, and the reality of land ownership and control is still divided along racial lines. Land reform legislation has been seen as one method of bal- ancing out the inequalities of Apartheid and including previously marginalized communities in the new ‘Rainbow Nation’ of South Africa. After the first democratic elections in 1994, the Mandela administration proposed a land reform programme centring on three elements: restitution (land returned to claimants who could prove that they were dispossessed of their land after the Native Lands Act of 1913), redistribution (land the government purchases at market value and redistributes to landless claimants), and tenure security (assurance that people living on White farms will not be arbitrarily evicted). The goal was to redistribute 30 per cent of agricultural land in the first five years following a ‘willing-seller, willing-buyer’ system; however, land reform in South Africa has been painfully slow, with only 3 per cent of the land having been redistributed by 2001 (Adams and Howell 2001).
During Apartheid, the struggle for land was incorporated into (and secondary to) the broader struggle against Apartheid, such that the ‘land demand was not articulated in and of itself, but rather as a symbol of the lack of political
2	In the 1980s, the average population density for the homelands was 151 people per square kilo- metre, as compared to 19 people per square kilometre in the rest of South Africa. Where White South African areas had housing surpluses, Black areas had housing deficits (Thwala 2006).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
democracy and the racism of the apartheid regime’ (Greenberg 2004b, 15; Greenstein 2003). While the majority of the South African population is landless, most of them identify politically in other ways because of the way in which resistance was constructed under Apartheid. The fact that the struggle for land took a backseat to the broader liberation struggle has made organizing a landless struggle in the post-Apartheid context difficult. To a certain extent, building a landless movement would require re-contextualizing longstanding demands – for political participation, access to resources etc. – around the land issue (Greenberg 2004b).
In a 2001 article, Lahiff and Cousins suggested that the government’s relative inattention to rural land reform is due, in part, to the absence of a grassroots landless voice to place pressure on the government in order to force this issue. That same year, however, the Landless Peoples’ Movement (LPM) formed to challenge the South African government’s land reform policies and approach, and to force land distribution into the national and international spotlight. In 2004, the LPM recorded a membership (loosely defined) of approximately 100,000 people, 90 per cent of whom were located in rural areas (Alexander 2004). These membership numbers are difficult to verify and may be inaccurate, but the claim to such numerical strength was an important strategy for the LPM to gain visibility. By the time we began talking to activists and scholars about the LPM in September of 2006, there was a general consensus that the LPM was in decline, with some going so far as to declare the movement dead.
In what follows, we analyze the rise and decline of the LPM as read through the experiences of two figures involved in the movement from its inception: Mangaliso Khubeka, a founder and national organizer of the LPM, and Ricado Jacobs, staff member at the Surplus People’s Project in Cape Town, a non- governmental organization that formed in the 1980s to help communities organize against the ongoing state-led relocations of Black South Africans, and member of the advisory committee for the formation of the LPM. Mangaliso’s interview illustrates the LPM’s approach to the three central concepts that we argued above were key to the success of the MST: political autonomy, land occupations and organic leadership. Ricado’s interview illustrates how these factors are shaped by the South African context. While we recognize that the opinions of these figures are not universally shared by all actors with the movement, we believe these interviews not only highlight the mentalities of key figures within the LPM at the current conjuncture, but their words also reflect the trajectory the movement has taken in its short history.
THE RISE OF THE LANDLESS PEOPLE’S MOVEMENT
We interviewed Mangaliso in November of 2006 at the Surplus People’s Project office in the Western Cape. He was travelling with other LPM members based in KwaZulu-Natal as well as with several MST visitors from Brazil. Their tasks were to network with LPM chapters in the Western Cape while trying to recruit other landless communities into the movement. Mangaliso was a founding
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	301
302	Brenda Baletti et al.
member of the LPM: he became involved with landless mobilization while resisting eviction from his home on a farm outside of Newcastle in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. He and several others formed a small local committee that became a province-wide organization called the Tenure Security Coordinating Committee (TSCC) after meeting with the Association for Rural Advancement (AFRA). Mangaliso and other members of the TSCC felt as though their com- plaints had gone unheeded by local and provincial government officials. There was a need, they felt, for the formation of an organization ‘to be the mouthpiece of the people’.
In August of 2001, South Africa hosted the United Nations World Conference Against Racism and Discrimination, an event that focused international eyes on both global and South African social movements. Special interest groups met in Durban for weeks leading up to the event. This conference ‘provided space and opportunity for resource mobilization for the first joint national action of new independent community movements’, and it was then that the Landless People’s Movement was formed out of disparate local landless groups (Greenberg 2004b, 18). During this period the LPM, along with a number of established organizations joined under the banner of the Durban Social Forum to promote a ‘Landlessness=Racism’ campaign and foreground the plight of the landless (Ntsebeza 2007).
In 2005, Mangaliso described the LPM as being comprised of ‘the poorest of the poor, people not having their own land’,3 many of whom, like Mangaliso, were evicted Black farm workers. In another article (n.d.) Mangaliso articulated the desires of LPM members: ‘they asked me what it is I want. I want to plough. . . . We don’t have land. We see no sustainable development; people are hungry We have no land or jobs’ (Martorell 2007). The World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg in 2002 provided another opportunity for NGOs to bring together landless members from all over the country to form the second Landless People’s Assembly. Five thousand delegates from the LPM joined 25,000 members from the Social Movements Indaba (an umbrella organ- ization for South African social movements created to foster solidarity among grassroots campaigns working on similar issues) to march against neoliberal policy trends in the South African government. Mangaliso’s comments reflect senti- ments that range from general disillusionment with the South African govern- ment and the slow pace of land reform: ‘there is nothing good about land reform in South Africa’, to outright indignation, ‘black people, they don’t have rights in South Africa. They don’t have rights. It’s only on paper that they are saying we have rights’.
On 11 June 2007, we interviewed Ricado Jacobs, a staff member at the Surplus People’s Project (SPP). Currently, the SPP advocates for rural mobilization and agrarian reform. Ricado has been with the SPP for many years and was a member of the National Land Committee (NLC), the organization instrumental in the
3	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
establishment of the Landless People’s Movement. A self-proclaimed activist, Ricado states that even after the dissolution of the NLC many former members were still active within the Landless People’s Movement and served as an advi- sory committee, organizing political education for LPM constituencies. When asked about the LPM’s current situation, he responded that because of the slow pace of land reform, the political situation was still ripe for a landless movement and that since 1994 the demands of the poor had not been met, particularly in rural areas. He attributed this to neoliberal agricultural restructuring and the South African government’s subsequent preference for a Market-Led Agrarian Reform (MLAR) over the grassroots-led alternative (see Borras 2003 for back- ground discussion).
THE LPM IN INTERNATIONAL NETWORKS
Shortly after the formation of the LPM in 2001, the movement began forging ties with international peasant movements like Vía Campesina and successful landless movements in other countries such as the MST in Brazil. Unlike the MST, the LPM was an international movement from its inception because of the support and advice it received from international peasant and landless organiza- tions. As the national organizer of the LPM, Mangaliso travelled to Brazil five times between 2001 and 2006. He also travelled to Mexico and the United States, proclaiming that ‘everywhere, there are problems about land. So we are con- nected to the world as LPM’.4 The MST is particularly significant to the South African landless movement because of the similarities between the two countries in agrarian structure, such as a dual agricultural economy, concentrated land ownership with racial overtones, and vast inequality. Such similarities may have worked to obscure some of the differences between the two places. For instance, Brazil’s movement was founded by peasants who articulated their struggle for land in terms of the right to land and labour. In South Africa, the right to land was identified more with a right to equal rights. While the two movements had similar goals – land redistribution – the historical foundations for unequal distribution and the philosophical justification for redistribution were profoundly different.
According to Mangaliso, members of the MST visited South Africa every year between 2003 and 2006. They came to meet with LPM members, share their experiences with land reform in the Brazilian context, and offer insights on how to strengthen landless mobilization. In 2005, two MST activists spent three months in South Africa ‘to teach the activists of the LPM how mobilizations were performed in Brazil’ (Rosa 2007, 4). According to Ricado, the MST’s primary objective while visiting South Africa is to ‘support the LPM and share experiences . . . Part of the traveling around is to assess and look at the state of the movement, and have debriefing sessions so that the [LPM] can improve’.
4	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	303
304	Brenda Baletti et al.
When funds are available, the LPM sends its members abroad to meet with the MST to learn ‘how they do things in Brazil’ (how to work with the soil, for example). By becoming members of Vía Campesina, Mangaliso felt that the LPM was connected to a global movement of ‘people who are on the side of agriculture’ and who could ‘speak with one voice’ against the injustices of global capitalism. Many South African scholars were equally optimistic: ‘it is in organ- izations like these [the Landless People’s Movement] that our nation has come alive and it is here that the real fight to defend and deepen our democracy is being fought’ (Desai and Pithouse 2003).
Ricado also recognized the benefits of forming ties with peasant movements across the globe, but he argued that when the LPM was founded, rural social movements like the MST were so strong that there was an attempt to ‘build primarily a Latin American-ist myth’ in a South African context. This, he argues, was a fundamental weakness within the movement: while the Brazilians built their movement around Brazilian history and heroes, the philosophy and practices of the LPM were not rooted in the history of South African peasant mobilization. Ricado also suggested that South African NGOs had been heavily influenced by what he called the ‘celebrities of the anti-globalization movement’, and, in fostering the LPM, tried to apply Western theories to a South African context.
In what follows we argue that the LPM attempted to mimic the MST’s success in mobilizing the rural poor by carrying out land occupations. The strategy was difficult to reproduce, however, both because of the particular political- economic context in South Africa and also because the LPM did not have the other two elements that were so crucial to the MST’s success: organic leadership with a grassroots connection and political or financial autonomy.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Land Occupations
Shortly after its formation, the LPM began to develop increasingly radical tactics in its attempts to challenge the South African government. According to Amanda Alexander, a visiting scholar at the Centre for Civil Society at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, LPM members first approached the government bureaucrati- cally, by requesting to meet with government officials, sending letters and marching to government offices. However, after continued frustration with governmental inaction, movement leaders began to threaten to occupy land ‘as one method of redistributing land through the self-activity of the landless, [identifying] unpro- ductive, unused or underused land and land belonging to abusive farmers as the focus for initial redistribution’ (Greenberg 2004b, 2). Actually, in the Landless People’s Charter of 2001, the LPM calls for the redistribution of ‘all unproduc- tive, unused, vacant or indebted private land’. If their demands are not met, the movement’s charter states that the LPM will ‘launch a campaign to occupy vacant land and state land, and return to our land’.
In South Africa, however, land occupations are politically explosive because of the disastrous economic and social results of land occupations in neighbouring Zimbabwe. Since 2000, the land reform policies of Zimbabwean president,
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
Robert Mugabe, have had a profound impact on the debates surrounding South Africa’s approach to land reform. In the run-up to the presidential elections of February 2000, war veterans of Zimbabwe’s struggle for independence, fed-up with the slow pace of land reform there, decided to take matters into their own hands by invading farms owned by White farmers. When White farmers appealed to the government, their requests were ignored. Mugabe, who was at risk of losing his presidency, condoned the invasions, eventually glorifying them as a blow to former colonial oppressors.
These actions led to the displacement of White commercial farmers and Black farm workers that resulted in a food crisis and famine in the region. In five years, Zimbabwe, once the region’s breadbasket, is now commonly referred to as the region’s basket case. The international community turned to South Africa, as the region’s economic and political leader, to speak out against Mugabe’s actions on land reform; however, because of South Africa’s political ‘obligations’ to Mugabe (stemming from assistance Mugabe’s government provided during the struggle against Apartheid in the 1980s), Mbeki did not strongly criticize Mugabe’s actions. South Africa’s unwillingness to criticize Mugabe early on has affected its economic situation.
Many members of the LPM vocally supported Mugabe’s land expropriation programme and tried to use the Zimbabwe situation to give weight to their own threats to occupy land (Greenberg 2004b, 30). The South African Communist Party supported the LPM, writing on their website that:
The LPM seeks a Land Summit that broadens our thinking as a society about land reform to include the lessons of other countries and continents. In particular, the LPM would like to place on the agenda the highly- successful land occupations model employed by the MST and other organisations in Brazil, as well as the Constitutional ‘social obligations clause’ that makes this possible in many Latin American countries. Essentially a ‘use it or lose it’ principle of land ownership and access, a social obligations clause could empower the landless to identify, occupy and use land that is currently unused or unproductive. The LPM also considers the land of abusive farmers, and the land of absentee owners to be socially unproduc- tive, and calls for this land to be made available for redistribution and use by the landless. (AIDC 2004)
Mangaliso seconded this statement when he argued that ‘we want our people who are staying on farms to start cultivating the land now. [We don’t care] that the farmers are saying “stop cultivating on our land”. Those who are not afraid of farmers must start cultivating the land’.5 The LPM tried to leverage the Zim- babwe situation by threatening to occupy land, but the strategy backfired on them. In response to the economic downturn associated with support for Zim- babwe, the South African government, worried that foreign investor confidence
5	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	305
306	Brenda Baletti et al.
would falter at any signs of Zimbabwe-style land grabs, came down hard on early attempts at occupation implementing a zero-tolerance policy and cutting off a major potential strategy of the LPM. In a press statement released in March 2004, the ANC declared: ‘South Africans will not tolerate hooliganism that is only aimed at misleading people and creating chaos and discord. Those with designs to deliberately flout the law and occupy land will be met with the full might of the law. . . . If the LPM has legitimate concerns regarding the land restitution process, these can and should be dealt with through the appropriate government departments’ (cited in Alexander 2004).
Of course, land occupations in South Africa are nothing new. At the height of the anti-Apartheid struggle, land occupations were staged throughout the country as part of a tactic to render it ungovernable. Most often these occupa- tions were symbolic and temporary (Mngxitama 2005, 17–18). Greenberg (2004a) describes land occupations in the Apartheid era as ‘weapons of the weak’. However, in this current conjuncture, according to Ricado, land occupation strategies that have been effective in Brazil are not politically viable in South Africa.
So now we want to adopt the [strategies of the] MST and you hear people threaten about land occupations. People are always making these silly state- ments in the media . . . But it’s not going to happen, you know, because there is no political process that could accompany [land occupations]. Even though the Constitution of Brazil allows for the ‘social function of land’ . . . it was a result of peasant resistance that they made the [1946] constitu- tional amendment.6
Ultimately, Ricado argued that there were different understandings of how one could (legitimately) claim land in South Africa and Brazil.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Local Leadership
As demonstrated in the MST section of the paper, movement leadership in Brazil is carefully cultivated at the grassroots level in the encampments. In one recent examination of leadership within the MST, Marcelo Rosa argues that for MST activists, the ‘conduct of life obtains meaning from the social experience of landlessness’ (2007, 7). In contrast, Rosa argues that leaders of the LPM con- duct their lives outside of the sphere of landlessness. They tend to be older activists who have had previous experiences working within political parties and/or NGOs. They often have outside commitments that include other occu- pations and family obligations (unlike the MST, the LPM cannot provide its leaders remuneration to sustain their families). Greenberg’s assessment of the LPM in 2004 found that, on paper, the LPM is structured ‘at the top’ with a national council, provincial councils and branch structures on paper. Most
6	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
council members have no secure access to land. At the grassroots level; however, the LPM is ‘mainly unstructured’ (Greenberg 2004b, 21). Greenberg speculates that the attempt on the part of activists and development workers to create ‘a tightly defined structure’ for the LPM as a social movement was premature (2004b, 21).
Ricado argued that the objectives and actions of the LPM ‘should be rooted in the everyday struggles of the people’, but this is complicated because the base of the movement is ‘from 40s upwards’ and the leadership of the movement is ageing. ‘This is a tough process requiring time and energy. Therefore the move- ment should focus on re-politicizing South African youth.’ Ricado deliberately compared the LPM and the MST: the MST, he noted, had ‘effectively resolved’ this issue of young, energetic leaders by grooming young people into the movement at a young age and giving them major responsibilities within the encampments. He argued that the LPM leadership had to span national, local and international networks, and incorporate people who could organize and arti- culate the aspirations of members. A key problem for the LPM, according to Ricado, is that leadership is seen as part of the middle-class intelligentsia because NGO staff members have been so influential in the direction the LPM has taken. According to Ricado, even the South African state criticized the landless move- ment for not having a leadership that was connected to the grassroots base: ‘the State essentially . . . says . . . “on whose behalf are you talking? Where are these people that you are representing?”’.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Political Autonomy
Perhaps the most important difference between the MST and the LPM is the ability for each movement to maintain its autonomy from both the state and organized elements of civil society. In Brazil, the MST adamantly cultivated its independence, using resources from the Brazilian government and the Catholic Church but never ceding its independence in exchange for funding. In South Africa, however, the LPM was heavily dependent on civil society organizations from the beginning. When the movement’s relationship with these organizations began to sour and funding became more difficult, the LPM had few resources of its own to draw upon.
In the early post-Apartheid era, civil society organizations like the NLC were key political organizations. The relationship between state and civil society – mediated through these organizations – went from one of ‘opposition and conflict’ to ‘partnership and cooperation’ (Greenberg 2004a; Alexander 2004; Greenstein 2003). The new government funded NGOs to implement develop- ments projects that were compatible with the government’s vision for a new South Africa. This partnership often made it difficult for NGOs to openly criticize or oppose the government (Alexander 2004): many organizations were compelled to professionalize their staff members in order to actively pursue those projects and activities prioritized by donor organizations and the govern- ment (Greenberg 2004a, 25).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	307
308	Brenda Baletti et al.
These processes of politicization and professionalization alienated civil society organizations from the constituencies they were responsible for serving and shifted priority away from grassroots organizations. A racialized division of labour also developed within the NGOs. For example, NLC fieldworkers were mostly Black activists from the local communities, while programme coordina- tors and researchers were mostly White. This racial segmentation exacerbated internal tensions (Mngxitama 2005).
Paradoxically, these processes of depoliticization, professionalization and alienation provided the political space for new social movements to develop (Barchiesi 2004, 4). President Mbeki’s first term in office ‘coincided with a resumption of social movement politics and activism which articulates a common rejection of the ANC’s conservative turn in macroeconomic policy’ (Barchiesi 2004, 23; Greenstein 2003). This upsurge of new social movements, however, built upon the legacy of strong civil society organizations. Some scholars argued that the social movements continued to be too closely linked to civil society institutions that held the purse strings and ultimately this encouraged ‘gradualism over radical courses of action’ (Alexander 2004, 49–50; Mngxitama 2004).
This changing relationship between the state, civil society and social move- ments lays the foundation from which to examine the national, regional and inter- national circumstances and support that led to the rise of the LPM. As previously mentioned, ‘the LPM was a creation of these NGOs from top to bottom, inspired by the MST, seeking to encourage a response from the families of Black rural labourers that were being expelled from rural areas’ (Sihlongonyane 2005, cited in Rosa 2007, 4). The LPM relied on the NLC in particular for organiza- tional and financial support. Andile Mngxitama of the NLC argues that implicit in these relationships was the idea that ‘without donor funding there can be no possibility of struggle’ (2005, 41). Likewise, middle-class intellectuals working with the movement through civil society connections shape ‘the image of the movement’ through their national and international resources and connections (Greenberg 2004b, 25).
Ricado argued that the NLC was a conflicted institutional host for the LPM. The NLC leadership disagreed over how best to approach the government’s political and economic stance after 1994. Greenberg (2004b) describes this conflict as a split between what he calls the antagonistic faction within the NLC, those who saw redistribution through mass occupations as the best method to gain access to land and the faction that supported critical engagement with the government. Andile Mngxitama (2005), who served with Ricado in the NLC, describes this debate as a struggle between the welfarist-reformist tendencies within the committee, and the mass action tendency, especially around the issue of land occupations and the attitude toward new government. These internal tensions within the NLC were transmitted to the LPM, and Ricado attributed the break-up of the NLC to this clash of ideas and ideologies and disputes over the nature of dissent and relationship with the government.
As factions within the LPM proposed increasingly radical strategies (such as land occupation) that opposed the government rather than operating within the
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
legal framework (established bureaucracy) for negotiation, NLC members and affiliates who preferred a less radical approach began to separate themselves from the movement. Because the LPM relied heavily on the NLC for funding and financial management, office space, and media and legal assistance (Alexander 2004), when the NLC dissolved the movement lost its primary source of organ- izational and financial support. In an interview, Ricado suggested that the NLC had been partly responsible in allowing financial dependency to develop: ‘But I think as NGOs, we have to really look at ourselves and how we create certain dependencies and orientations among people and communities, because this is the difficulty that [the LPM] are sitting with to organize and mobilize. . . . And so we have to look at the role of the NGOs in that.’ Ricado argued that the LPM needed to be able to define itself better as a movement by developing a ‘program of action, a philosophy, and an outlook . . . that will inspire rural peasants or the landless to stand up and start engaging in [open] struggles’ by speaking to the everyday realities of landless South Africans.
CONCLUSION: LATE MOBILIZATION IN A TRANSNATIONAL WORLD
In the end, what do we gain from this comparison of the MST and the LPM? They are clearly two very different movements, despite their common partici- pation in the transnational peasant network. And yet, it is only in hindsight that their differences stand out. When the LPM first formed in 2001, the movement bore many similarities to the MST: the LPM drew on a long history of agrarian repression, and the movement also articulated a popular anti-state sentiment that allowed its activists to win support from a broad range of people throughout the South African countryside and cities. Upon forming, the LPM became an immediate – and seemingly natural – partner with the MST. Brazilian activists sympathized with the long history of landlessness and dispossession in Brazil, and they supported the LPM’s work by sending activists to South Africa and hosting the LPM’s leaders in return. It seemed self-evident that the LPM would be an important part of the transnational peasant network along with the MST. Only five years later, however, the LPM had essentially disbanded and key scholars and activists no longer regarded it as a potential actor in the South African debate over land inequality and poverty. How can we understand this transition?
We do not attempt to provide a comprehensive explanation for the LPM’s failure in this article. Rather, we explore the relationship between the LPM and the MST in an attempt to better understand the dynamics of the transnational peasant networks – and how these dynamics may have shaped the LPM’s trajec- tory. A side-by-side comparison of the movements (Matrix 1) suggests that key differences between the two made it difficult for knowledge to be passed among them through network connections. This presents a potential problem for pro- gressive politics because the transfer of knowledge is considered to be one of the main benefits of such networks.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	309
310	Brenda Baletti et al. Matrix 1: A Comparison of the MST and the LPM
International participation and representation
Demand for redistribution
Relationship to NGOs
Basis of leadership
Sources of funding
The MST
Became internationalized over the course of its development
Based on the right to property for those who work it (labour theory of property); land for small farmers to work
NGOs provided institutional support but the MST always kept its distance from NGO authority and developed diverse sources of funding
Organic leadership from the grassroots; cultivated in occupations and through prior political activism
Settlements (internal funding), sale of MST products, NGOs – particularly international NGOs, state assistance
The LPM
International visibility from its inception
Based on demand for racial equality; land for residence, citizenship, housing and rights
Founded by NGO leaders and maintained close ties, especially for funding
Most visible leaders are NGO transplants, although there is grassroots participation
Primarily NGO funding, both national and international
In conclusion, there are three key arguments in this article. Our first and most basic argument is simply that transnational networks – no matter how progres- sive or how alternative – are not flat. They, like the world system more gener- ally, are riddled with inequalities and power differences. At the same time, actors within transnational networks or movements are located within quite distinct historical trajectories, no matter the universal calls for ‘peasant’, ‘landless’ or ‘worker’ solidarity. Our second argument is that as a result of historical specifi- cities, the study of transnational networks needs to be located at multiple scales, both the ‘globalized’ and the ‘localized’. At both scales, we argue that moral economies of production and social reproduction are important, as is the very nature of the places where transnational networks meet up and touch down. Third, and finally, we argue that this sort of critical transnational analysis requires a fairly specific method. The study of histories in the present at multiple scales requires both critical ethnography (Hart 2003, 2004) that is sensitive to the intimate nature of social relationships and what Philip McMichael (1990) calls ‘incorporated comparison’, where cases are compared both for their differences/ similarities and for their inter-connecting relationships. Such methods operation- alize Gerschenkron’s theory of late development, or in the case of peasant social movements, late mobilization. Understanding the precise mechanisms by which transnational networks come to favour ‘early mobilizers’ versus ‘late mobilizers’
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
requires more ethnographic attention to the networks themselves than we have done in our own research. Again, we would like to stress that the disadvantages of late mobilization are not pre-determined or automatic. The influence of the transnational networks on particular movements is always situated within the concrete histories and contingent workings of the world system.
REFERENCES
Adams, M. and J. Howell, 2001. ‘Redistributive Land Reform in Southern Africa’. Natural Resource Perspectives, 64.
AIDC (Alternative Information and Development Centre), 2004. ‘Landless People’s Movement (Gauteng): Discussion Document on Forging a United Front with the SACP’. http://www.aidc.org.za/?q=book/view/363, Accessed 8 January 2008.
Alexander, A.S., 2004. ‘ “Not the Democracy We Struggled For’: The Landless People’s Movement and the Politicization of Urban-Rural Division in South Africa’. Unpub- lished BA Honours Thesis. Boston, MA: Harvard University.
Barchiesi, F., 2004. ‘Classes, Multitudes and the Politics of Community Movements in Post-Apartheid South Africa’. Centre for Civil Society, Research Report 20: 1–41. Bernstein, H., 2004. ‘“Changing Before our Very Eyes”: Agrarian Questions and
the Politics of Land in Capitalism Today’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 4 (1/2): 190–
225. Borras, S. Jr, 2003. ‘Questioning Market-Led Agrarian Reform: Experiences from Brazil,
Colombia and South Africa’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3 (3): 367–94. Branford, S. and J. Rocha, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in
Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau. Cardoso, F.H., 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brazil: Presidencia da
Republica and Secretaria de Comunicacao Social. Cousins, B., 2006. ‘Agrarian Reform and the “Two Economies”: Transforming South
Africa’s Countryside’. In The Land Question in South Africa, eds L. Ntsebeza and R.
Hall, 220–45. Capetown: HSRC Press. De Janvry, A., 1981. The Agrarian Question and Reformism in Latin America. Baltimore,
MD: John Hopkins University Press. De Janvry, A., E. Sadoulet and W. Wolford, 2001. ‘The Changing Role of the State in
Latin American Land Reforms’. In Access to Land, Rural Poverty, and Public Action, eds A. de Janvry, G. Gordillo, J. Platteau and E. Sadoulet. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Souza Martins, J., 2003. ‘Representing the Peasantry? Struggles for/about Land in Brazil’. In Latin American Peasants, ed. T. Brass, 300–35. London: Frank Cass Publications.
Deere, C.D. and L.S. de Madeiros, 2007. ‘Agrarian Reform and Poverty Reduction: Lessons from Brazil’. In Land, Poverty and Livelihoods in an Era of Globalization: Perspectives from Developing and Transition Countries, eds A.H. Akram-Lodhi, S. Borras Jr and C. Kay, 80–119. London: Routledge.
Desai, A. and R. Pithouse, 2003. ‘ “But We Were Thousands”. Dispossession: Resistance, Repossession and Repression in Mandela Park’. Journal of Asian and African Studies, 39 (4): 239–69.
Desmarais, A.A., 2007. La Vía Campesina: Globalization and the Power of Peasants. London: Pluto Press.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	311
312	Brenda Baletti et al.
Edelman, M., 1998. ‘Transnational Peasant Politics in Central America’. Latin American Research Review, 33 (3): 49–86.
Edelman, M., 2005a. ‘When Networks Don’t Work: The Rise and Fall and Rise of Civil Society Initiatives in Central America’. In Social Movements: An Anthropological Reader, ed. J. Nash, 29–45. London: Blackwell.
Edelman, M., 2005b. ‘Bringing the Moral Economy Back in...to the Study of Twenty-first Century Transnational Peasant Movements’. American Anthropologist, 107 (3): 331–45.
Featherstone, D., 2003. ‘Spatialities of Transnational Resistance to Globalization: The Maps of Grievance of the Inter-Continental Caravan’. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 28: 404–21.
Ferguson, J., 1994. The Anti-Politics Machine: ‘Development’, Depoliticization, and Bureau- cratic Power in Lesotho. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Fernandes, B.M., 1999. MST, Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Fernandes, B.M., 2007. ‘The Occupation as a Form of Access to Land in Brazil: A Theoretical and Methodological Contribution’. In Reclaiming the Land: the Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds S. Moyo and P. Yeros, 317– 41. New York: Zed.
Forman, S., 1975. The Brazilian Peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press. Gerschenkron, A., 1952. ‘Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective’. In The Progress of Underdeveloped Areas, ed. B. Hoselitz, 3–29. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. Gohn, M.d.G., 1997. Os Sem Terra, ONGs e Cidadania. São Paulo: Cortez. Greenberg, S., 2004a. ‘The Landless People’s Movement and the Failure of Postapartheid
Land Reform’. Centre for Civil Society Research Report, 26: 1–40. Greenberg, S., 2004b. ‘Post-Apartheid Development, Landlessness and the Reproduction
of Exclusion in South Africa’. Centre for Civil Society Research Report, 17: 1–42. Greenstein, R., 2003. ‘Civil Society, Social Movements and Power in South Africa’.
RAU Sociology Seminar Series, Fourth term, 12 September: 1–40. Grindle, M., 1986. State and Countryside: Development Policy and Agrarian Politics in Latin
America. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Hall, A.L., 1990. ‘Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil’. In Agrarian Reform and
Grassroots Development: Ten Case Studies, eds R. Prosterman, M. Temple and T.
Hanstad, 205–35. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers. Hart, G., 1996. ‘The Agrarian Question and Industrial Dispersal in South Africa:
Agro-industrial Linkages through Asian Lenses’. In The Agrarian Question in South
Africa, ed. H. Bernstein. London: Frank Cass. Hart, G., 2002. Disabling Globalization: Places of Power in Post-Apartheid South Africa.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Hart, G., 2003. ‘Denaturalizing Dispossession: Critical Ethnography in the Age of Resur-
gent Imperialism’. Paper prepared for Creative Destruction: Area Knowledge & the New Geographies of Empire conference, Center for Place, Culture & Politics CUNY Graduate Center New York, 15–17 April 2004.
Hart, G., 2004. ‘Geography and Development: Critical Ethnographies’. Progress in Human Geography, 281 (1): 91–100.
Houtzager, P.P. and M. Kurtz, 2000. ‘The Institutional Roots of Popular Mobilization: State Transformation and Rural Politics in Brazil and Chile’. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 42 (2): 394–424.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
Keck, M. and K. Sikkink, 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Lahiff, E. and B. Cousins, 2001. ‘The Land Crisis in Zimbabwe Viewed from South of the Limpopo’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 1 (4): 652–66.
Mainwaring, S., 1995. ‘Brazil: Weak Parties, Feckless Democracy’. In Building Democratic Institutions: Party Systems in Latin America, eds S. Mainwaring and T. Scully, 354–98. Stanford, CT: Stanford University Press.
Martorell, J., 2007. ‘World Summit for Sustainable Development in Johannesburg: ANC Government Tries to Silence its Critics with Apartheid-Style Repression’. http://www.marxist.com/Africa/wssd_repression.html, Accessed 15 November 2007.
Maybury-Lewis, B., 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
McMichael, P., 1990. ‘Incorporating Comparison within a World-Historical Perspec- tive: An Alternative Comparative Method’. American Sociological Review, 55 (3): 385 – 97.
Mngxitama, A., 2005. ‘The National Land Committee, 1994–2004: A Critical Insider’s Perspective’. Centre for Civil Society, Research Report, 34 (2): 1–48.
Navarro, Z., 2002. ‘Mobilização sem emancipação – as lutas sociais dos sem-terra no Brasil’. In Produzir para Viver, ed. B. de Sousa Santos, 189–232. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Civilização Brasileira.
Novaes, R.C.R., 1998. ‘A Trajetória de uma bandeira de luta’. In Política e Reforma Agrária, eds R. Nonato and L.F. Carvalho Costa, 169–80. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Mauad. Ntsebeza, L., 2007. ‘Land-Reform Politics in South Africa’s Countryside’. Peace Review:
A Journal of Social Justice, 19 (1): 33–41. Ondetti, G., 2001. ‘When Repression Backfires: The Rise of the Brazilian Landless Move-
ment in the Mid-1990s’. Paper presented at Latin American Studies Association meet-
ings, Washington DC, 6–8 September. Pereira, A.W., 1997. The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast
Brazil, 1961–1988. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. Pereira, A.W., 2003. ‘Brazil’s Agrarian Reform: Democratic Innovation or Oligarchic
Exclusion Redux?’. Latin American Politics and Society, 45 (2): 41–65. Petras, J., 1997. ‘Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left’. New Left Review, 223: 17–
47. Reis, E.P., 1990. ‘Brazil: 100 Years of the Agrarian Question’. International Social Science
Journal, 50 (157): 419–32. Rosa, M., 2007. ‘Landless Experiences: Youth and Social Movements in Brazil and South
Africa’. Unpublished Manuscript. Brazil: Federal University of Fluminese. Routledge, P., 2003. ‘Convergence Space: Process Geographies of Grassroots Globalisa-
tion Networks’. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 28 (3): 333–49. Routledge, P., A. Cumbers and C. Nativel, 2007. ‘Grassrooting Network Imaginaries: Relationality, Power, and Mutual Solidarity in Global Justice Networks’. Environment
and Planning A, 39 (11): 2575–92. Santos, R. and L.F.C. Costa, 1998. ‘Camponeses e Política no Pré-64’. In Política e
Reforma Agrária, eds L.F.C. Costa and R. Santos, 13–41. Rio de Janeiro: Mauad. Schwartz, S., 1985. Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society: Bahia, 1550–
1835. New York: Cambridge University Press. Seligmann, R., 1998. PROCERA: Programa Especial de Credito Para Reforma Agrária.
Brasilia, DF: Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	313
314	Brenda Baletti et al.
Sihlongonyane, M.F., 2005. ‘Land Occupations in South Africa’. In Reclaiming the Land: the Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, eds S. Moyo and P. Yeros, 142–64. London: Zed Books.
Smith, N., 1993. ‘Homeless/Global: Scaling Places’. In Mapping the Futures. Local Cul- tures, Global Change, eds J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson and L. Tickner, 87–119. London: Routledge.
Stedile, J.P., 2002. ‘Landless Battalions: The Sem Terra Movement of Brazil’. New Left Review, 15: 77–104.
Thwala, W.D., 2006. ‘Land and Agrarian Reform in South Africa’. In Promised Land: Competing Visions of Agrarian Reform, eds P. Rosset, R. Patel and M. Courville, 57–72. Oakland, CA: Food First.
Tilly, C., 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Viotti Da Costa, E., 2000. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press. Wolford, W., 2006. ‘The Difference Ethnography Can Make: Understanding Social
Mobilization and Development in the Brazilian Northeast’. Qualitative Sociology,
29 (3): 335–52. Wright, A. and W. Wolford, 2003. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the
Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Publications.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.

2008
Health
Rev Saúde Pública
Health of families from the Landless Workers’ Movement and temporary rural workers, Brazil, 2005
Fernando Ferreira Carneiro

I,II Anamaria Testa TambelliniIII José Ailton da SilvaIV João Paulo Amaral HaddadIV André Campos BúrigoV Waltency Roque de SáVI Francisco Cecílio VianaVI Valéria Andrade BertoliniVI
I	Coordenação Geral de Vigilância Ambiental em Saúde. Secretaria de Vigilância em Saúde. Ministério da Saúde. Brasília, DF, Brasil
II	Departamento de Saúde Coletiva. Universidade de Brasília. Brasília, DF, Brasil
III	Instituto de Estudos em Saúde Coletiva. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
IV	Escola de Veterinária. Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais. Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil
V	Mestrado Profissionalizante em Educação Profissional em Saúde. Escola Politécnica de Saúde Joaquim Venâncio. Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
VI	Centro Mineiro de Estudos Epidemiológicos e Ambientais. Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil
Correspondence:
Fernando Ferreira Carneiro R. Angelim, Lote 1 Condomínio Verde 70680-608 Brasília, DF, Brasil E-mail: fernandocarneiro.brasilia@gmail.com
Received: 5/30/2007 Revised: 2/3/2008 Approved: 3/18/2008
Health of families from the Landless Workers’ Movement and temporary rural workers, Brazil, 2005
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE: To assess the health conditions of families from the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement and temporary rural workers.
METHODS: The research involved a comparative study of three populations: a settlement and a camp linked to the Rural Workers’ Movement, and the families of temporary rural workers in a city of Southeast Brazil, in 2005. Information relating to sociodemographic characteristics and families were collected by means of questionnaires that were put to 202 families. In addition, structured observation and group discussions were used. A discriminative factor analysis was carried out to confirm differences between the communities.
RESULTS: The three communities scored an average of 89%, which implies that they are distinct groups and supports the hypothesis that there are real differences between them when it come to health and lifestyle conditions. There was a high rate of food insecurity (39.5%) among temporary rural workers, almost double that of families who were camping and four times greater than those living on settlements. Temporary rural workers’ salaries were low and fluctuate, meaning that they were more exposed to pesticides than the families living on settlements or in camps. A striking characteristic of families living on the settlement was that they all practiced animal rearing, unlike the families of temporary rural workers, practically none of whom were able to do so in the city. The perceptions of most families who were living on settlements or in camps were that the Brazilian Health System had not been meeting their health needs, mainly due to access difficulties. For this group, their needs are met only after making complaints to and putting pressure on governors.
CONCLUSIONS: The view held by families from the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement was that the fact that they belonged to the Movement and were better organized meant their health was better than that of temporary rural workers. The conservative modernization of rural Brazil has led to worse conditions for temporary rural workers, while Agrarian Reform has allowed for a better quality of life and improved health conditions among families, when compared in the areas under study.
DESCRIPTORS: Rural Workers. Rural Settlements. Social Conditions. Family Health. Rural Health. Food Security. Rural Population Health. Landless Worker Movment.
INTRODUCTION
Current Brazilian research is not yet able to provide a full explanation of the complex relationship between the health conditions of rural people and their determinants (Figueiredo7 et al 1987, Veiga & Burlandy19 2001).
Studies concerned with the health conditions of this population generally as- sociate nutritional status with land ownership, work and health procedures
2
Health of families from landless rural workers...	Carneiro FF et al
(including the use of pesticides), reported morbidity and mortality and relationships with health services. The results of these studies point to increased nutri- tional deficits as land ownership diminishes, and give evidence of a more precarious health status of the rural population when compared with urban populations. There remain significant shortcomings in terms of access to and the quality of rural health services, and in terms of environmental sanitation. The process of “conservative modernization” of Brazilian agriculture has made the situation worse, since it has led to an increase in the socio-environmental vulnerabilities of this population (Brentlinger et al3 1999, Silva16 1999, Kassouf10 2005).
The use of the term “health conditions” in this current study refers to a broader definition, as applied by Law 8080 which governs the Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS – Brazilian Health System): “the defining and condi- tioning factors of health include food, housing, basic sanitation, the environment, work, income, education, transport, leisure and access to essential goods and services; the levels of health of the population are an expression of the social and economic organization of the country”.
On this basis, the objective of the present study was to compare the health conditions of a permanent settlement, a temporary encampment, both from the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST – Landless Rural Workers’ Movement), and a commu- nity of temporary rural workers.
METHODS
The study was carried out in the municipality of Unaí in the state of Minas Gerais. Unaí is located in the North- eastern meso-region of the state and in the micro-region, known as the Integrated Region of the Federal District and surroundings, located 130km from the capital of Brazil, Brasilia. The 2000 demographic census reported there to be 55,525 inhabitants in the urban area of the municipality and 14,508 in the rural area.
Further to a pilot and adjustments to the research tools, questionnaires were carried out by the field team in each family unit in the place of residence between 15 and 28 April, 2005. The key informants were the female household member (or person who looked after the family) and male (for information relating to production). The study involved all families (26 households) from the settlement and 95 families from the encampment. Fifty families from the encampment who were not available during the research period were not included, nor were 10 squatter families who did not live on the encampment.
In addition to this research tool, additional information was gathered through structure observation, discussions with the MST health collectives and community repre- sentatives. The health collectives are organized groups of people responsible for looking after community health matters. In addition to local collectives (found on encampments and settlements), the MST includes state- and national-level collectives that have a wider coverage and are responsible for the promotion and monitoring of public policies and cooperation with other organizations and movements. At the time of study, the organization of these collectives was still at the initial stages on both the settlement and encampment.
Issues under study included: how subjects conceived the health-illness processes; social, demographic and family characteristics; life, work and production conditions; the presence of farm animals, pets and synanthropic animals; and the identification of the implementation of health policies in the different groups. The questions relating to food security were based on the works of Vasconcelos18 (2000) and Unicamp.a The definition of food security was taken from Law no 11.346 of 15 September 2006 which created the National System for Food and Nutri- tional Security, namely: “food and nutritional security consists of the realization of the rights of all to regular and permanent access to a sufficient amount of quality food, without jeopardizing access to other essential needs, based on health promoting food practices that respect cultural diversity and that are environmentally, culturally, economically and socially sustainable”.
Selection of the temporary rural workers was based on the registry of the city’s Primary Healthcare Informa- tion System which identified the neighborhood with the highest concentration of this population. A total of 98 families were registered in the local Family Health Pro- gram, of whom 81 were asked the questionnaire. Three families refused to take part and 14 were not at home.
The conceptual tools were used in order to allow for dialectic reflection of an object as defined by Breilh2 (2006) “that moves between the characteristics of be- ing, of time that is simple and complex, determined and contingent and uncertain, as well as being social and biological and general, particular and singular”. For Breilh,2 the epidemiological rationale should take into account the structural determinants, generative processes, and finally the specific processes. On this basis, he believes that epidemiology should not just define its “object” of transformation of its scientific field, but also the “subject” of this transformation. Thus the epidemiological rationale could contribute towards people’s emancipation in light of the ways of life and situations that they face.
a Corrêa AMS, Escamilla RP, Maranha LK, Sampaio MFA, Yuyama L, Alencar FL, et al. [In] Segurança alimentar no Brasil: validação de metodologia para acompanhamento e avaliação. Campinas: Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da UNICAMP; 2003. [technical report]. [cited 2006 Dec 10]. Available from: http://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/validacao_brasil1.pdf
Rev Saúde Pública 2008;42(4)
3
The data obtained from the questionnaires were put together and analyzed in EpiInfo (2001), version 6.0. For the purpose of comparing differences between the communities, frequency tables were drawn up and the chi-squared, Fisher, ANOVA and T tests were used depending on the information. Subsequently, those vari- ables that showed the most acute differences between the groups were selected for a discriminant factor analy- sis using the Minitab program13 (2006), version 14.
Based on the analysis of the variables and using the theoretical grounding of the study, those variables that were most representative and that best characterized (p<0.05 in the chi-square or Fisher’s Test) the differ- ences between the communities were selected (Table 1). This was followed by a discriminant factor analysis which aimed to certify there were differences between the three communities under study. This analysis meant it was possible to check which of the variables most characterized or differentiated these groups. Values above 70% were considered satisfactory.
Prior to the work in the three areas, the research team met with representatives from the community and from the local health sector to plan the activities. Education initiatives were carried out in schools and with organized groups. After the work, meetings were held to discuss the results with the families involved in the study.
The project was approved by the Research Ethics Com- mittee of the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.
RESULTS
The sociodemographic and familial characteristics of the three communities under study were similar (p>0.05), in relation to: age and sex, schooling and family composition (mostly nuclear – head, spouse and children). These similarities helped the comparison between these groups.
There were differences between the three communities in terms of food security, as is shown in Table 2. The cir- cumstances in which the temporary rural workers found themselves were more critical, compared with those of families in the MST encampment and settlement.
With regard to government support, either in the form of a grant or other benefit, only 20.1% of those from the encampment received the basic social security pack- age (cesta basica), with school grants (bolsa escola) being the most common form of welfare benefit on the settlement (14.8%), and the family welfare grant (bolsa família) most common in the temporary rural workers’ neighborhood (4.8%). The offer of work for the families of temporary rural workers was generally limited to just six months of the year, which meant that these families had a variable and low income.
The majority of temporary rural workers (90%) wanted to change their occupations. The alternatives to which
they aspired included “any other” (29.2%), “machine operator” (13.9%), “farm laborer” (8.3%) and other options that were considered to be “more moderate”. When asked about the worst thing in their jobs, answers included the time that they had to wake up (44.5%), travel (19.5%), food, damage to their health, tiredness and “exploitation” (14.3%). These conditions were sometimes extreme. Some reports referred to daily journey times to work of up to four hours, meaning that many people left work in the early hours of the morning. Some workers traveled more than 130km to the farms, with an average journey time of three hours. This led to problems in keeping food fresh and to complaints about tiredness and damage to one’s health.
More than half of the families living on the settle- ment (57.7%) lived from subsistence farming on their plots, growing manioc (96.2%), rice (92.3%), sugar cane (84.6%), maize (65.4%), beans (53.8%), fruits (73.1%), vegetables (69.2%) and peanuts (30.8%), which distinguished them from the families on the encampment and the temporary rural workers. All farming was basically aimed at sustaining the fam- ily, with almost no exceptions. There were very few cooperative activities on the settlements, with some examples of cooperative action between neighbors and relatives (19.2%). Some families (42.3%) also worked on farms to complement their incomes.
Even with all the difficulties faced on the encampment, 22.1% of families managed to guarantee their subsis- tence from the land. The favored crops for growing were related to subsistence such as maize (64.2%), manioc and vegetables (62.1%), followed by rice (32.6%), fruits (28.4%), peanuts (22.1%) and sugar cane (14.7%). As with the settlement, 21.1% of families on the en- campment carried out cooperative activities with their neighbors. There were no surpluses from their farming and a significant number of families also had to work as temporary rural workers (36.1%), or find temporary work in the city (9%) to earn a wage.
Among the roles expected of the public health system SUS, the families from the settlement and the encamp- ment believed that it was important to guarantee access to health services and the necessary transport. The im- portance of access was most commonly mentioned by the families on the encampment (67.7%), while in the temporary rural workers’ neighborhood, where there is a local health center, access was not mentioned. For most MST families (57.7% of those from the settle- ment), the only way to ensure that the SUS met their needs was through complaints and putting pressure on the government.
A large proportion of the families from the settlement and the encampment considered themselves to form part of a communitarian organization (65.4% and 61.1% respectively). For the families of temporary rural work- ers, the proportion was much less (25%).
4	Health of families from landless rural workers...	Carneiro FF et al Table 1. Variables used for the discriminant factor analysis of the three communities under study. Unaí, Southeastern Brazil,
2005.
Thematic group
Sociodemographic and family characteristics Living conditions
Food security Sanitation Credit Community organization
Prouduction and working conditions Exposure to pesticides Animal rearing
Health services
Activities that mean that the SUS health system meets the health needs of the family or community
Health conditions Factors that are missing in guaranteeing good health
SUS: Brazilian Health System
Under the discriminant factor analysis, the three commu- nities scored a general percentage of 89% correct clas- sification, with only 21 families not having the typical characteristics of their own group out of a total of 189 families in the study. Of the 202 families interviewed, 13 were not included in the study as they did not provide all the information required. The families of the temporary rural workers scored the highest index of matching the classification with 96%, followed by 86% on the en- campment and 76% for the settlement (Table 3).
The variables that best characterized the families from the settlement were access to credit, the rearing of farm animals, the availability of food over the previous three months, rural origins, the need for improved access to health services and the absence of piped water in their homes. At the other extreme, were the families of the temporary rural workers who were differentiated by the use of pesticides at work, the non-rearing of farm animals, the presence of piped water and the low level of participation in community organizations. The fami- lies from the encampment fell between the two, with most having urban origins, a high level of community participation and organization, low use of pesticides and access to credit (Table 4).
DISCUSSION
The drawing of conclusions relating to the relation- ship between socio-economic development, health and food security is a difficult and complex issue, since there are a multitude of determinants related to nutritional deficiencies. The principal problems are related to the difficulty in controlling all the variables that are relevant to the issue and in choosing the most
Variable
Urban or rural origin
The food supply ended in the last three months Presence of piped water inside the home Access to credit services (farming and others) Participation in an organization or community body
Use of pesticides at work Do not rear farm animals
Demand improvements, put pressure on the government and form part of an organization
Access and improvements in health services
appropriate epidemiological design for the drawing up of conclusions.
The better conditions relating to food security and animal rearing, coupled with the higher levels of com- munity organization and capacities for complaints were positive attributes of the MST population. This shows the potential for this group to contribute towards a broad and participatory process of agrarian reform. However, the lack of homes with piped water and the difficulties of access to health services point to disad- vantages associated with public health and sanitation policy limitations that have not yet been resolved, as noted by several authors (Schmidt et al15 1998, Leite et al8 2004, UnBa 2001).
The findings here relating to greater food insecurity amongst the temporary rural workers compared with those from the encampment and settlement are similar to those of other researchers (Victora20,21 1983 e 1986, Lira et al9 1985, Romani & Amigo14 1986, Ferreira et al6 1997, Brentlinger et al3 1999, Veiga & Burlandy19 2001, Castro et al5 2004). These studies show that ownership of the means of production, in this case understood to mean land ownership, is associated to a better nutritional status among children. Leite et al8 (2004) also found that access to land and to the possibil- ity of growing crops for personal consumption appeared to lead to an improvement in the nutritional status of people who previously lived from temporary work or from other forms of instable employment. The analysis of income generation, taking into account both income in the form of personal consumption and monetary income showed that, even with low levels, families guaranteed their food security. In addition, Leite et al8
a Universidade de Brasília. Saúde nos Assentamentos e Acampamentos da Reforma Agrária. Brasília: UnB/MST; 2001.
Rev Saúde Pública 2008;42(4)
5
Table 2. Availability of food in the last three months among families. Unaí, Southeastern Brazil, 2005.
Table 3. Classification of the discriminant analysis by community of residence and selected variables. Unaí, Southeastern Brazil, 2005.
Community
Yes	No
Don’t Know
Total
Classification by Discriminant Analysis
Settlement Encampment
Temporary rural workers’ neighborhood
Total Correct classification
Proportion
Settle-	Encamp- ment	ment
19	8 6	76
0	4
25	88 19	76
0.76	0.86
Temporary rural workers’ neighborhood
0 3
73
76 73
0.96
Lack of food in the last three months
N%N%N%
Settlement Encampment 21 22.1 73 76.8 1 1.1 95
Temporary rural workers’ neighborhood
Total
32*	39.5
49*	60.5	-	81
3 11.5 23 88.5 -	26
56 27.7 145 71.8 1 0.5 202
* p <0.05 taking the settlement as the basis for comparison
(2004) found there to be an average improvement of 90% in families’ living conditions after they had settled on the main settlement “strips” of Brazil.
The findings relating to food insecurity among tempo- rary rural workers were also reported by Silva16 (1999) in up-country São Paulo. Moreira & Watanabe’s study12 (2006) of the weekly dietary intake of the families of temporary rural workers in the Canavieira Zone in Paraíba also found diets to be lacking in proteins, with food intake weighted towards cereals and their deriva- tives. Most of these families spent more than half of their family income on food.
Some of the results can help to explain the higher levels of food insecurity among temporary rural workers. An important factor is the shortage of work over the 12 months of the year. Periods without work mean that the temporary rural workers incur debts of various kinds, ranging from public payments for water and electricity, to stores that sell food and other daily staple supplies. The bolsa família welfare payments, which could serve as a temporary solution to this problem, do not provide sufficient coverage to this population. These social programs are based on food distribution or cash transfers that are dependent on certain conditions relating to the reinforcement of basic social rights in the areas of health (children’s vaccine certificates must be up-to-date) and education (children must attend school) that benefit poor families. Information from the social department of Unaí’s Municipal Mayor’s Office suggest that the low levels of coverage of the bolsa família grant among temporary rural workers are related to the fact that the municipal Human development Index is higher than other regions such as the Vale do Jequitinhonha, which means that federal government transfers tends to prioritize these other areas. Another factor is that these benefits are passed on inconsistently: the fact that many of the temporary rural workers are considered part of the formal labor market since their employment books
Table 4. Linear discriminant function by community of residence and selected variables for the three communities under study. Unaí, Southeastern Brazil, 2005.*
a FAO, UNDP. ‘Principais indicadores sócio-econômicos dos assentamentos de reforma agrária’. Brasília: Ministério da Agricultura Abastecimento e da Reforma Agrária; 1992. [Projeto BRA 87/022].
Variable
En- Settle- camp-
Temporary rural workers’ neighborhood
-9.88 2.49
5.29
1.21 7.46
3.54
-0.47
0.98 6.04
1.16
Constant -6.95
Rural or urgan origin
Presence of piped water in the home
Access to credit
Use of pesticides
The food supply ended in the last three months
Demand improvements in the SUS system, form part of an organization
Participate in an organization
Do not breed farm animals
Access and improvements in health services
0.12
0.93
10.22 1.12
1.32 2.88
2.89 0.99
2.56
* Categoriziation of variables 1= absence SUS: Brazilian Health System
presence of factor; 0=
ment
ment
-3.92 3.86
1.69
1.06 -0.06
1.40 1.08
3.02 2.20
1.98
are signed, and this means they are not considered as possible beneficiaries; but when they are unemployed and enter the pool of those waiting to receive benefits, they are at the bottom of the pile.
The marked involvement with animal rearing among families from the settlement was also observed in other studies of settlements (Leite et al8 2004). Although this activity generally related to personal consumption, this kind of farming leads to increased family income and improvements in food security.a
6
Health of families from landless rural workers...	Carneiro FF et al
The situation of temporary rural workers was better only in terms of access to sanitation and health services, due to the greater number of facilities supplying these kinds of services in urban areas when compared with rural areas. However, the high levels of exposure to pesticides, high rates of food insecurity and low levels of political organization also made them different to the MST population involved in the study. These negative attributes are direct consequences of large-scale pro- duction models based on monoculture, that have been analyzed in other studies (Alessi & Navarro1 1997, Silva16 1999, Castro4 2003, Miranda11 et al 2007, Soares & Porto17 2007).
Although families from the MST settlement and en- campment have lower levels of access to most public health services and policies, their political organization is much more advanced than that of the temporary rural workers. Their robust political actions aimed at claiming their rights has led to a reduction in certain
differences such as access to education and government credits, as has also been noted in other studies.a
These findings contribute towards a reflection about Brazil’s overall development aims. “Agro-business” is considered to be a major force in the Brazilian economy and is responsible for 40% of all exports, but its impact on health (workers, families and communities) and eco-systems has not been assessed. At the same time, the results that Agrarian Reform has had on living conditions and the health status of beneficiaries may justify the need for a wide-ranging Agrarian Reform Program in Brazil.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to the families of the communities involved in the study and to the team from the Health Post in Bairro Mamoeiro for facilitating access to the families and their records.
a Bittencourt GA, Castilhos DSB, Bianchini V, Silva HBC. Principais fatores que afetam o desenvolvimento dos assentamentos de reforma agrária no Brasil. Brasília: Organização das Nações Unidas para a Agricultura e Alimentação / Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária; 1999. (Projeto de Cooperação Técnica INCRA/FAO).
Rev Saúde Pública 2008;42(4)	7 REFERENCES
1.	Alessi NP, Navarro VL. Saúde e trabalho rural: o caso dos trabalhadores da cultura canavieira na região de Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brasil. Cad Saude Publica. 1997;13(Sup 2):S111-21. doi:10.1590/S0102- 311X1997000600010
2.	Breilh J. Epidemiologia Crítica: ciência emancipadora e interculturalidade. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz; 2006.
3.	Brentlinger PE, Hernán MA, Hernández-Diaz S, Azaroff LS, McCall M. Childhood malnutrition and postwar reconstruction in rural El Salvador-a community-based survey. JAMA. 1999;281(2):184-90.
4.	Castro J. A geografia da fome – o dilema brasileiro: pão ou aço. 3.ed. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira; 2003.
5.	Castro TG, Campos FM, Priore SE. Saúde e nutrição de crianças de 0 a 60 meses de um assentamento de reforma agrária, Vale do Rio Doce, MG, Brasil. Rev Nutr. 2004;17(2):167-76. doi:10.1590/S1415- 52732004000200003
6.	Ferreira HS, Albuquerque MFM, Ataíde TR, Morais MGC, Mendes MCR, Siqueira TCA. Estado nutricional de crianças menores de dez anos residentes em invasão do “movimento dos sem-terra”, Porto Calvo, Alagoas. Cad Saude Publica. 1997;13(1):137-9. doi:10.1590/S0102-311X1997000100024
7.	Figueiredo VM, Freitas E, Pinto MGO, Barros ME. Questão Agrária e Saúde no Brasil contemporâneo. Rev Bras Saude Ocup. 1987;15(59):7-17.
8.	Leite S, Heredia B, Medeiros L, Palmeira M, Cintrão R. Impacto dos Assentamentos: um estudo sobre o meio rural brasileiro. São Paulo: Editora UNESP; 2004.
9.	Lira PIC, Amigo H, Romani SAM, Torres MAA. Estado nutricional de crianças menores de seis anos, segundo posse da terra, em áreas rurais do Estado de Pernambuco, Nordeste do Brasil. Arch Latinoam Nutr. 1985;35(2):246-57.
10. Kassouf AL. Acesso aos serviços de saúde nas áreas urbana e rural do Brasil. Rev Econ Sociol Rural. 2005;43(1):29-44. Disponível em http://www.scielo.br/
scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0103-200320050 00100002&lng=en&nrm=iso>. [Acesso em 12/out/06] doi:10.1590/S0103-20032005000100002
11. Miranda AC, Moreira JC, Carvalho R, Peres F. Neoliberalismo, uso de agrotóxicos e a crise da soberania alimentar no Brasil. Cienc Saude Coletiva. 2007;12(1):7-14. doi:10.1590/S1413- 81232007000100002
12. Moreira E, Watanabe T, organizadores. Ambiente, Trabalho e Saúde. João Pessoa: Editora Universitária UFPB; 2006.
13. Minitab Statistical Software. Version 14. Pensilvânia: Minitab Inc; 2006.
14. Romani SAM, Amigo H. Perfil alimentar e posse da terra na área rural do Estado de Pernambuco, nordeste do Brasil. Rev Saude Publica. 1986;20(5):369-76. doi:10.1590/S0034-89101986000500006
15. Schmidt BV, Marinho DNC, Couto Rosa SL, organizadores. Os assentamentos da Reforma Agrária no Brasil. Brasília: Editora Universidade de Brasília; 1998.
16. Silva MAM. Errantes do fim do século. São Paulo: Fundação Editora da UNESP, 1999.
17. Soares WL, Porto MF. Atividade agrícola e externalidade ambiental: uma análise a partir do uso de agrotóxicos no cerrado brasileiro. Cienc Saude Coletiva. 2007;12(1):131-43. doi:10.1590/S1413- 81232007000100016
18. Vasconcelos FAG. Avaliação Nutricional de Coletividades. 3.ed. Florianópolis: Ed UFSC; 2000.
19. Veiga GV, Burlandy L. Indicadores sócio-econômicos, demográficos e estado nutricional de crianças e adolescentes residentes em um assentamento rural do Rio de Janeiro. Cad Saude Publica. 2001;17(6):1465- 72. doi:10.1590/S0102-311X2001000600030
20. Victora CG. Desnutrição e a propriedade da terra no campo. Cienc Hoje. 1983;1(5):80.
21. Victora CG, Vaughan JP, Kirkwood B, Martines JC, Barcelos LB. Child malnutrition and land ownership in southern Brazil. Ecol Food Nutr. 1986;18:265-75.
Article based on the doctorate thesis by FF Carneiro, presented to the Escola de Veterinária of the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais in 2007.

2008
Law
Journal of Rural Studies
‘My land, your social transformation’: Conflicts within the landless people movement (MST), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Rute Caldeira

The School of Law, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
The Brazilian Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) is one of the best-known and most prominent rural social movements. The unequal distribution of land in Brazil, and the neglect of this problem by successive Brazilian governments contributed greatly to the organisation of rural movements striving for the implementation of land reform in the country. The struggle for land therefore frames the MST collective action and legitimates its raison d’eˆ tre as a social movement. The MST framing process, carried out mainly by the movement leaders and organisers, intends to unify the social movement by articulating private beliefs, interpretations and preferences into shared values and meanings. However, this process of framing does not take place without competition or/and conflict: leaders are many times forced to compete with other institutions, with the media, or even with inherited cultural understandings which provide alternative frames. This paper focuses particularly on the conflicting process of framing internal to the MST. More specifically, the present paper looks at how the MST leaders/organisers frame, and interpret, community and land differently from the MST settlers/ followers whose lived experiences and inherited cultural understandings naturally informed their perceptions both on community and land.
r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords: Land reform; Framing; Social movement; Brazil
1. Introduction
The Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) is one of the most prominent rural or agrarian reform movements in the world. Over two decades, it has carried out hundreds of land occupations across Brazil and has succeeded in forcing the redistribution of approxi- mately 22,000ha of land to 218,000 families.1 This is particularly remarkable in an era in which agrarian reform is frequently seen as an issue which is passe ́ . Thus, the MST has attracted much attention in both political and academic circles.
The MST, as a national mass movement organisation, was formed in 1984 in the small town of Cascavel, Parana ́ state, Brazil. Nevertheless, this movement is just one in the relatively long line of ‘peasant’ struggles in Brazil. The most important and the most emblematic of these struggles
E-mail address: rute.caldeira@manchester.ac.uk 1Information based on MST’s statistics. See also www.mmst.org.br
(in Portuguese).
0743-0167/$ - see front matter r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2007.12.001
are: Zumbi dos Palmares in the 17th Century2; Canudos rebellion in the 19th Century3; cangac-o in the early 20th Century4 and Ligas Camponesas in the mid-20th Century.5
2Zumbi dos Palmares was the name of a quilombo. A quilombo is an organised free community of slaves usually set up in donated lands. The first reference to the existence of quilombos dates from 1597 (Fernandes, 2000). However, quilombos were often attacked by governmental forces or popular militias led by powerful landowners and Zumbi dos Palmares was no exception. For almost a century, the community in Zumbi dos Palmares resisted the constant attacks of white settlers who, in the end of the 17th Century murdered Ganga Zumba (the leader) and destroyed the quilombo.
3The Canudos rebellion took place in Bahia state. The rebels, all ex- slaves and landless people, were led by the Antoˆ nio Conselheiro. In 1830, they settled in Fazenda Canudos where they survived from cooperative agricultural work. In 1897, this community was massacred by the Federal army.
4In Portuguese Brazilian, cangac-o is slang for social banditry. These were groups of expelled agricultural workers who often attacked large properties, threatening the power and influence of the landlords. This was more common in the Northeast regions.
5The Liga Camponesa (or Peasant Leagues) was first formed by renters inGalile ́iaFarm,Pernambucostatewhowereresistingexpropriation. Soon after this, other leagues were formed. Their final goal was radical
www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud
The Brazilian agrarian sector, based on the capitalist model of production and dependent on large property, always tended to push people out of land, forcing them to constant physical displacement. These dispossessed people, named ‘landless’, were at the bottom of the social and economic hierarchy. In the 1960s and 1970s, with regard to political and social mobilisation, the Communist Party and the Roman Catholic Church competed for the leadership of these groups of landless people. Thus, while some landless people found support in the trade unions and peasant associations, others found comfort, organisation and assistance in Roman Catholic organisations such as the Christian Based Communities (CEBs) and the Pastoral Commission for Land (CPT). These Catholic organisations were greatly inspired and influenced by the liberation theology, a theological stream of the Catholic Church that throughout the 1960s and 1970s remained extremely popular amongst the Latin American clergy.
The peak of social tension in the Brazilian countryside was in the 1960s and 1970s, during the process of agricultural modernisation, when machinery was replacing labour and cash crops were being widely introduced. In several Brazilian states,6 especially in the south, peasant insurgent groups, supported by the Catholic Church and other religious organisations, began to come together to form movements inspired by Church organised groupings such as MASTER (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra) in Rio Grande do Sul, formed in the 1950s.7 By 1983, in just the state of Parana ́ these included the MASTES (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra do Sudoeste do Parana ́); MASTEN (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem- Terra do Parana ́); MASTRECO (Movimento dos Agricul- tores Sem-Terra do Centro-Oeste do Parana ́) and the MASTEL (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem-Terra do Litoral do Parana ́).
The leaders of these and other organised rural/peasant movements held their first national meeting in 1982. This meeting was promoted by the CPT. Back then, due to CPT’s efforts of harmonisation of the several existing movements, those present at this meeting did not feel the need to create a national social movement. However, 2 years later in a second national meeting held in Cascavel city, Parana ́ state, the rural leaders agreed that resistance to
(footnote continued) land reform. During the military government that seized power in 1964 the Peasant Leagues, along with many other peasant movements, were co- opted.
6Brazil has 26 states and one Federal District: Acre, Alagoas, Amapa ́ , Amazonas,	Bahia,	Ceara,	Distrito	Federal,	Espı ́ rito	Santo,	Goia ́ s, Maranha ̃ o, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraı ́ba, Parana ́, Pernambuco, Piauı ́, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondoˆ nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sa ̃ o Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins.
7The strong implementation of MASTER at some point eclipsed the predominance of the ULTAB-organised groups in Rio Grande do Sul. The ULTAB (Unia ̃o dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agrı ́colas) was controlled by the Brazilian Communist Party.
co-option would be more efficient if organised nationally. With this purpose, the MST was created.
Despite the federal government’s constant attempts at co-option, the MST survived. The social movement’s power of mobilisation was recognised, nationally and internationally, especially after 1997 when a national protest march was organised. The first group of followers began gathering on 17 February in Prac- a da Se ́ , in Sa ̃ o Paulo city (Chaves, 2000). At that exact moment, several other groups were doing the same all over Brazil. Two months later, and after a long, painful but peaceful journey the ‘landless’ people arrived in the country’s capital city, Brasilia, which had never looked so small as when welcoming the thousands and thousands of demonstrators. That day, the Prac- a do Treˆ s Poderes (Piazza of the Three Powers) saw only the power of the landless people. The world finally woke up to the land problem in Brazil and the MST obtained international media attention, breaking through the national isolation that in the past years had consigned them to the hands of many landlords’ ruthless violence.
The following section briefly outlines the main theore- tical influences over the analysis of social movements, and its concepts, specifically emphasising the concept of ‘frames’. The framing process is also a process internal to social movements that might imply, and usually does, some conflict due to different understandings concerning the same social ‘reality’. The last sections of this paper focus on how the settlers and the leaders of the MST construct different understandings of community and land. The paper is based on 8 months’ empirical research, undertaken in 2002 in Rio state, Brazil, in MST-run encampments and settlements.
2. Theorising social movements: from grievances to framing
For Tarrow (1998), the three main theorists who influenced subsequent theories on social movements are Marx, Lenin and Gramsci. Marx laid the foundations of what Tarrow designates as ‘grievance theory’. For Marx, conflict is structurally rooted, that is conflict emerges from within the structure of society. Collective action is the means to overcome structural grievances that affect a certain class group. However, Marx said little about leadership in particular and it was Lenin who came to conceptualise the role of the leaders in collective class movements. Lenin did not underestimate the ‘power’ of the masses but he most certainly did not overestimate the masses’ capacity of organisation. Thus, he elaborated a ‘theory of vanguard’ according to which an elite or professional group of revolutionaries would have to be formed in order to organise the masses and prepare them for the revolution. Lenin’s theory, Tarrow wrote, ‘‘was an organisational response to a historical situation in which the working class [alone] was unable to produce a revolution’’ (1998, p. 12). This theory emphasised the crucial importance of the organisational variables not only
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	151
ARTICLE IN PRESS
152	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
in the ‘making’ of revolutions but also in the process of contentious politics.
Developing these ideas, resource mobilisation theory (RMT) began to take shape in the 1960s, notably in the work of the economist Mancur Olson. Olson (1971) strived to understand why rational individuals, primarily guided by self-interest, took part in collective movements. According to Olson (1971), if individuals are primarily concerned with their individual good rather than with the collective one, to be successful social movements should be organised in such a way that everyone who is part of a movement feels individually rewarded. The few ‘believers’ in the ‘collective good’ are the social movement’s most important members, thus its leaders. Part of their task is the distribution of ‘selective incentives’ which will encou- rage other members’ continued participation and avoid the ‘free-rider’ problem. In sum, social movements should be organised in such a way that all its members feel individually rewarded for being collectively involved in something. Hence, a social movement’s existence depends greatly on the availability of resources that can be mobilised both to attract and reward its members and to perfect the social movement’s organisation. McCarthy and Zald’s (1977) work focused especially on social movements’ capacity to mobilise resources. This focus led to a new methodological approach to the study of social movements in which social movements should be analysed in the same way as other organisations are analysed, corporations included. Hence, social movement leaders would occupy an analogous position to corporate executives, and social movement militants to stockholders.
Meanwhile, Gramsci’s writings gave more flesh to Lenin’s conceptualisation of leadership. Gramsci argued for the development of a ‘cadre of intellectuals’ recruited not only from within the working class but from the opponent elites. These intellectuals would form the work- ing class’s historical bloc of forces. Their main role would be to deconstruct the dominant bourgeois culture that contributed to the cultural alienation of the working class. When no longer culturally alienated, the working class would be free to (re)discover its own culture, and its own (collective) identity. Gramsci, Tarrow (1998) states, deeply influenced ‘framing and collective identity theories’ on social movements.
Each one of the above theories emphasises different variables: grievances, organisation and resources, and culture. Completely neglected, according to Tarrow (1998) is the political variable. It was only in the political process approach (PPA) that this variable was given more analytical prominence. The PPA was a reaction to what was thought to be the shortcomings of RMT. Mobilising human and material resources was not enough to explain why ‘‘waves of movements emerge in some periods and not in others’’ and why some social movements were ‘‘more adept at manipulating cultural symbols than others’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 18). The explanation could only be found in ‘‘the variations of political structure and the
workings of political process’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 18). Depending on the particular configuration of a certain political system and context, different opportunities or threats would emerge. These could either facilitate (in the case of opportunities) or repress (in the case of threats) social movement organisation.
Tilly (1995, 2002) contributed greatly for the further development of the PPA by focusing on the dynamics of the political opportunity structure. For Tilly what stands out in social movement analysis is the interaction between the political institutions and the social movement leaders who confront, as much as negotiate with, these institutions. Confrontation and negotiation are the two faces of the same process of struggle, a process that does not exhaust itself in the immediate context of the struggle but that bears an historical weight. The DNA of any process of struggle is inscribed in its repertoires of contention. These repertoires display an array of options of strategies of struggle. Repertoires of contention are formed in and by the historical process of struggle and they are inherited allowing social movements, in certain contexts and in a particular moment in time, to decide on their strategies of struggle (for example, blockades, strikes, marches, etc.).
Nevertheless, how are these repertoires of contention updated, how do they incorporate new and innovative strategies? According to Tarrow (1998), repertoires of contention can be disrupted by ‘moments of madness’, due to the escalation of protest and/or in the context of which protest escalates. These moments of madness are tempor- ary but disruptive and transformative, and liable of changing the course of cycles of protest. For this to happen, however, it is crucial the emergence of favourable political opportunities, which vary according to different historical, political and cultural circumstances (see Zald, 1996). A structure of political opportunities is a chain of causation, which culminates in the availability of resources external to a group. These resources allow lowering the cost of collective action, disclose potential allies, reveal vulnerable elites, and facilitate the emergence of social networks and collective identities (Tarrow, 1998, p. 20). With the opening of favourable political opportunities, social movements are able not only to resort to previous repertoires of contention but also to innovate and to come up with new forms and strategies of struggle. Forms of contention depend greatly of leaders’ creativity and frame both the leaders’ and the masses’ actions. Framing allows individuals to organise, categorise and interpret social meanings in a given situation. Framing, as Tarrow put it, ‘‘not only reflects the generalisation of a grievance, but defines the ‘us’ and ‘them’ in a movement’s conflict structure’’. This is of extreme importance since the ‘‘coordination of collective action depends on trust and cooperation that are generated among participants by shared understandings and identities or, to use a broader category, on the collective action frames that justify, dignify, and animate collective action’’ (Tarrow, 1998, p. 21).
In general terms, frames ought to be understood as the ‘‘specific metaphors, symbolic representations, and cogni- tive cues used to render or cast behaviour and events in an evaluative mode and to suggest alternative modes of action’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 262) and social movements ‘‘actively engage in the construction of meaning, the portrayal of injustice, and the definition of pathways to change’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 269). However, Tarrow argues, ‘‘[A]lthough movement organisers actively engage in framing work, not all framing takes place under their control’’ (1998, p. 22). Movement organisers/leaders may have to compete with the state, the media, or simply with inherited cultural understandings. The framing process is a dynamic one since ‘‘frames are, on one hand, part of the world, passive and structured; on the other, people are active constructing them’’ and therefore the ‘‘vulnerability of the framing process makes it a locus of potential struggle, not a laden reality to which we all must inevitably yield’’ (Gamson et al., 1996, p. 276). When the leaders of a social movement are forced to compete with their ‘followers’’ inherited cultural understandings then conflict situations inside the social movements are most likely to arise. It is precisely on some of these conflict situations which take place inside the MST that this paper focuses on. The option to look at conflict within the social movement rests on Gamson et al.’s assumption that a social ‘‘move- ment is a field of actors, not a unified entity’’ hence being ‘‘more useful to think of framing as an internal process of contention within movements with different actors taking different positions’’ (Gamson et al., 1996, p. 283).
3. The MST: conflicts from within
The MST’s existence in Brazil is justified by the existence of an important structural grievance: the unequal distribu- tion of land. Nevertheless, the MST’s organisation as a social movement would never have been possible without the support of certain religious organisations, especially the Catholic Church-run CEBs and CPTs. Influenced by liberation theologians, these organisations, brought to- gether people subjected to the same grievances and many political opponents to the regime, especially during the military dictatorship in Brazil in the 1960s and 1970s. At the time of its formal organisation as a social movement, the MST leaders framed the movement’s collective action on the struggle for land. The right to land is still the slogan that reflects the generalisation of many landless people’s grievances and which justifies the movement’s collective action. Nevertheless, the MST leaders, in their effort to construct a coherent and cohesive social movement that clearly draws the distinction between ‘us’ (the landless people), and ‘them’ (the landowners and the government), have to compete with the landless people’s (or settlers’) inherited cultural understandings. Thus, this distinction between ‘us’ and ‘them’ may as well be internal to the MST. For the settlers, ‘us’ are themselves; ‘them’ are the leaders. Two examples of how this internal distinction is
created inside the social movement are the settlers’ and leaders’ different conceptions, or understandings, of com- munity and land. These two elements—community and land—are not a random choice. Community and land are two elements closely involved in the MST leaders’ framing process and likewise embedded in the MST’s ideology. Ideology and framing can be closely related: though ideologies ‘‘tend to be more complex and logical systems of beliefs than frames, (y) frames may be embedded in ideologies’’ (Zald, 1996, p. 262).
4. Leaders’ and settlers’ different understandings of community: ‘here the stronger ones eat the weaker ones’
The ‘right to land’ is the slogan that frames the MST collective action and justifies its existence as a social movement in the context of Brazilian society. The materialisation of this fundamental right implies the redistribution of land. Ultimately, it implies the implemen- tation of land reform in a country where such a reform, on a large scale, has never been attempted. As the MST organisers and leaders are well aware, this will not happen overnight and the government does not seem willing to cooperate. Thus, one of the MST strategies of struggle is to occupy lands which are not socially productive and to organise rural communities of landless people (sem-terra).8
Wolford argues that, through this process, the MST has engaged in the construction of an imagined community whereby ‘‘adherence to MST’s ideological and practical guidelines requires each individual to go well beyond past experiences to imagine a new social, political and economic ideal’’ (Wolford, 2004, p. 506). This social imaginary, according to Wolford, is what the leaders believe estab- lishes the link between ‘‘‘the objective conditions of
8The argument for the ‘legitimacy’ of the occupation is rooted in the Land Statutes, published by the military government in the mid-1960s, which stated that land that does not fulfill a social function shall be used for the purposes of land reform. The Land Statutes have endured until the present day and by social function is commonly understood the productive use of land, contributing to the generation of intensive-labour/employ- ment. In 1988, with democracy finally restored in Brazil, the concept of ‘productive land’ was added to this bill inherited from the military dictatorship. The concept of ‘productive land’ is not related to the composition of the soil but with the productive use that is given to privately own landed properties. Any private landed property, to be liable for expropriation, has to be considered unproductive. The assessment of the productive status of the land and the on-site technical inspection (vistoria) is due to be carried out by the INCRA’s (Instituto Nacional de Colonizac-a ̃o Agra ́ria) technicians. The vistoria is a decisive and conclusive moment in this process. If, after the vistoria, the land is considered unproductive, the INCRA initiates the negotiation of compensation with the landowner. In 2001, under Cardoso’s presidency, extra legal clauses were added to the existing legal dispositions’ corpus that regulates the agrarian reform in Brazil. One of these legal clauses stated that any landed property that is occupied before INCRA’s productivity assessment will not be inspected at all by this governmental institute. Therefore, in such situations the process of expropriation/negotiation with the landowner cannot be initiated. This means that a landed property can only be occupied after the INCRA’s productivity assessment concludes on use given to land.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	153
ARTICLE IN PRESS
154	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
exploitation’ and the subjective interpretation of those conditions as exploitation’’ (Wolford, 2004, p. 506). However, Wolford argues that the social movement’s interpretation of these objective conditions often collides with the settlers’ subjective interpretations, which are informed by the landowning class’s dominant worldview. Therefore, the first step is to deconstruct this dominant worldview that prevents settlers from seeing themselves as a class. Indeed, according to Wolford, for the MST leaders the construction of a sem-terra community is one step further in the making of a class-for-itself. Leaders believe that those who join the MST, the sem-terra, form a class- in-itself (Wolford, 2004). Being part of the community of sem-terra is becoming part of a class-for-itself.9
As was observed during the fieldwork, the MST ascribes a strong political dimension to their idea of a community of sem-terra. Indeed, as Wolford argues, the MST organisers aim to elevate the sem-terra’s consciousness to the level of a class-for-itself. However, the leaders of the MST have made clear that the cohesiveness of their ‘imagined’ rural community cannot rest exclusively on an ideological belief but instead on the sharing of common traditional (as in To ̈ nnies, 1963) and moral (as in Durkheim, 1984) values, reinforced by the symbolic (as in Anderson, 1991). These values, as emerged from interviews with the leaders, are those ‘‘shattered by the foundations and development of capitalist society’’10: solidarity, community living and family as the centre of social life. Thus, the MST leadership does not see these values as new. Instead, these values are part of a rural traditional way-of-life that was eroded by capitalist pursuit of profit. The MST leaders interviewed argued that before joining the social movement, settlers were alienated, corrupted by the capitalist values of individualism and egotism. The experience of revolutionary praxis in the MST-run encampments will, however, allow them to overcome this capitalist ‘inherited culture’. As one male leader commented:
This period we are in now is a period of pre-settlement [encampment] when everything and everyone is boiling up, but that’s good and pedagogic. Little by little, this period will revolutionise people’s mentalities and teach them how to gain control over their own lives to the point where they can form a different and new community. That’s the process through which a com- munity is built.
9Becoming a class-for-itself implies living through the revolutionary experience of struggling not only for land but also of fighting against capitalist exploitation. According to the MST leaders, this fight against capitalism does not have to be destructive. Indeed, it is constructive since it implies the setting up of a different, alternative model of production based on cooperative work and production in the rural sem-terra communities. This setting up of an alternative model of production is seen by the leaders as representing the embryo of a new political project, a new mode of organising the social alternative to capitalism and neo-liberalism.
10Quote from an interview with one male national leader.
In summary, the leaders’ imaginary countryside is depicted as peaceful, communal and communitarian, healthy, and as abiding by values of solidarity, friendship (almost brother/sisterhood) whilst ‘naturally’ inducing a strong bond between the wo/man and the land. Overall, the MST leaders’ ‘imagined community’ implies both the emergence of rural settlements based on communal/ cooperative production and on relations and networks of solidarity. This community is seen as being formed in the dialectical encounter between a new political project and old traditional (and moral) values.
One male regional leader conveyed this sense through an allegory:
Let me tell you a story. In the northeast there is an old saying that goes like this: if you eat the grain meant to be kept as a seed, in the future you will either starve or leave. Women were responsible for the seeds. And for years, people over there respected this saying. And why? Because if you eat the grain that you are keeping as a seed you won’t have anything to grow during the raining season, therefore you won’t have anything to eat. So either you starve or you migrate. We, the MST, we are like the women in northeast. We try to keep the seed. And what are the seeds? The seeds are the [traditional cultural] principles. (y) These are values and principles that structure our vision of the world and prevent us from being corrupted by the system. (y) These are the seeds that we keep. We won’t give them up no matter how hard it is to keep them. Even if we don’t achieve our goal at least we will leave this legacy to future movements and generations. Our goal is social trans- formation. We have three main goals: land, land reform, and a new society (y).
However, the leaders’ ideal of rural communities down- plays settlers’ prior experiences of the countryside. Settlers’ experiences of the countryside, as it emerged from the interviews, were not so idyllic at all. Thus, it was observed, the leaders’ mythologized idea of rural communities was not accepted and was even resisted, by many of the settlers interviewed. Prior experiences obviously influence the settlers’ perceptions and representations, and the memory of these experiences cannot simply be erased. The prior experiences that these settlers in Rio de Janeiro state had of life in the countryside were deeply associated with a past of dispossession and exploitation, often as sugarcane cutters, which led them to migrate to the closest urban centres. Their decision to return to the countryside, this time with the push from the MST, was mainly rooted in settlers’ belief that the land they would acquire would prevent them from being exploited as they had been in the past. In other words, settlers imagined their return to the countryside as a new beginning. From the interviews and informal con- versations held with the settlers, it can be concluded that for them returning to the countryside meant a sort of (individual) liberation. The land that the settlers would get was set to be their individual insurance against oppression
and exploitation. Land is for the settlers a means that hopefully will allow them to achieve food security, higher status and independence. Settlers do not expect to find an idyllic countryside that they know never existed. They simply expect to change their objective and subjective individual living conditions in order to face up to the hardships of a rural context that they have never experienced as idyllic but which, nevertheless, has some familiarity to them.
To the majority of the settlers living in the encampments where the fieldwork took place, community is linked neither with being part of a sem-terra class nor with the construction of a rural community based on communal or cooperative production. Community, instead, comprises many practical concerns that need solutions as well as of relations with neighbours. These relationships, from the very beginning when the settlers set up the encampment, are crisscrossed by close friendship but also petty conflicts based on ‘envy’, ‘jealousy’, gossip, competition for the best resources such as land, and a strong sense of inequality. Ultimately, settlers’ sense of community is associated with the degree of solidarity channelled into concrete actions that aim to improve their living conditions inside the settlements and the encampments. Daily interactions between neighbours also help to form community relations and during the fieldwork it was observed that women were more prompt to comment about these issues than were men. When living inside the encampments, women would tend to spend their days in the built up housing area. Also women are the main people who form everyday community relationships. Furthermore, because in the encampments and settlements where the fieldwork took place most women were responsible for the domestic chores they were more aware of the difficulties inherent in everyday life as well. Consequently, women were more aware of how the ‘community’ inside the encampments was developing.
Some female settlers commented:
I brought all my children here with me and when I first got here my shack was made of hay because I didn’t have money to buy plastics. I tell you, in the beginning things were tough but I could handle it. But now... In here the stronger ones eat the weaker onesy And now life goes on, from better to worst, from better to worsty You know, here there’s no unity but a lot of gossipy Here you only find people who live with difficulties. You won’t find anyone that might help to put an end to your misery or someone who will offer you something. This is my notion of companionship. Few people do this here. [female settler, 29 years old, Oziel Alves]
If we leave for two weeks to work, by the time we get back our shack won’t be here anymorey They steal things from us so we can’t leave to work anyway. Plus we have the children and no one to take care of them. I’m not crazy to leave my little eight year old girl here
alone all day. I don’t trust people herey [female settler, 24 years old, Oziel Alves]
Alternatively, in the communities of Oziel Alves and Itatiaia, two other major factors fomenting the fragmenta- tion of community relationships, besides settlers’ lack of trust of each other, were identified. Their existence feeds into settlers’ understanding of the community of landless in which they are living. These factors are processes of internal social and economic differentiation, and disputes over land.
Processes of internal social and economic differentiation often led to a greater sense of internal inequality. Some settlers, before joining the MST, had more financial resources than others. Those who had more were obviously more able to cope with the hardships of living in an encampment. Life in the encampments implied an agonis- ing wait for the legal expropriation/recognition of the possession of the land and consequently for the govern- mental subsidies/loans to start off the production. Most of the settlers approached argued the MST’s internal regula- tions aggravated and deepened the prior situation of inequality amongst settlers. According to the internal rules of the MST, families have to remain inside the encamp- ments at all times. This is, not only they have to live there; they must remain permanently in the encampments. Otherwise, when it comes to distributing the plots, non- abiding families will be penalised by getting the worst plots (for example, those far away from water resources; worst suited for irrigation; far away from the main road). Ultimately, these families may be expelled. In order to abide by the MST’s rules, most of the families were deprived of a second earner even when they could barely cope on one salary. In the case of lone-parent families, families were deprived of the only existing earner. This rule was clearly designed to suit ‘traditional’ families, often composed of a father, a mother, and children. Therefore, in the encampments, those who ended up staying were
(i) settlers who could rely on their meagre savings and/or the help of their family and relatives;
(ii) settlers who owned their own house in the city and managed to rent it;
(iii) settlers who experienced the most dramatic situations of poverty and deprivation and
(iv) settlers whose family structure allowed them to combine a paid job in the nearest city with living in the encampment.
Settlers who did not get any support from their families ‘outside’ or could not find a paid job in the nearest city fared considerably worse than the others who did and who could. Even to till the small gardens surrounding the shacks to produce some vegetables, manioc, flour and fruits for family consumption, implies having money to buy the seeds and the farming tools. Some settlers, whose objective living conditions before joining the social
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	155
ARTICLE IN PRESS
156	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
movement were better, were clearly at an advantage when compared to those who were worse-off. Those who were worse-off and who were greatly affected by this MST rule had only two options: they could either leave or stay. If they stayed, their struggle for survival would be increas- ingly difficult. The settlers in the encampments where the fieldwork took place were aware of this. They were also concerned with the fact that due to this situation, ‘good people’, people ‘who really deserved it’ were being forced to leave because they were unable to guarantee their survival. Most of the settlers interviewed often blamed the leaders for this situation and called for their intervention. However, the leaders believed the encampment period to be the period in which economic equality would eventually be restored and not exacerbated. One male regional leader argued that:
The financial question is different because those who have little [money] when they come to an encampment will lose it all after a while because the struggle takes time. So, to sustain your family here you will have to buy seeds, cattle and so even if you have a little more than the others you will lose the little you have and little by little you will try to rebuild what you lost. And that’s the process you can see here in the encampment because we are already delimiting the lots, starting to produce soy
But the settlers approached doubted this prognosis. They believed that internal problems of inequality and depriva- tion were not likely to be automatically solved. The MST is not responsible for the length of the waiting period. Instead, this is mostly determined by the functioning of the Brazilian legal system and by the delay in the bids for the governmental credits/loans/subsidies. Nevertheless, by blindly applying this particular rule according to which settlers have to remain in the encampment at all times, the MST is contributing to the aggravation of the social differentiation that exists a priori amongst the settlers-to- be. It is clear that the social movement does not have the means to support those who are worse-off. However, the compulsoriness of the rule in question considerably reduces the poorest settlers’ options for strategies of survival and increases their disadvantaged position in relation to the other (better-off) settlers.
Disputes over land, another dividing factor, are already characteristic of the encampments. For instance, veiled but heavy tension surrounding the question of the distribution of the plots was strongly felt in the atmosphere of the encampment at Oziel Alves. This tension started to mount when land in the encampment started to be measured with the purpose of being divided into individual lots. Again, the root of the question was the rule that made it compulsory for settlers to stay permanently in the encampment. Many of the settlers argued that those who had lived only a short time in the encampment were getting the best plots; while the families who by choice or by compulsion were abiding by the existing rule were being let
down by the distribution scheme. Discussions and meetings amongst family representatives within the community of Oziel Alves concerning the distribution of the plots were permeated by fear. One female representative of a group of families when questioned on how these meetings went stated that she was particularly concerned with a case of a settler who had spent most of his time in the city and who was about to be given a very well-located plot. This settler, she argued, had a reputation of being an extremely violent man and, furthermore, of having been arrested in the past. He was not threatening the leaders directly but he was threatening some of the settlers. This woman then added that she alone would not speak against him since, according to her, ‘‘you never know what might happen to you or to our loved ones afterwards’’.
In the encampments and settlements where this research was carried out, the leaders’ imagined community was not exactly coming to life. In the MST-run encampments and settlements, the community was a site of friendship but it was also deeply fragmented by internal conflicts that feed into settlers’ understandings of community. Also conflict- ing were the different meanings that leaders’ and settlers’ attributed to land.
5. Leaders’ and settlers’ divergent views on land: ‘my land, your social transformation’
According to the MST organisers, the process of the construction of ‘new’ rural communities corresponds to the initial dismantling of the way the social structure is organised in Brazil. For the leaders of the MST, social relations are deeply influenced and structured according to the way production is organised. Thus, essential to the task of ‘dismantling’, and thus of socially transforming the world, is the emergence of a new type of production, ideally based on the communal ownership of the land.
However, most of the settlers interviewed understood the conquest of the land to be a collective act but one that would allow them to become the sole owners of their plot of land. After the initial stage when land is collectively occupied, they felt the land to be their property and none of the settlers seemed willing to sacrifice that. Furthermore, they were not willing to sacrifice their independence, the control over their lives. Settlers believed that they gained this control when they, as individual households, took possession of the plots. Thus, not surprisingly, in the encampments where the distribution of the plots had taken place and where settlers were already tilling the land properly (though still without having received government subsidies), many settlers would cool off their relationship with the leaders. Often they would do this not by seeking direct confrontation but instead by avoiding frequent interaction. Leaders were seen as authorities and settlers feared they would use that authority to take away what they had conquered: land. As Wolford (2004) also observed in Flora settlement in the northeastern state of Pernambu- co, settlers were grateful to the MST for helping them to
conquer the land. However, this gratitude ‘‘did not manifest itself as allegiance to the movement because the settlers saw their land as the means to independence—even from the movement’’ (Wolford 2004, p. 164).
The settlers’ urge for land was not coming from the belief in a mythologized countryside; a demonic city; or a peasant way-of-life where the peasant naturally nourishes a great affection for the land s/he owns. Most of the settlers who were living in the encampments where the present research took place had undertaken in their past a wide range of jobs: from sugarcane cutters to builders, from truck drivers to cooks. Thus, even if they had the memory of a childhood and/or adolescence in the countryside, they never truly owned a piece of land. That is, they had not been socialised as small farmers and thus the symbolic relationship of affection with their land does not emerge instantly or easily. The land that was obtained, in this particular case, was primarily seen as a means to achieve something: an improved livelihood and an im- proved social status.11 Both an improved livelihood and an improved social status will prevent settlers, so they thought, of being exploited by the landowners. Overall, from several informal conversations with the settlers, it emerged that for them the most important thing was, not to ‘transform society’, but to ‘secure’ the land because in their minds this implies food security and an improved livelihood.
Settlers identified this improved livelihood (or ‘better life’, as often mentioned) with fewer concerns about food (in)security and with personal autonomy and indepen- dence. By food security this paper accepts Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition, according to which food security ‘‘is the state of having secure and sustainable access to sufficient food for an active and healthy life’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 825; see also Pottier, 1999). Therefore, a household is food secure only if ‘‘over a particular period of time’’ it enjoys ‘‘an acceptable likelihood that will have sustainable access to sufficient food over that period’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 828). By ‘personal autonomy and independence’ settlers understood independence from exploitive work relations such as the ones in which they had been engaged. Such independence, as it was observed during the fieldwork, implied the possibility of not being subjugated to harsh and low paid (and often humiliating) forms of work. One female settler argued this explicitly:
I worked as a sugarcane cutter all my life! When I was a little child I used to cut sugarcane and to take care of our small kitchen garden. Then I got married and
11There are some cases that the land occupied is merely used as a trade off for monetary compensations. I was told by an ex-INCRA technician that at least in a particular case where he was involved as a technician, one landlord willingly negotiated compensation with the INCRA and then, once the settlers got the land the landlord bought the land back from them but spending less money than the compensation earned. Again this situation would never happen if the allocation of loans/subsidies, technical assistance and the provision of certain infrastructures was made available earlier in the settlement process.
continued working as a sugarcane cutter. I was always working and living on others’ land and if I couldn’t live there I had to rent a small room nearby for the whole family because we had no money to eat. At least here [in the encampment] we don’t pay rent and to eat, we just grow something to eat. [female settler, 30 years old, Oziel Alves]
For the settlers, however, food autonomy entails more than household food self-sufficiency. None of the settlers interviewed excluded the possibility of selling their products in the local markets since the money they will get in return will allow them to buy other goods and to upgrade their investment. As one female settler in Ouziel Alves put it, they needed to produce ‘‘things that grow fast’’ to sell it in the market and get some money in return to, in the future, ‘‘buy a van to transport the foodstuffs to the market’’ and to buy ‘‘other things, like a proper stove and fridge’’. Hence, the settlers were interested in cash cropping and/or other trades (that is, pluriactivity) since for them ‘‘access to food derives from opportunities to produce food directly or to exchange other commodities or services for food’’ (Wiebe and Maxwell, 1999, p. 828; emphasis added).
Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition of food security is much more inclusive than that of other writers such as Barraclough, who defined food security as ‘‘the sustained and assured access by all members of a society to food that is adequate in quantity and quality to meet nutritional needs for an active healthy life’’ (Barraclough, 1997, p. 117; see also Barraclough, 1991). Barraclough is mostly concerned with (the minimal required) ‘nutritional needs’ and with direct access (via production) to foodstuffs. Wiebe and Maxwell’s definition acknowledges that access to food can be indirect and mediated (in this case by an exchange relationship). This is a conception that contex- tualises the concept of food security since it puts the emphasis on access, opportunity and mediation. These three dimensions are intimately linked to the concept of livelihoods when ‘livelihood’ is understood, as it is here, as comprising ‘‘the assets (natural, physical, human, financial and social capital), the activities, and the access to these (mediated by institutions and social relations) that together determine the living gained by the individual or household (Ellis, 2000, p. 10).
For the settlers, once access to food is considered to be secure, access to other goods and services becomes the priority and this corresponds to their desire for an improved and secure livelihood, a concept that, as pointed out above, goes well beyond nutritional sustainability. For both the leaders and the settlers, food security in the context of a desirable livelihood is seen to be achieved through democratised access to goods and services related to education, health and other commodities, as well as access to land. This ‘democratised access’ means that access is not only a privilege of the few. Ultimately, ‘democratised access’ is thought to be granted by rights that—at least
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	157
ARTICLE IN PRESS
158	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
theoretically—guarantee equal and universal access to the minimal required of goods and services that allow an active and healthy life. In other words, access, in this context, ‘‘refers to the ability to participate in, and to derive benefits from, social and public services provided by the state such as education, health services, roads, water supplies and so on’’ (Ellis, 2000, p. 9).
Nevertheless, settlers believe not only that they should have democratised access to the necessary goods and services but also that they can and must buy their way into having access to these goods and services. This can only be achieved through earning an income. These settlers’ past as city dwellers has taught them that without an income, nothing or very little is ‘secured’. Thus, for all the settlers interviewed food security and improved livelihoods were inseparable from one another and from ‘income’. For some settlers, producing food for family consumption would allow saving more money and having more money available to have access to the necessary goods and services that contribute for the improvement of one’s livelihood. For others, agriculture should be profit- able business. Thus, they should not produce only for self- subsistence. They may well invest in cash crops or ultimately sell the land.
Most importantly, for all the settlers, both food security and an improved livelihood are possible to achieve in the context of the present form of capitalist social organisa- tion. The leaders do not see this as the case. That is, whilst settlers understand their participation in the labour and food markets as sufficient to enhance their quality of life by improving it, leaders believe that the (re)production of the unequal distribution of wealth will still occur if the functioning of markets is not controlled and regulated. For the leaders, undermining the present form of social organisation is therefore imperative. In summary, there is a remarkable difference between leaders’ and the settlers’ understandings of land use.
These divergent perspectives on land generate some other important tensions. For instance, while the leaders insist on cooperative production of alternative crops and foodstuffs free from the strings of the big export multi- nationals and bio-technology companies, many settlers turn to the production of cash crops (see Wolford, 2004). After realising that agricultural self-sufficiency combined with the production of alternative (and organically produced) crops is not enough to improve their livelihoods, settlers may abandon the rhetoric of alternative food crops in favour of the actual production of cash crops. This decision is not solely individual but also influenced by the pressure exerted by the market and/or the government, which might tend to protect certain traditional production sectors (as is the case, for instance, of the sugarcane production sector in Brazil (see Valada ̃ o, 1999; Wolford, 2003, 2004).
In fact, based on this and other research on the MST (e.g., Kleba, 1992; Sizanoski, 1998; Grade, 1999; Giehl, 2002), four major factors can be said to considerably
influence settlers’ decisions concerning production.12 These factors are (i) ecological; (ii) economic; (iii) infrastructural and (iv) socio-cultural.
Ecological factors are related to the quality of and composition of the soil; to the existence or non-existence of natural water resources; to the climate and microclimate of a particular region; and so forth. Economic factors encompass the government and government agencies responsible for the monetary programmes set up to support agrarian reform initiatives and agrarian production; trade agreements; international aid policies; and the configura- tion of the international, national and regional markets. Infrastructural factors have to do with the existing infrastructures within the land available for land reform, these being from water supply systems, irrigation system, and accessibilities, to technical support—structural or temporary (provisional).
Socio-cultural factors obviously are related to settlers’ life experiences. The present research concluded that food security and an improved livelihood are extremely im- portant to settlers, so important that land is seen as a means to achieve it. The whole experience of dispossession and unemployment is very much present in many settlers’ memories. Uprooted from their extended rural families, cornered in the city favelas, and not being able to rely on the government’s reduced social welfare, most of these settlers have experienced malnutrition and material depri- vation. For all the settlers interviewed, preventing situa- tions like this from happening ever again in the future was clearly a priority. Giehl (2002), while researching influences on the processes of decision-making involved in the option for a determinate production model in the Domingos de Carvalho settlement in the southern Brazilian state of Santa Catarina, has reached a similar conclusion on the priority given to food security.13 According to this agronomist, ‘‘food security has revealed itself as a major concern very much present in the settlers’ discourses even because the majority has lived through hugely precarious situations in the encampment stage’’ (Giehl, 2002, p. 132; original in Portuguese). Socio-cultural factors include also
12To a certain extent, these factors correspond to Ellis’ definition of assets. Assets represent the five different types of capital available. People adopt and adapt livelihood strategies according to the different types of capital they have access to Ellis (2000, p. 40). According to Ellis, the different types of capital are: natural (e.g., land, water and biological resources), physical (infrastructures producers of goods), human (labour available and education, skills and health), financial (stocks of money), and social capital (social groups and networks) (Ellis, 2000).
13It is interesting to point out that the Giehl’s research and the study reported in this paper took place in two different states: mine in Rio de Janeiro and Giehl’s in Santa Catarina. In Rio de Janeiro, settlers’ had never been small landowners or peasants. Though most of them had grown up in the countryside and worked as sugarcane cutters, none of them had owned their piece of land before. In Santa Catarina, many settlers had either been renters or owners of small plots of land. Interestingly, for both—settlers from Rio de Janeiro and settlers from Santa Catarina—food security was extremely, if not, the most important goal to be achieved. In such a way that it influenced considerably their decisions about what to produce and what not to produce.
settlers’ perception of risk. That is, not only will settlers tend to produce foodstuffs for nutrition; they will produce foodstuffs whose productive process they are most familiar with. Additionally, selling the surplus in the market is not perceived as risky.14
The interaction of the four above-mentioned factors frames the context in which settlers live and their decisions are based on their perception of this context. Thus, for instance switching to the production of sugarcane is not simply falling into ‘‘temptation’’ of reproducing the capitalist mode of agrarian production. Switching produc- tion has probably more to do with the macroconjunctures (e.g., government incentives) and the settlers’ own evalua- tion of how to better improve their livelihoods in the given social, economic and environmental and ecological con- text. In the encampments and settlements included in the present research, while leaders did not manage to achieve a transformed social world, settlers kept longing for a better life in the context of the present one. In truth, they longed to become small farmers and to own a ‘house and a farm’. This is most certainly different from the leaders’ utopia of a transformed social world based not on the private owner- ship of the means of production and individualized production, but on communal ownership and cooperative production.
6. Conclusion
The unequal distribution of land in Brazil is the structural root of conflict over land. One of the main actors in this conflict is the MST, a social movement that descends from many other previous, and nationally scattered, organised rural movements. The struggle for land frames the MST’s collective action. It justifies and legitimates the MST’s existence, and it clearly defines who is who on each side of the barricade: the MST represents the landless people whereas ‘on the other side’ are the landowners and the Brazilian government.
However, in the process of framing the social movement, in which the MST leaders are of crucial importance, maintaining unity might be harder than it actually seems, especially when some of this ‘framing work’ (Tarrow, 1998) escapes the control of the leaders or movement organisers. This paper has shown how conflict is produced within the MST and how unity is challenged when the MST leaders and the settlers frame their actions, and interpret their situation, differently. As an example, it was shown how the
14Arguing against ‘moral economists’, Popkin (1979) states peasants’ capacity to take risks should never be despised, and that ‘‘revolutionaries who expect peasants to have no interest in market production as long as their subsistence floor is secure are likely (y) to have problems when peasants in liberated areas seek to enter markets with their newly recovered surplus’’ (Popkin, 1979, pp. 28–29). Nevertheless, Brazil always had, since the very beginning of its exploitation by the Portuguese colonial power, a market-oriented agriculture. Thus, once in possession of land, entering the market, for the newly made peasants, is not perceived as risky but instead, as a safe move.
MST leaders have to compete with settlers’ inherited cultural understandings of community and on land. To the leaders’ mythologized idea of rural community, settlers oppose their memories of a countryside where survival was made so difficult that they were driven to migrate. Joining the MST and returning to the countryside implies for these settlers the individual possession of land.
The constitution of a community, as imagined by the MST leaders, is definitely not the settlers’ main concern. Land is. Settlers understand land as a means to secure their food, livelihood and social status. However, despite conflicts surrounding the framing process internal to the social movement, it is interesting to point out that both parties in this dynamic internal struggle—leaders and settlers—have together actually been achieving common victories: land has been occupied and redistributed whilst lobbying for the implementation of the agrarian reform has forced incorporation of the land issue into the political and legal debates.
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful for the valuable suggestions of two anonymous referees. This paper is based on Ph.D. research entirely funded by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Portugal (Fundac-a ̃o Para a Cieˆncia e Tecnologia, Ministe ́rio da Cieˆncia e Tecnologia).
References
Anderson, B., 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. Verso, London.
Barraclough, S., 1991. An End to Hunger? The Social Origins of Food Strategies. Zed Books, London.
Barraclough, S., 1997. Food and poverty in Americas: institutional and policy obstacles to efficiency in food aid. Development in Practice 7, 117–129.
Chaves, C.A., 2000. A marcha nacional dos sem-terra: um estudo sobre a fabricac-a ̃ o do social. Relume Dumara ́ , Rio de Janeiro.
Durkheim, E., 1984. The Division of Labour in Society. Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Ellis, F., 2000. Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing Countries. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Fernandes, B., 2000. A formac-a ̃ o do MST no Brasil. Vozes, Petropolis. Gamson, W.A., et al., 1996. Framing political opportunity. In: McAdam, D., et al. (Eds.), Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements. Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Giehl, A.L., 2002. Entre o extraordina ́ rio e o cotidiano: os processos
deciso ́ rios	dos	agricultores	assentados—um	estudo	de	caso	do assentamento Domingos Carvalho (Rio Negrinho/SC). Centro de Cieˆncias Agra ́rias. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Flor- iano ́ polis, Brazil.
Grade, M., 1999. MST: Luz e Esperanc-a de uma Sociedade Igualita ́ ria e Socialista. Centro So ́ cio-Econoˆ mico. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Floriano ́ polis, Brazil.
Kleba,	J.B.,	1992.	A	cooperac- a ̃ o	agrı ́ cola	em	assentamentos	de	reforma agra ́ ria no Estado de Santa Catarina: estudo de caso de um grupo coletivo do assentamento ‘‘Tracutinga’’ Dionı ́ sio Cerqueira. Centro de Cieˆncias Humanas. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Flor- iano ́ polis, Brazil.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160	159
ARTICLE IN PRESS
160	R. Caldeira / Journal of Rural Studies 24 (2008) 150–160
McCarthy, J., Zald, M., 1977. Resource mobilization and social move- ments. American Journal of Sociology 82, 1212–1242.
Olson, M., 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Popkin, S.L., 1979. The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in Vietnam. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Pottier, J., 1999. Anthropology of Food: The Social Dynamics of Food Security. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Sizanoski, R., 1998. O novo dentro do velho: cooperativas de produc-ao agropecua ́ ria do MST. Possibilidades e limites na construc-a ̃ o social. Centro de Filosofia e Cieˆncias Humanas. Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Floriano ́ polis, Brazil.
Tarrow, S., 1998. Power in Movement: Social Movements and Con- tentious Politics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tilly, C., 1995. Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758–1834. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Tilly, C., 2002. Stories, Identities, and Political Change. Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham.
To ̈ nnies, F., 1963. Community and Society. Harper and Row, New York. Valada ̃ o, V., 1999. Assentamentos e sem-terra: a importaˆ ncia do papel dos
mediadores. EDUFES, Vito ́ ria. Wiebe, K., Maxwell, D., 1999. Land tenure and food security: exploring
dynamic linkages. Development and Change 30, 825–849. Wolford, W., 2003. Producing community: the MST and land reform
settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change 3, 500–520. Wolford, W., 2004. Of land and labor: agrarian reform on the sugarcane plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 31,
147–170. Zald, M., 1996. Culture, ideology and strategic framing. In: McAdam, D.,
et al. (Eds.), Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements. Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings. Cam- bridge University Press, Cambridge.

2008
Political Science
Comparative Political Studies
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press Maureen Donaghy 

Comparative Political Studies 2009 42: 847 DOI: 10.1177/0010414008329921
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://cps.sagepub.com/content/42/6/847
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Comparative Political Studies can be found at: Email Alerts: http://cps.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://cps.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://cps.sagepub.com/content/42/6/847.refs.html
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	847
important is that the boundary between the rationalist approach and social–construc- tivist approach is not always clear. True, according to both the qualitative study and the quantitative study, firms seem to consider social ties, historical advantages, and international agreements when making investment decisions. However, these could be interpreted as factors that influence a firm’s calculations about the likelihood of prof- its given the risk of starting a venture in another country. Put another way, these social features of FDI could be seen as ways of reducing transaction costs. Perhaps firms do go where the profits are greatest, but their cost-benefit calculus includes fac- tors such as the risk of doing business in an environment where social ties (and the informational benefits they afford) are absent. This is a substantial issue for the argu- ment. Bandelj’s response to it is based largely on the distinction between uncertainty and risk. When expected utility cannot be calculated, actors make decisions based on reason but infused with routine, emotional reaction, normative commitments, and tacit knowledge. This is “practical rather than rational action” (p. 192), and prac- tice is a process. For this answer to be convincing, one must accept the unknowable and constructed qualities of the socioeconomic world. The payoff, however, involves shifting to a conception of action as a process that evolves over time and is shaped by situations; as such, it is a much thicker understanding of the process of decision making than that offered by the rationalist account.
The book offers compelling arguments and evidence that a socially and cultur- ally contextualized theory of action is necessary and possible without its falling prey to the usual objection that cultural approaches are too heavily interpretative to be of general use. It will have an impact on economic sociologists, and it should be read by political scientists who are interested in theories of rationality, economic trans- formations, and economic aspects of globalization.
Roger Schoenman
University of California, Santa Cruz
References
Stark, D., & Bruszt, L. (1998). Postsocialist pathways: Transforming politics and property in East Central Europe. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stark, D., & Vedres, B. (2006). Social times of network spaces: Network sequences and foreign investment in Hungary. American Journal of Sociology, 111(5), 1367-1412.
Ondetti, G. (2008). Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. DOI:10.1177/0010414008329921
Past social movement research primarily examines why movements begin and end, without reviewing the shifts in intensity that inevitably occur within the life span of
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
848	Comparative Political Studies
long-lasting movements. In Land, Protest, and Politics, Gabriel Ondetti seeks to rem- edy this gap by applying theoretical concepts of social movements to explain the evo- lution of the landless movement in Brazil during the past three decades. The author provides a thoroughly researched and thoughtful examination of the Brazilian land- less movement, acknowledging the prominence of the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Workers’ Movement) while situating it within the range of actors involved in the struggle for agrarian reform in Brazil. His application and evaluation of five theoretical approaches to explain one movement should serve as a model for future scholars. The analysis falters, however, in its defining the variables that make up the political opportunity structure (which, Ondetti argues, largely explains the movement’s trajectory) and in its supporting claim that the landless movement’s exceptionalism can be explained by its ability to overcome the free-rider problem. Despite these criticisms, the book not only provides an invaluable resource in English on the landless movement in Brazil but contributes to our understanding of how theoretical approaches can be successfully tested using empirical evidence.
Ondetti seeks to address two questions: First, what explains changes in movement activity over time? Second, why did the landless movement increase in intensity while other movements in Brazil waned in the late 1980s and early 1990s? He begins with a chapter explaining the theoretical approaches from the social movement liter- ature; then, he relates in chronological order the major activities of the movement, as well as the broader political changes, throughout the following five chapters. At the end of each chapter, he assesses how these events can or cannot be explained by each of the following theoretical approaches: grievance/discontent, organizational capac- ity, activist strategy, and political opportunity. To a more limited extent, Ondetti reviews and applies Mancur Olson’s theory of collective action (1965) to the second question of why the landless movement increased in intensity when other movements declined.
For the first question, Ondetti argues that the political opportunity approach best explains the shifts in the landless movement’s intensity over time. He finds “political shifts that affected the receptivity or vulnerability of governing authorities to the movement’s protest actions played a critical role” (p. 221) in the movement’s trajectory. He also presents evidence in great detail that largely appears to support this argument. As such, he explains how the movement began with land occupations in the late 1970s during the opening of the military dictatorship and how it strengthened with the implementation of the 1988 constitution, which specified that land not used for a social function could be expropriated and used for agrarian reform. The author also explains how two massacres in the late 1990s, both involving members of the land- less movement, led to public sympathy for the landless plight and so intensified the movement’s efforts to press for reforms. At the beginning of the 21st century, a crackdown by the Cardoso government on occupations weakened the viability of occupations; but by 2003, the election of Worker’s Party President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva reinvigorated the movement, with the promise of a government more recep- tive to its claims.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	849
Regarding the second question, Ondetti argues that both the activist strategy approach and the political opportunity perspective explain why the landless movement became stronger while other movements declined in the postdemocratic transition period. Ondetti argues that whereas other movements formed around the struggle for public goods, such as human rights or improved educational and health resources, land occupations (as an activist strategy) provided direct benefits to only those who participated. The landless movement therefore surmounted the free-rider problem, which according to Olson (1965), leads to a movement’s decline. Although other movements attempted to overcome the free-rider problem by appealing to individuals’ ethical or ideological concerns, these selective benefits (postdemocratization) were not enough to sustain the movements’ momentum. However, poor agricultural workers and farmers without secure land tenure were still motivated to participate in land occu- pations by the promise of a plot of land. Here Ondetti differentiates the goal of rural land reform based on the political opportunity structure created by the constitutional guarantee for land. He states that no other benefit holds this same status of legal legit- imacy. Through the legitimacy of its claims, the landless movement sustained broader public support, even with the use of radical tactics.
Overall, this book presents a strong contribution to the literature on the landless movement, as well as to empirical literature on social movements. It is clear that the author spent a considerable amount of time in the field listening to movement partici- pants and interviewing important leaders; he has intricately woven their stories into the narrative. His broad knowledge of Brazilian politics is complemented by his detailed understanding of the Landless Workers’ Movement, generally accepted as the largest social movement in Latin America. Rather than focus exclusively on the Landless Workers’ Movement, however, Ondetti includes rural unions and other movements organizing land occupations, in his analysis of the broader “landless movement.” In doing so, he provides a complete picture of the actors involved and the dynamics of their interests. By focusing on numerous movements within one larger movement, he also avoids some of the usual criticism of social movement scholars for concentrating too narrowly on one movement when it is clear that these actors do not exist in a vacuum.
Ondetti’s primary contribution to social movement scholarship, more broadly, is his evaluation of competing explanations for the rise and decline of movement intensity. Rather than propose one explanation and pick events from the movement to support a theoretical claim, Ondetti presents a narrative for each period, regarding the movement and the political environment, and then assesses how well each theoretical perspective explains the movement’s rise or decline during that period. Although other studies have presented similar details about the trajectory of the Landless Workers’ Movement (Branford & Rocha, 2002; Wright & Wolford, 2003), none have systematically evalu- ated competing theoretical claims from the social movement literature to explain shifts in movement activity. Studies of other movements have also tended to present one theory, rather than pit various approaches against each other for explanatory power. Ondetti offers an example for social movement scholars to follow in bringing existing approaches to bear on a new question and in carrying the comparison of each approach’s explanatory strength throughout the narrative chapters.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
850	Comparative Political Studies
Despite the book’s considerable strengths, however, the analysis suffers from two major flaws: First, the author fails to concretely define the variables of the polit- ical opportunity structure; second, he does not carry through his argument regard- ing the free-rider problem to address the full dynamics of occupations. Regarding the first point, Ondetti begins with a discussion of Tarrow’s basic definition (1994) of the political opportunity structure as “dimensions of the political environment that provide incentives for people to undertake collective action by affecting their expectations for success or failure” (p. 85, as quoted on p. 34). From this perspec- tive, movements arise when there are shifts in political conditions, of which Ondetti notes a few examples—the opening up of authoritarian regimes, the realignment of alliances, and the changes in elite preferences. Ondetti also answers criticisms of the political opportunity approach’s “conceptual stretching” by using what he sees as Tarrow’s “mainstream” definition while being mindful of the two-way dynamics of influence between movements and external events. Although none of this analysis is problematic on its own, the author does not clearly identify instances of political opportunity shifts, which would be useful for either accepting or rejecting the expla- nation for movement changes throughout the book. It is clear from the analysis that external events matter, but it is less clear which types of events matter for either increasing or decreasing movement intensity and by what measure the author judges the political opportunity structure to offer explanatory power greater than that of the other approaches. Although I am not suggesting the need for quantitative analysis, a clearer definition of events constituting the political opportunity structure and a framework for judging the relative impact of various events would strengthen the author’s conclusions regarding the relative weight of one explanation over another.
Regarding the trajectory of the landless movement as an anomaly in the early 1990s, as compared to other movements, Ondetti cites several sources in agree- ment that movements generally declined during this period. However, he provides little support for his argument that the rural landless movement was unique in its ability to overcome the free-rider problem (Olson, 1965) through the strategy of land occupations. In his discussion of activist strategy in the early 1990s, he quickly dismisses the effectiveness of urban land occupations as a legitimate strategy for pressuring the government; then, he acknowledges in the conclusion that urban occupation movements across Latin America actually do overcome the free-rider problem. Extending the analysis across periods and assessing the rise and decline of other movements would strengthen and clarify the author’s argument regarding the uniqueness of occupations as a strategy to overcome the free-rider problem.
In sum, the book offers a significant contribution to social movement studies, through the use of empirical evidence to refute and support various theoretical expla- nations for movement trajectory. Social movement scholars should use this work as a model for applying detailed empirical evidence to assess alternative arguments.
Maureen Donaghy
University of Colorado, Boulder
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Book Reviews	851
References
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To inherit the earth: The landless movement and the struggle
for a new Brazil. San Francisco: Food First.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2009
City and Regional Planning
Geoforum
The rise and transformation of the Brazilian landless movement into a counter-hegemonic political actor: A Gramscian analysis
Abdurazack Karriem


Department of City and Regional Planning, Cornell University, 321 West Sibley Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 31 October 2007 Received in revised form 5 September 2008
Keywords:
Brazil MST Antonio Gramsci Counter-hegemony Land occupations Common sense Political ecology Scale Social movements
1. Introduction
[I]f yesterday the subaltern element was a thing, today it is. . . a historical person, a protagonist. – Antonio Gramsci
The MST’s struggle for land reform is also a struggle for the preservation of life and nature. – MST
In this paper, I analyze the struggles of the Movimento dos Trabalha- dores Rurais Sem Terra or Brazilian Landless Rural Workers Move- ment (MST), which is widely acknowledged as one of the most organized, dynamic, and influential mass movements in Latin America (Petras, 1997a; Branford and Rocha, 2002; Wright and Wolford, 2003). Through occupying land, the MST has pressured successive governments into settling more than 400,000 families on over 7 million hectares of farmland (Rossetto, 2005; Comparato, 2003). For the MST, a successful program of land and agrarian re- form is only possible in the context of broad social change, includ- ing changing existing nature–society relations. Consequently, the MST has increasingly engaged in larger political contestations that
* Present address: 2148 O Street NW, Apt 309, Washington, DC 20037, USA. E-mail address: ak11@cornell.edu
0016-7185/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2008.10.005
abstract
The Brazilian Landless Movement (MST) is widely acknowledged as one of the most organized, dynamic, and influential social movements in Latin America. The MST has increasingly inserted the struggle for land within larger political contestations for broad social change, leading conservatives and leftists alike to describe it as a ‘‘first class actor” in Brazilian politics. What explains the move from corporatist strug- gles for land to broader counter-hegemonic contestations; put differently, how did the MST come to acquire ‘global ambition’? Much of the literature on the MST analyzes its external actions but without explaining what drives these actions. This paper utilizes a Gramscian political ecology approach to com- prehend the MST’s political actions and its rise and transformation into a counter-hegemonic political actor. Specifically, I evaluate the development of the MST’s organizational praxis from corporatist strug- gles for land in the late 1970s to ‘global ambition’ and changing nature–society relations by the early 2000’s. Such an approach brings to light the role of organization building, political education, alliance building, and subaltern agency in propelling the MST’s political mobilizations. In so doing, this paper con- tributes to the literature on the MST and collective action. This paper also engages with a ‘politics of scale’ since the conquest of geographic scale is critical to understanding the MST’s national growth and political actions. This paper concludes by arguing that the rise and transformation of the MST into a vibrant coun- ter-hegemonic actor in Brazilian politics was a gradual process that matured as it territorialized into a national movement.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
go beyond the struggle for land, leading the conservative newspa- per, O Estado de Sao Paulo, to call it ‘‘a first class actor on the political scene” and the Marxist historian, Eric Hobsbawm, to characterize it as ‘‘probably the most ambitious social movement in contemporary Latin America.”1 What explains the insertion of the struggle for land within broader counter-hegemonic actions; put differently, how did the MST come to acquire ‘‘global ambition” (Harvey, 1996)?
Much of the literature on the MST’s political actions analyzes its external actions but without explaining what drives these actions (e.g. Meszaros, 2000; Hammond, 1999; Comparato, 2003). I devel- op a Gramscian political ecology approach – a synthesis of Grams- cian political economy and political ecology – to analyze the MST’s political actions and rise and transformation into a counter-hege- monic political actor. Specifically, I evaluate the development of the MST’s organizational praxis from corporatist struggles for land in the late 1970s to ‘global ambition’ and changing nature–society relations by the early 2000’s. The MST’s territorialization nationally does not only lead to the conquest of land, it also leads to the spa- tialization of an organizational praxis that challenges hegemonic constructions of ‘common sense’ or what McCarthy and Prudham
1 Hobsbawm cited on back cover of Branford and Rocha (2002). O Estado de Sao Paulo cited by Comparato (2003, p. 121).
(2004, p. 279) call the production of ‘‘neoliberal discourses as self- evident truths in today’s world.” The MST’s successful scaling-up from a territorial struggle for land to a popular project of social transformation has been accomplished through an organizational praxis that introduces a counter-hegemonic popular common sense that empowers MST members to challenge private property relations through land occupations, that promotes popular educa- tion, self-organization, leadership building, and the remaking of nature–society relations through agro-ecological practices. A Gramscian political ecology approach, then, highlights the role of subaltern agency in propelling the MST’s political mobilizations. In so doing, this paper contributes to the literature on the MST and to our understanding of collective action.
This paper also engages with a ‘politics of scale’ since the con- quest of geographic scale is key to understanding the MST’s polit- ical action and growth into a national movement. In utilizing the terms rural–urban, local–global, and society–nature, I do not see them as fixed or binary concepts; rather, following Swyngedouw (1997), Smith (1984), and Harvey (1996), I analyze them as mutu- ally constitutive entities that are both produced and reproduced in the contested realm of social relations. While much of the litera- ture on scale politics analyzes the role of capital in producing space and nature from above, I utilize an emergent Gramscian political ecology approach to evaluate how MST struggles recast scalar and nature–society relations from below.
I commence the paper by outlining the methodology that in- forms my research. I then theorize how a Gramscian political ecol- ogy approach might provide a useful lens through which to evaluate the MST’s resource struggles and evolution into a coun- ter-hegemonic movement. I next analyze the genesis of the MST and show how liberation theologians created the conditions for the landless to challenge their status of social exclusion. Subse- quently, I appraise the MST’s territorialization nationally and uti- lize Gramsci’s concept of ‘common sense’ to analyze how ‘global ambition’ becomes rooted in the movement’s organizational praxis. I then proceed to assess the MST’s national consolidation, its contestations against neoliberal policies at local–global scales, the challenge to the capitalist production of nature, and its efforts to create alternative nature–society relations. I proceed to critically reflect on the MST’s rise into a counter-hegemonic political actor, showing difficulties encountered and qualitative growth across its historical trajectory. I conclude by arguing that the acquisition of ‘global ambition’ was a gradual process that matured as the MST territorialized into a national movement.
2. Methodology
Ethnographic and qualitative research on resource struggles are common threads in political ecology analyses (Moore, 1993; Paul- son et al., 2003). This paper draws on qualitative research con- ducted over the period 2004–2006 in the southern and northeastern Brazilian states of Rio Grande Sul and Pernambuco, where I lived in MST land reform settlements (assentamentos) and land encampments (acampamentos). I conducted 120 formal and informal open-ended interviews with MST rank-and-file mem- bers, state-level and national MST leaders, academics, government officials, and members of the Catholic Church.2 I was a participant observer in acampamento, assentamento, state-level and national MST meetings, which, along with my interviews and numerous informal discussions, provided deeper insights into the subjective
2 In line with the requirements of the Cornell University Commission on Human Subjects Research, allinterviewee names have been changed to protect confidential- ity. All translations from Portuguese intoEnglish are mine.
factors that move MST struggles for land, a more egalitarian society, and new nature–society relations.
3. Hegemony, counter-hegemony, and the making of Gramscian political ecology
A Gramscian political economy approach is useful in under- standing how elite power is maintained and how grassroots move- ments can build a counter-hegemonic project. For Gramsci (1971), ruling class hegemony is not based on force alone, but on a combi- nation of coercion and consent. That is, a hegemonic class rules by incorporating some of the interests of subordinate classes. Implicit in the notion of hegemony is the need to build alliances with other social forces and provide leadership. Intellectual or ideological leadership is not merely imposed; instead, subaltern classes con- sent to or are persuaded to accept dominant ideas as ‘‘common sense.”
Here Gramsci challenges the view that the masses are imbued with ‘‘false consciousnesses” and argues that counter-hegemonic movements have to contest the exercise of hegemony as common sense. For Gramsci (1971), common sense is the unconscious and uncritical ways in which individuals make sense of and perceive the world around them. These cultural conceptions of the world (e.g. religion, folklore) – which are inherited from the past – fre- quently come into conflict with an individual’s political activity. Predictably, common sense is the sphere in which hegemony is exercised, but it can also be the terrain from which a counter-hege- monic challenge to dominant ideas can be mounted. This, however, requires a sustained critique of common sense, enabling individu- als to move to ‘‘good sense” or, what I call, a popular common sense. According to Gramsci:
A philosophy of praxis cannot but be present itself at the outset in a polemical and critical guise, as superseding the existing mode of thinking and existing concrete thought (the existing cultural world). . . therefore, it must be a criti- cism of ‘common sense’, basing itself initially, however, on common sense in order to demonstrate that ‘everyone’ is a philosopher and that it is not a question of introducing from scratch a scientific form of thought into everyone’s individual life, but of renovating and making ‘critical’ an already existing activity. . . . The purpose of the synthesis must be to criticize the problems, to demonstrate their real value, if any, . . . and to determine what the new contemporary problems are and how the old problem should now be organized. (1971, pp. 330–31, emphasis added).
Central to a Gramscian analysis is a belief in the ability of historical subjects to both understand and change the world around them. Subaltern groups are not passive recipients to whom a ‘readymade ideology’ needs to be taken; they are the starting point for ‘making critical’ their social reality.
Hegemony is never absolute. It is continuously contested by oppositional forces, reformulated due to tensions or splits in the ruling bloc, and adapted to changing circumstances. Thus, hege- mony is dynamic and continuously needs to be renewed to absorb internal and external pressures. This leads us to the battleground where hegemony is won, maintained, and contested, and where an alternative hegemony can be forged: civil society, the sphere of ideological and cultural reproduction. Gramsci sought to under- stand the resilience of capitalism and the failure of communist par- ties to take power in Western Europe. His analysis brought him to a critical appraisal of the relationship between the state and civil society: when power is centralized in the state, it maybe possible to seize power through a frontal assault or ‘‘war of movement” whereas in liberal democracies power is diffused across civil
A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325	317
318	A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325
society, thus requiring a protracted strategy – the ‘‘war of position”. Moreover, Gramsci (1971, p. 235) argues that in mature states ‘‘‘civil society’ has become a very complex structure. . . which is resistant to the catastrophic ‘incursions’ of the immediate eco- nomic element (crises, depressions, etc.).” Here Gramsci contests the reduction of hegemony to economic relations, arguing that hegemony is founded on a much broader base.
For a war of position to be successful, a counter-hegemonic force will have to move beyond its own class or corporatist inter- ests and take into account broader national-popular demands. Moreover, it will have to engage in political and ideological strug- gle or ‘‘intellectual and moral reform” which requires a critique of hegemonic ideas as ‘common sense.’ This raises the importance of ideology as the ‘cement’ uniting different social groups and its role in driving individuals to make history. In Gramsci’s words, ideology becomes the terrain ‘‘on which men [and women] move, acquire consciousness of their position, struggle” (cited by Mouffe (1979, p. 185)). Ideology does not simply take hold; it requires ‘organic intellectuals’ to raise consciousness and transform ideas into a material force. This does not mean that intellectuals drive a war of position. For Gramsci, transformative politics is based on mass participation and movements must continuously form new organic intellectuals to give practical content to his assertion that ‘every- one is a philosopher’. Furthermore, ‘‘the mode of being of the new intellectual can no longer consist in eloquence. . . but in active participation in practical life, as constructor, organizer, ‘permanent persuader’ and not just a simple orator” (Gramsci, 1971, p. 10).
3.1. Towards a Gramscian political ecology perspective
Political ecology has long had an analytical focus on struggles over access to land and the utilization of natural resources (Blaikie and Brookfield, 1987; Bryant and Bailey, 1997; Turner, 2004; Paul- son et al., 2003; Peet and Watts, 1996). Political ecology’s concern with social justice as it pertains to resource use and access brings to light the complex interrelationship between nature and society and hence to questions of livelihoods. Resource conflicts have ta- ken on particular importance in the contemporary conjuncture in which the far-reaching commodification of ecological resources – e.g. water (Bakker, 2007), plant genes or GMOs (Shiva, 2000), land and ocean fisheries (Mansfield, 2004, 2007) – ‘‘indicates nature’s deep remaking within the circuits of capital” (Castree, 2000, p. 25). The remaking of nature under neoliberalism has, however, not been an uncontested process; it has set in motion the making of counter-hegemonic movements which, following Gramsci (1971), have challenged the naturalization of the ideas behind the remaking or production of nature as ‘common sense’.
How do we study conflicts over resources? Neumann (1992) suggests that a political ecology analysis of resource conflicts should include attention to the actors and the social relations that they are enmeshed in, trace the connection of local relations to the broader geographical and political environment, and situate these resource struggles historically to better comprehend the contem- porary situation. A Gramscian political economy approach – with its analytical focus on the production of hegemony – incorporates and complements Neuman’s suggestions by providing interesting pathways in understanding how nature and space is produced through coercive and consensual means, how movements contest resources, and how society–nature relations might be remade.
While his fragmentary writings do not explicitly delve into questions of nature, Gramsci’s (1971, p. 448) assertion that ‘‘hu- man history should be conceived also as the history of nature” speaks to the mutually constitutive character of society–nature relations that have come to shape contemporary political ecology analyses. Like Gramsci, the idea of the ‘production of nature’ pop- ularized by Smith (1984) challenges the notion of an ‘‘independent
non-social nature” (Castree, 2000, p. 25) or the separation of nature and society (Braun and Castree, 1998; Harvey, 1996). As Smith (1984, p. 54) states: ‘‘With the production of nature at a world scale, nature is progressively produced from within and as part of so-called second nature”, a process that has accelerated under neoliberalism.3
The production of nature, then, is deeply implicated in the exer- cise of hegemony, with implications for control over and the strug- gle for resources. A Gramscian political ecology approach provides a useful framework from which to understand the production of nature and how subaltern classes contest the remaking of nature in their struggles to build livelihoods. Gramsci’s writings also en- gage with the scalar politics of political ecology literature. His work is replete with spatial metaphors and ideas that are spelt out, for example, in his notes on the Italian unification process and the Southern Question (Gramsci, 1994; Jessop, 2005; Wainwright, 2005). Edward Said admired Gramsci’s spatial thinking, stating that he presented ‘‘an essentially geographical, territorial appre- hension	of	human	history	and	society. . .	he	was	political	in	the practical sense, conceiving of politics as a contest over territory, both actual and historical, to be won, fought over, controlled, held, lost, gained” (cited by Jessop (2005, p. 435); also Wainwright, 2005).
Central to a Gramscian political ecology perspective is a philos- ophy of praxis: that is, of theory that informs practice and vice ver- sa. While much has changed since Gramsci wrote the Prison Notebooks, his ideas still have force for both analyzing hegemonic rule and the shaping of a counter-hegemonic politics of collective action. A Gramscian political ecology perspective is particularly apt for such an endeavor since it rejects the reduction of all strug- gles over resources to economic and class relations, yet retains class as an important tool of analysis; it situates resource struggles within a historic context; stresses the importance of ideology, organization and strategy; and, emphasizes the significance of cul- ture, thus taking into account the politics of everyday life that in- form struggles over ecological resources. Furthermore, to forge an alternative hegemony, counter-hegemonic movements needs to do more than simply resist the dominant model; they have to develop alternative forms of production and reproduction or alter- native conceptions of nature–society relations.
4. The genesis of the MST: 1979–1985
The genesis of the MST can be traced to the military regime’s agricultural modernization policies – and the 1979 occupations of the Macali and Brilhante estates and the acampamento at Encru- zilhada Natalino – which expelled family farmers and tenants and brought vast tracts of public land into private hands.4 In a scene reminiscent of the great enclosure movement in 19th century Eur- ope, almost 30 million Brazilians were forced off the land between 1960 and 1980 and moved to the cities (Perz, 2000, p. 866), leading to what Lefebvre (1991) calls the production of (urban and rural) space, and what Smith (1984) calls the production of space and nat- ure.5 Thus, the forced separation of rural workers from the means of production and into wage labor leads to the production of new agrarian-scapes and society–nature relations.
3	The term ‘second nature’ is from Marx and Engels and refers to nature that has been transformed by human activity while ‘first nature’ is nature that is original and independent of human activity.
4	For an analysis of the Macali, Brilhante and Encruzilhada Natalino struggles and the historical roots of the MST, (see Marcon, 1997; Branford and Rocha, 2002; Fernandes, 2001; Wright and Wolford, 2003), and Stedile and Fernandes (2001).
5 City and countryside are thus socially constructed and subject to further re- production (Williams, 1973). Davis (2004), in Planet of Slums, discusses contemporary processes of space production across the globe, showing that spatial scales are not fixed but products of changing social relations.
Brazil’s conservative agricultural modernization resembles Gramsci’s notion of ‘passive revolution’ whereby ‘‘far-reaching modifications in a country’s economic structure are made from above, through the agency of the state apparatuses, without rely- ing on the active participation of the people” (Simon, 1982, p. 49). Instead of embarking on a radical program of agrarian reform, the military regime opted to create a small class of large-scale ‘modern’ farmers.
Liberation theologians linked to the Catholic and Lutheran churches played a formative role in the MST’s genesis period (Gai- ger, 1987; Marcon, 1997). They preached that the struggle for land was just and that the landless had a right to land, which was a ‘gift from god’. In asserting land as a social good, they contested sacro- sanct notions of private property and provided strong religious and moral backing to land occupations. This was crucial as ‘respect’ for private property was deeply ingrained and enforced in rural social relations. Religious socialization is still utilized to provide moral justification for land occupations as Gustavo, a MST settler in Rio Grande do Sul (hereafter RS), suggests: ‘‘Land is a gift from God and, if we are all children of God, you have to have access to it.”6 Symbolic meanings can thus play an important role in struggles over resources, as well as over ‘‘competing cultural understandings of rights, property relations, and entitlements” (Moore, 1993, p. 383). The ability to tap into the folklore of the landless and give it a pop- ular common sense inflection has been central to the MST’s rise to counter-hegemony.
An enduring influence from liberation theology has been the continued use of the mística or mystique, which reflects Catholic values of suffering and redemption to confront difficulties, strengthen resolve, and provide vitality in the quest for land and a better life. Most MST meetings commence with a mística (a the- atre rendition) which draws on peasant folklore, pays tribute to historic figures in the struggle for social justice such as Zumbi dos Palmares, and draws sustenance from indigenous and peasant struggles of the past.7 Josue, a MST member from the Conquest of the Frontier settlement in RS, describes the importance of the mística as an emotional force that feeds the MST’s utopia of an egalitarian society:
[T]he mística touches you inside. It touches our lives even more because it shows the mystery of struggling, of dream- ing, of having hope, of the world that is [out] there. So through the mística we receive our life, our reality, our dreams, our history. And the místicas give us enthusiasm, give us courage.8
Thus, in the formative stage of the MST, liberation theologians exercised the Gramscian role of organic intellectuals by raising consciousness. They did not bring consciousness from outside, but started in the cultural realm of common sense or the folklore of the landless. In doing so, they provided the tools for the landless to understand their social reality, organize themselves, and be- come protagonists of social change. It showed that that the land- less were not prisoners of an all-powerful system, but subjects of their own history. This ‘‘popular religiosity” (Gorgen, 1997) would become an important component of the MST’s open, eclectic ideology.
Prior to the MST’s founding, Brazil witnessed a mushrooming of isolated rural struggles, which were mostly violently suppressed. In the early 1980s, the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT) sponsored
6	Interview #19, 6/08/2004.
7 Zumbi, a 17th century slave leader, led a revolt against slave owners and established a 30,000 strong free community, the Quilombo de Palmares, which resisted for over fifty years (Branford and Rocha, 2002).
8	Interview #55, 10/22/2004. For more on the mística, (see MST, 1998; Bogo, 2002; Issa, 2007).
a series of meetings to unite localized movements or ‘‘militant par- ticularisms” (Harvey, 1996). Joao Pedro Stedile, a founder MST member, recalls the advice offered by Jose de Souza Martins, a re- spected analyst of Brazilian agrarian struggles and former advisor of the CPT, who stated that a movement that fights for land will only have a future if it transforms itself into a ‘‘political agent to change society” and if it ‘‘manages to acquire a national character” (Stedile and Fernandes, 2001, p. 21, emphasis added).
Stedile and his colleagues were convinced of the necessity for ‘scaling up’ mobilizations for land by building a national move- ment that transcended the pitfalls of localized ‘militant particular- isms’. In this regard, Harvey (1996, p. 324, emphasis added) highlights both the potential and dangers of successful localized struggles in promoting militant particularisms:
Anti-capitalist movements. . . are generally better at organiz- ing in and dominating ‘their’ places than at commanding space. ‘[R]egional resistances’... can indeed flourish in a multitude of particular places. But while such movements form a potential basis for that ‘militant particularism’ that can acquire global ambition, left to themselves they are easily dominated by the power of capital to coordinate accumula- tion across universal but fragmented space. The potentiality for militant particularism embedded in place runs the risk of sliding back into parochialist politics.9
The MST’s early victories were achieved under extremely diffi- cult conditions (of military siege in the case of Encruzilhada Nata- lino), and subtle and overt repression from the military police and agrarian elites; they were also due to the solidarity of urban move- ments and progressive sectors of the church. The church, with its local, national, and transnational scalar presence, provided crucial material, financial, and moral support. The MST drew on this soli- darity to deepen the acquisition of ‘global ambition’ in later years.
The first articulation of ‘global ambition’ emerged at the MST’s founding National Meeting in 1984 at Cascavel, Paraná, where it af- firmed that direct action would be the means to achieve the fol- lowing objectives: land belongs to those who work it; fight for an egalitarian society; maintain organizational autonomy from political parties while encouraging member participation in poli- tics; promote leadership training; and, build alliances with urban workers and peasants in Latin America (MST, 1989).
These objectives signaled growing independence from the Church as mentor, leader, and intellectual. Moreover, in setting it- self the task of building a national movement and forging alliances at the city and Latin America levels, the MST was engaging in a pol- itics	in	which	‘‘scale	emerges. . .	in	the	fusion	of	ideology	and practice” (Delaney and Leitner, 1997, p. 97).
5. Territorialization of the MST: 1985–1990
This period describes the spatial growth or ‘territorialization’ (Fernandes, 1996, 2001) of the MST into a national movement. I use the concept territorialization not only to analyze the spatial growth of the movement, but also the diffusion of an organiza- tional praxis that drives the MST’s national growth. Territorializa- tion is not linear, but a contested process. For example, Miguel, a member of the 16th of March assentamento and a state-level MST leader in RS, acknowledges the contested class and spatial charac- ter of the territorialization or spatial quest for land:
[T]he development and the continuous rooting of capitalism in the countryside continuously creates more difficulties for
9 Harvey reworks Raymond Williams’ idea of militant particularism, especially his understanding of ‘‘working class self-organization” that ‘‘tried to connect particular struggles to a general struggle” (cited by Harvey (1996, p. 32)).
A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325	319
320	A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325
the poor, the weak; and, at the same time that we made a movement for the redistribution of land, capitalism made the concentration of land. [So] we are in this constant polit- ical dispute, struggling, fighting to redistribute land, to de- concentrate land property and, on the other hand, the mech- anisms of the [capitalist] model concentrating land.10
I lived in the city. I worked for 15 years in [Porto Alegre], so what happens there? There in that society there is no work. It is very difficult, me with three children and my husband. It was very difficult to find a job, when one day a grassroots articulator [MST militant] arrived to invite us to join the movement.13
The decentralized organizational structure and the self-organiza- tion inculcated by the nucleos have thus been central to the spatial growth of the MST.
The popular method of education in the organizational struc- tures (e.g. nucleos) of the MST allows for the dialectical process of participation–learning. Through participation–learning, MST members become active citizens who see their demand for land as a right, not a hand out. The transformation to active citizens is not automatic; it is a long, slow process, which necessarily entails challenging inherited ideas or ‘common sense’. The MST’s acampa- mentos and assentamentos are the spaces in which ‘common sense’ is deconstructed and disputed, and a popular common sense insti- tuted. The adoption of Freire’s (1993) method of popular education is crucial to the MST’s philosophy of praxis since ‘‘Every relation- ship of ‘hegemony’ is necessarily an educational relationship” (Gramsci, 1971, p. 350). Educational relationships constitute the essence of hegemony and popular education has a key role to play in supporting a ‘war of position’. To this end, the MST emphasizes political education and the development of its own organic intel- lectuals, which has been crucial to its growth and mobilizing capacity. Many of the local, regional and national leaders have par- ticipated in, planned, and led land occupations, and maintain an or- ganic link with the acampamentos and assentamentos.
The promotion of a philosophy of praxis has allowed the MST to engender a consciousness of counter-hegemony among its mem- bers, many of whom come to see the fight for land not in corporat- ist terms, but as part of a larger project of change. Joao and Gustavo, respectively, describe the acquisition of a counter-hege- monic consciousness:
I entered into the MST out of necessity [for land], [but] the movement taught us to have a larger vision, to have a vision that it is not enough to struggle for yourself, for a piece of land for yourself. The movement gives you conditions to understand the whole of society, the way in which it is struc- tured, and who it is that orders in the country today.14
I would like to say that the organized struggle of the people is the solution for our liberation. If . . . a person thinks ‘I need land!’ and goes to struggle for land and not struggle for structural change, he is doubly mistaken. The struggle is for land, it is for credit, it is for the change of society as a whole, it is for schools, it is for everything. So I think, I am certain, that an organized struggle [ensures] that we get to reach our objectives.15
Joao and Gustavo capture the practical and philosophical out- look of the MST. Education emerges as a critical pedagogy of per- sonal and broader social transformation, facilitating the move from common to a popular common sense. I do not suggest that all members are reached by consciousness-raising, that all partici- pate equally, or that the attainment of global ambition is uniform.
13	Interview #2, 5/29/2004.
14	Interview #58, 10/24/2004. In a practical manifestation of global ambition, Joao and his partner, Maria, shortly after being settled on Assentamento Conquista da Fronteira, volunteered two years to help build the MST in northeast Brazil. During my field visit, Joao, Maria and their colleagues were planning another land occupation. I interviewed numerous MST members who had similarly volunteered to help build the MST throughout Brazil.
Each successful land occupation leads to the establishment of assentamento which provides the springboard for further land occupations and hence territorialization of the movement. A MST member, Calixto, describes the organizational praxis that drives the territorialization of the MST. Calixto and his comrades, on con- quering Assentamento Sumaré I in the state of Sao Paulo, recruited other landless families to undertake another occupation and set up a new acampamento, which led to the conquest of Assentamento Su- maré II. This territorialization process was repeated and eventually led to the establishment of Assentamento’s Sumaré III and IV, a strategy that has been territorialized across Brazil (Fernandes, 1996, 2001). This analysis does not suggest that territorialization is a straightforward process. Rather, occupations face violent evic- tions, often resulting in injury, arrest or death, and it can take years of living in an acampamento facing harsh winters and summers before being settled. Furthermore, limited access to basic human necessities (water and food) is a constant feature of this difficult struggle for land.
an
A key factor that drives the territorialization of the MST is the organizational praxis that is diffused in an acampamento or assen- tamento, which, once established, becomes a space for self-organi- zation, political socialization, solidarity, forging global ambition, and the making of a popular common sense.11 The MST’s organiza- tional structure draws on the ecclesiastical base communities (CEBs) promoted by liberation theologians. The CEBs are spaces where small groups or nucleos of individuals and families study, debate, and reflect on their social realities and organize to change them. Lib- eration theologians did not see the poor as victims who needed char- ity, but as actors who, through organization and struggle, can become the protagonists of their own liberation. Based on the CEB model, an acampamento or assentamento of 100 families is divided into 10 nucleos of 10 families, with two coordinators – a man and a woman. Other members of the nucleo participate in the health, education, communication, political education, or mass front sectors.
A typical land occupation commences when militants from the mass front sector recruit landless families, agricultural workers or the urban unemployed on farms, in rural towns, and metropolitan centers. Giselle, who participated in 40 land occupations in the Pontal de Paranapanema region in Sao Paulo, describes the recruit- ment process, stating that it is important to stress the risks in- volved to those who want land, but also highlight the reward of gaining land for their families. Potential recruits are informed that they have a constitutional right to land, but that this right is only applied by the government through occupying land.12 The territo- rialization process described by Calixto above follows the methodol- ogy outlined by Giselle. Recruitment also takes place through familial or friendship ties and priests sympathetic to the MST. Ana, from Acampamento Guerreiros de Zumbi, describes her reasons for joining the MST and how she was recruited:
10	Interview #23, 6/07/2004. Miguel, formerly landless and a MST member since the mid-1980s, has been seconded by his cooperative to work full-time for the MST for a two year period. As a leader, he helps build alliances with urban and rural movements, negotiates with state-level government agencies, and maintains links with assentamentos and acampamentos in the state. However, he also has to maintain ties to his cooperative by engaging in agricultural production activities at least two weekends every month.
11	An acampamento is set up immediately after the occupation of an unproductive farm. An assentamento, by contrast, represents land transferred to occupying families by the government.
12	Interview #70, 12/30/2004.
15	Interview #19, 6/08/2004.
Indeed, my visits to MST acampamentos and assentamentos showed that levels of participation and consciousness varied, but I also found that a critical mass of members participated in Movement activities and had attained a critical consciousness. The MST thus built upon the liberation theology utopia that ‘there must be an alternative’ to injustice and social exclusion, a utopia that could be reached through an organizational praxis that promotes partic- ipation, ideals of solidarity, and political consciousness.
6. National consolidation and counter-hegemonic struggles: 1990–2002
In this period, the MST consolidated itself as a national move- ment, increasingly mobilized against neoliberal policies, and faced opposition from landlords and government. Paradoxically, the MST experienced its most expressive period of growth under Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s government (1995–2002) when Brazil’s neo- liberal project was most forcefully implemented. The implementa- tion of neoliberal policies was regarded as imperative in transforming Brazil into a ‘modern’, competitive nation and, for Cardoso, this meant that the exclusion of sectors of the rural and urban populace was unavoidable.16 Cardoso aggressively privatized parastatals and radically liberalized trade by reducing import tariffs from 32.2% to 14.2% (Rocha, 2002). While family agriculture was left to face market forces, agribusiness received generous export incen- tives and cheap loans to become globally competitive. Consequently, agro-export agriculture mechanized heavily, resulting in the elimi- nation of two million agricultural posts and the expulsion of almost 400,000 smallholders between 1995 and 1998 (Pereira, 2003, p. 52). Thus, the celebrated ‘global competitiveness’ of Brazil’s agribusiness was produced through active state support.
For Cardoso, land reform was an anachronism under globaliza- tion and dismissed it as a ‘nineteenth century demand’ (Pereira, 2003). The MST, however, continued to mobilize the landless to oc- cupy land throughout Brazil. The MST discovered that landowners in the Pontal de Paranapanema region in the state of Sao Paulo had illegally acquired a million hectares of public land and launched numerous occupations that forced the government to intervene and expropriate land, leading to the settlement of 6000 families by the end of 1994 (Branford and Rocha, 2002; Fernandes, 1996). These successes swelled the ranks of the MST and, a year later, 22,000 families occupied a further 59 estates (Hammond, 1999). The MST made numerous gains in the northeast, the north, and center-west regions of Brazil (Fernandes, 2001; Morrisawa, 2001; Wright and Wolford, 2003). The territorialization of occupations nationally has resulted in what Harvey (1996, p. 324) would call the MST’s move from ‘‘organizing in and dominating” place to ‘‘commanding space.”
The struggle for resources to produce livelihoods has faced vio- lent opposition from landowners and the police.17 In a climate of rising resource conflicts, 10 landless were killed in August 1995 at Corumbiara; and on April 17, 1996, 19 MST members were killed and 69 wounded while on a march at Eldorado dos Carajas in the northern state of Pará protesting unmet government promises. Keck and Sikkink (1998) describe how ‘‘advocacy networks” within and between nations communicate and exchange information around common concerns such as human rights. The Carajas massacre al-
16	Cardoso stated that ‘‘the excluded might number somewhere around 16 million people!” (cited by Pereira, 2003, p. 50), an astounding statement given that Brazil already had one of the worst indices for land and income distribution in the world. The top 20% of the population appropriates 64.2% of national income, while the lowest 40% earns 5.7% (World Bank, 2000). Moreover, one percent of landowners own 45% of all farm land (Petras and Veltmeyer, 2003).
17 Since the mid-1980s, almost 1600 workers were killed in land conflicts (Cadji, 2000; CPT, 2004).
lowed the MST and network activists to exert strong domestic and global pressure, forcing Cardoso to establish a Special Ministry for Agrarian Reform and grant federal courts jurisdiction over human rights crimes (Cadji, 2000). The massacre enabled the MST to scale-up struggles for human rights, while simultaneously situating access to land as a key socio-economic right.
After the massacre, the government sought to politically isolate the MST. The MST went on the offensive and commenced a two- month-long national march for ‘Land Reform, Employment and Justice’ to the nation’s capital, Brasília. The march opened a na- tional debate on Cardoso’s neoliberal policies which expelled small farmers and generated urban unemployment because of privatiza- tion and trade liberalization. When the 1000 marchers who cov- ered 1500 km converged onto and ‘occupied’ Brasília, 100,000 people welcomed them (Chaves, 2000; Stedile and Fernandes, 2001). The march was a good example of the MST disputing the naturalization of neoliberal ideas as ‘common sense’ at a mass le- vel, and is regarded as representing the ‘‘first victory” by popular forces ‘‘over the neoliberal policies implemented by the Brazilian state” (Almeida and Sanchez, 2000, p. 23).
6.1. Hegemony through domination
In a demonstration of its organizational capacity, the MST con- tinued its offensive actions and linked corporatist struggles for land to a diversified range of national-popular contestations. For example, in April 1999, the MST co-organized the ‘Tribunal on For- eign Debt’ and, in December 1999, it scaled-up its struggle to the global level by participating in the ‘Battle in Seattle’ against the WTO. In April 2000, the MST joined indigenous movements in a na- tional campaign against the government’s celebration of ‘500 years of the discovery of Brazil’; in one week – April 17–24, 2000 – MST members occupied 150 unproductive farms throughout Brazil, involving 20,000 families; and, in May 2000, it coordinated the occupation of the Ministry of Finance in Brasilia and the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform offices in 19 states to demand the release of agricultural credit (Comparato, 2003; Morrisawa, 2001).
These actions generated a flood of negative media reports crit- icizing the MST for transgressing the rule of law. Comparato (2003), in a detailed analysis of newspaper and magazine reports, illustrates the open collusion between government and the media in tarnishing the MST’s public image, creating the pretext for repressive actions. To combat MST mobilizations, the government launched an ‘anti-MST package’: Lumiar, the government’s techni- cal assistance program for assentamentos, was shut, resulting in the dismissal of 1300 agronomists; an ‘‘anti-invasion” provisional measure excluded all occupied properties from expropriation for a two-year period; and, settlers who participated in occupations were to be excluded from the agrarian reform program. Govern- ment actions thus sought to break the nexus of the MST’s struggle for land and its struggle on the land (Colleti, 2002; Comparato, 2003).
These coercive measures placed the MST squarely on the defen- sive: land occupations dropped sharply and 258 militants were ar- rested on charges ranging from the formation of criminal gangs to illegal possession of arms (Comparato, 2003). A MST leader in Per- nambuco acknowledged the severity of these measures: ‘‘We had already legitimated the occupation of land and [now] the govern- ment puts us into illegality, prohibiting” occupied land from being ‘‘expropriated.”18 Cardoso’s government had asserted its domination over the MST. According to Gramsci (1971, p. 12), ‘‘direct domina- tion” is exercised through the repressive state apparatus or the
18	Interview #51, 8/17/2004.
A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325	321
322	A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325
‘‘state and ‘juridical government’” while hegemony is exercised through institutions of civil society. The state does not simply im- pose domination by force; in complex societies it tries to gain the consent of broad sectors of civil society or, as Gramsci puts it, ‘‘force should appear to be supported by the agreement of the majority, ex- pressed by so-called organs of public opinion – newspapers and associations.”19 Thus, the coercive component of hegemony was em- ployed to enforce control over the MST since it refused to consent to and openly challenged hegemonic notions of common sense.
These measures did not stop the MST from engaging in popular struggles. In 2002, the MST, the Catholic Church, and other move- ments organized a national plebiscite against the Free Trade Area of the America’s (FTAA), with the MST arguing that the FTAA would lead to the ‘‘complete denationalization of agriculture, and the impracticality of a national development project, a necessary con- dition for the viability of land reform.”20 After months of grassroots mobilizing against the FTAA, ten million Brazilians turned out to vote on September 1–7, 2002, with more than 90% voting against signing the FTAA (Osava, 2002).21 The MST also served on the body that or- ganized the inaugural (2001) and subsequent World Social Forums (WSF) in Porto Alegre, Brazil. In allying with the rising anti-corporate globalization movement, the MST exercised an important role in helping build a global counter-movement and a new politics of ‘glob- alization from below.’
7. Linking local–global struggles, contesting the production of nature, promoting alternative nature–society relations
In this Section 1 discuss how the MST not only challenges the commodification of nature by capital, but also works towards cre- ating alternative models of nature–society relations that are rooted in agro-ecological practices. The MST has recognized that – in addi- tion to domestic constraints – it has to philosophically and practi- cally scale-up struggles to confront the larger structural forces that undermine rural livelihoods. In this regard, the MST and rural movements in the global North and South have united into a trans- national peasant movement, the Via Campesina, which leads strug- gles against World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations on liberalizing agriculture and food from Seattle to Cancun (Desma- rais, 2002). Local resources struggles are thus deeply intertwined with global economic relations.
Early into the 21st century, the MST has increasingly combated agribusiness, arguing that the agribusiness model displaces work- ers from the land, prioritizes agro-exports over meeting domestic food needs, further concentrates land and income in fewer hands, and is detrimental to the environment. While the MST and the Via Campesina are not opposed to trade, they challenge WTO nego- tiations on agricultural liberalization that favor agribusiness, stat- ing that ‘‘food is a basic human right” that can only be attained in a system where ‘food sovereignty’ is guaranteed. According to the Via Campesina:
Food sovereignty is the right of each nation to maintain and develop its own capacity to produce its own basic foods respecting cultural and productive diversity. We have the right to produce our own food in own territory. Food sover- eignty is a precondition to genuine food security.
(cited by Desmarais (2002, p. 104))
19	Gramsci cited by Joll (1977, p. 99). 20	Cited by Karriem (2005, p. 7). 21 According to a MST member the campaign ‘‘initially arose as an idea for
conscientizing the population about the dangers of the [FTAA] and we presented the proposal of a pedagogic debate, the realization of a plebiscite to hear the [views of the] population on the FTAA” (Interview #76, 01/21/2005).
Food sovereignty’s focus on producing food to ensure social repro- duction and agricultural diversity provides a sharp counterpoint to the commodifying instincts of agribusiness; moreover, it has par- ticular salience in the contemporary period of rampant food infla- tion that has generated food riots from Indonesia to Haiti, an outcome that is largely a product of the remaking of nature into bio- fuels. A recently leaked confidential World Bank report noted that the move to biofuels had forced up global food prices by 75%, while higher energy and fertilizer prices accounted for an increase of only 15%, much lower than originally estimated (Chakraborrty, 2008). The current global food crisis has also opened up opportunities: it affords the MST and other movements an opportunity to pressure governments to promote land reform and increase support to the family farm sector which produces most of the food crops and thereby facilitate the remaking of agriculture on a different basis.
The MST has also challenged growing control over and com- modification of seeds by transnational corporations (TNC’s). In line with the global campaign of ‘Seeds as the Patrimony of Humanity’, MST and Via Campesina members from around the world attend- ing the 2001 World Social Forum uprooted GM corn and soy plants at a Monsanto experimental plantation near Porto Alegre. In March 2006, the MST and the Via Campesina–Brazil occupied an experi- mental station of the Swiss TNC, Syngenta Seeds, located near the Iguacu National Park in the southern state of Paraná, where GMO experiments contaminated an area rich in biodiversity. The MST action forced the environmental agency, IBAMA, to fine Syn- genta $500,000 for contravening environmental laws prohibiting the planting of GMO’s within a 10 km radius of national parks. The MST-Via Campesina transformed the station into an agro-eco- logical training center and planted creole or native seeds. Instead of enforcing the fine, however, the Lula government sought to amend the law to enable Syngenta to legally continue GMO exper- iments (MST, 2007). The MST campaign thus publicly exposed how ‘‘State functions aimed at curbing socially and environmentally destructive effects of capitalist production are ‘rolled back’” through a discourse of maintaining economic competitiveness (McCarthy and Prudham, 2004, p. 276).
In line with a Gramscian political ecology perspective, the MST has not only remained at the level of protest; it promotes practical alternatives by encouraging agro-ecological methods of agriculture that respect the environment and the production of seeds that maintain biodiversity.22 Bionatur, the MST seed cooperative, mar- kets 63 varieties of agro-ecological seeds with an annual output of 22 tons (Ponce and Engelmann, 2006). Marino de Bortoli of Bionatur states:
We work from the perspective of confronting the current agricultural model imposed by the multinationals, which controls the market for seeds in Brazil and the world. The Bionatur network is guided by the production of healthy food, free from agrotoxins and transgenic seeds, which is the basis for the food sovereignty of the people.23
The shift toward agro-ecology, then, is crucial in promoting alter- natives to and ensuring independence from corporate control over agriculture, and illustrates the evolution in the MST’s understand- ing of society-nature relations that is not based on dominating nature. Stedile (2002, p. 100) describes the development of the MST’s ecological thinking, the sharing of ecological experiences and ideas that takes place across local–global scales, and how it imagines the construction of future nature–society relationships:
22	On the MST’s move to agro-ecology, (see Branford and Rocha, 2003).
23 Bortoli cited in Bionatur realize terceiro Encontro National. http:// www.mst.org.br/informativos/minforma/ultimas1917.htm. Accessed September 12, 2006.
It’s not enough to argue that if you work the land that you have proprietary rights over it. The Vietnamese and Indian farmers have contributed a lot to our debates on this. They have a different view of agriculture, and of nature – one that we’ve tried to synthesize in the Via Campesina. We want an agrarian practice that transforms farmers into guardians of the land, and a different way of farming, that ensures an eco- logical equilibrium and also guarantees that land is not seen as private property.
What the afore-going discussion illustrates is the transforma- tion of ‘nature as an accumulation strategy’ (Katz, 1998), its impli- cations for rural livelihoods, and the MST challenge to and provision of alternatives to nature’s remaking under neoliberalism.
8. Critical reflections on the MST’s rise into a counter- hegemonic movement
In the genesis period, the MST successfully drew on religious ideas to contest hegemonic, common sense constructions of pri- vate property as sacrosanct, thus providing moral justification for land occupations. In comparison to the genesis period, the MST grew rapidly during the second (territorialization) and third (na- tional consolidation) periods of its history. In the genesis period, the level of preparation and political socialization was prolonged before an occupation, allowing for greater social cohesion, under- standing of movement goals, and the transformation of families into protagonists of their own history. However, from the 1990s onward, the Movement grew so fast that preparation and political socialization suffered. For example, in the Pontal de Paranapanema region eager militants adopted a top-down approach to organizing, which led to families leaving the MST because their views were not considered. The MST leadership intervened and sent a skilled orga- nizer, Jose Rainha, to the Pontal region (Branford and Rocha, 2002; Fernandes, 1996). Rainha went back to MST basics by re-introduc- ing horizontal, participatory organizing approaches through which the landless take decisions and correct them if need be, thus learn- ing by doing. In its quest to build a transformative movement that seeks to transcend hierarchical power relations, the MST has tried to be vigilant in dealing with ‘tensions of micropower.’24
If during the genesis period the MST was strongly influenced by religious ideas, in the territorialization period there was a Marxist and nationalist orientation. The MST gave more attention to ques- tions of production and, in line with its Marxist outlook, pushed for the collectivization of agriculture on the assentamentos. However, many of the collectivization experiments failed. The MST was forced to revise its strategy and adopted a more gradual, inclusive and flexible approach to cooperation through the formation of ser- vice, finance, and commercial cooperatives which brought eco- nomic benefits to the settlers (Branford and Rocha, 2002; Stedile and Fernandes, 2001). The top-down collectivization experiment had a sobering impact on the MST leadership, forcing it to adopt an open-ended ideology that was influenced by socialist, religious, nationalist, and communitarian currents.
Through its interaction with the environmental movement, the MST introduced ecological concerns into its eclectic ideological outlook. This eclecticism suggests an impressive openness to new ideas and forms of struggle. The MST’s ecological thinking com- menced during the early 2000’s and is still relatively uneven within the movement. However, the making of a Gramscian political ecol- ogy praxis is increasingly evident in MST actions. For example, in asserting ‘seeds as a patrimony of humanity’, the MST contrasted
24 I borrow the term ‘tensions of micropower’ from Andreas Hernandez. The MST has not always succeeded in resolving tensions, for example, around leadership (Wittman, 2005) or alternative forms of agricultural production (Wolford, 2004).
seeds as a collective good that has been transferred and shared by peasants over centuries to the increased commodification and control over seeds by TNC’s. The MST thus drew on a historical peasant consciousness to reinterpret the past in the present (Moore, 1993) or, following Gramsci (1971, 165), it transformed ‘‘popular beliefs” into ‘‘material forces” to contest hegemonic pro- ductions of nature and to set in motion alternative paradigms that seek to remake nature–society relations from below through agro- ecological practices.
To ensure the political socialization of its growing membership, the MST placed strong emphasis on political education, forming or- ganic intellectuals, and opening its schools to other popular move- ments in Brazil and Latin America (Petras, 1997b). This Gramscian focus on ideas and on socializing knowledge so that it becomes a material force for both personal and broader social change takes on particular importance in a neoliberal era in which the ‘end of ideology’ has been declared, and in which dominant ideas are pre- sented as natural. While capital has drawn on ‘traditional intellec- tuals’ to justify and diffuse hegemonic ideas, subaltern groups have developed their own organic intellectuals to demystify hegemonic constructions of common sense and help build an alternative hege- mony. In this regard, MST organic intellectuals exercise an essen- tial role in constructing ‘‘an intellectual-moral bloc which can make politically possible the intellectual progress of the masses and not only of a small group.”25 However, this educational rela- tionship should not be passive, but active and reciprocal so that ‘‘every teacher is always a student and every student always a teacher” (Gramsci, 1971, p. 350).
In contrast to its early history, when mobilizations were largely restricted to the local and state-level scales and focused on the struggle for land, MST actions since the 1990s were characterized by mobilizations at national and global scales and intersected with broader political actions. This illustrated the national consolidation and organizational capacity of the Movement, the gradual accumu- lation of conquests and experiences, and the spatialization of its philosophy of praxis across multiple scales. The growing breadth of national-popular collective actions – land, foreign debt, environ- ment, WSF, FTAA, human rights – exemplifies the maturation of a counter-hegemonic consciousness within the MST. In this regard, Gramsci (1971) notes that a social group engaged in counter-hege- monic struggles needs to combine its own interests with those of other popular forces in order to create a national-popular collective will. In joining indigenous movements against the government’s high-profile celebration of the founding of Brazil, the MST demon- strated solidarity with indigenous struggles and historicized the struggle for land by highlighting that Brazil’s economic develop- ment was founded on violent struggles of ‘accumulation by dispos- session’ (Harvey, 2003). Participation in the Tribunal on Foreign Debt signaled a concern with the billions of dollars that Brazil pays to merely service debt and the implication for social spending. Moreover, in contributing to the formation of the WSF and the Via Campesina, the MST signaled a keen awareness of the rela- tional nature of local–global struggles. In this regard, Thiago, a member of the MST’s communications unit in Rio Grande do Sul, displays a sharp understanding of the geographies of neoliberal globalization, the remaking of nature, and a scalar politics of resis- tance through which movements scale-up popular mobilization:
[I]n this process of the construction of the Via Campesina, we realized that the stage of capitalism ... today is of the supremacy of international finance capital. It placed us with
Gramsci (1971, pp. 332–33). Gramsci proceeds to state that the ‘‘Consciousness of being part of a particular hegemonic force (that is to say, political consciousness) is the first stage towards a further progressive self-consciousness in which theory and practice will finally be one.”
A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325	323
25
324	A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325
the same problems as farmers in any part of the world. . . . In our	understanding	. . .	there	are	. . .	five	large	international enterprises that monopolize the whole process of agricul- ture. .... from the seed, to the inputs, and commercialization. So we realized that our enemies were common. It was Mons- anto in Brazil, in India, in Europe, and this permitted . . . our participation as the Via Campesina in the large demonstra- tions against the G-8, [in] Seattle, Genoa, . . . and the World Social Forum as a space of articulation. So in the same way that empire is present in all the territories, [our actions] are . . . felt in the center of empire. I think it was Arundhati Roy who said that our function as social movements is to besiege the empire, it is to surround it.26
While much of the literature on scale politics analyzes the role of capital in producing space and nature from above, Thiago illustrates how popular movements recast scalar and nature–society relations from below. Counter-hegemonic struggles, then, take on a spatial character since hegemonic ideas and practices are spatialized – although unevenly – as common sense across geographic scales. Implicit in Thiago’s analysis is the necessity for alliances across interrelated scales to unite a diverse range of social groupings and thereby spatialize a Gramscian war of position to the global scale.
9. Concluding remarks
In this paper, I traced the MST’s rise and transformation into a counter-hegemonic actor by analyzing the development of the MST’s organizational praxis from corporatist struggles for land in the late 1970s to ‘global ambition’ and changing nature–society relations by the early 2000’s. I also argued that territorialization does not only result in the spatial conquest of territory, it also leads to the spatialization of an organizational praxis that encourages self-organization, political socialization, and the forging of global ambition. To this end, I employed a Gramscian political ecology perspective to illustrate how the MST’s philosophy of praxis empowers its members to practically and ideologically challenge hegemonic constructions of common sense and the production of nature under neoliberalism. In analyzing the internal dynamics which forge global ambition, this paper contributes to our under- standing of the subjective factors which drive social movement mobilizations.
The analysis of the MST as a counter-hegemonic movement does not suggest that its political trajectory has been one of contin- uous advance; rather, the MST’s praxis since its founding has been marked by conquests and defeats, offensive and defensive strug- gles, loss of lives and the conquest of land, which reflects a Grams- cian war of position as a long, slow process of practical and ideological struggle for an alternative hegemony.
The acquisition of global ambition was a gradual process that evolved and matured as the MST territorialized into a national movement. Moreover, the emergence of global ambition has been informed by an organizational praxis which promotes the develop- ment of a counter-hegemonic popular common sense that chal- lenges private property relations through land occupations, that promotes consciousness-raising, self-organization, leadership and alliance building, and the remaking of nature-society relations through agro-ecological practices.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Michael Ekers, Scott Prudham, Andreas Hernandez, Sudeshna Mitra, Rogerio Acca, Bill Goldsmith and three anonymous reviewers for their extremely helpful comments and
suggestions. I also thank Mohammed Seedat and Ariana Vigil for reading an earlier version of this paper. I am solely responsible for the paper as it appears. The research for this paper was gener- ously supported by the Ford Foundation, the Cornell University Provost Fund, the Einuadi Center for International Development, and the Tinker Foundation.
References
Almeida, L.F., Sanchez, F.R., 2000. The landless workers’ movement and social struggles against neoliberalism. Latin American Perspectives 27 (5), 11–32. Bakker, K., 2007. The ‘‘commons” versus the ‘‘commodity”: alter-globalization, anti-
privatization and the human right to water in the global south. Antipode 39 (3),
430–455. Blaikie, P., Brookfield, H., 1987. Land Degradation and Society. Methuen, London. Bogo, A., 2002. O Vigor da Mística. MST, Sao Paulo. Branford, S., Rocha, J., 2003. Another modernization is possible: from land conquest
to agro-ecological experiment. Science as Culture 12 (2), 155–187. Branford, S., Rocha, J., 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement
in Brazil. Latin America Bureau, London. Braun, B., Castree, N., 1998. The construction of nature and the nature of
construction: analytical and political tools for building survivable futures. In: Braun, B., Castree, N. (Eds.), Remaking Reality: Nature at the Millenium. Routledge, London.
Bryant, R., Bailey, S., 1997. Third World Political Ecology. Routledge, London. Cadji, A., 2000. Brazil’s landless find their voice. Nacla 28 (5), 30–35. Castree, N., 2000. Marxism and the production of nature. Capital and Class 72, 5–36. Chakraborrty, A., 2008. Secret Report: Biofuel Caused Food Crisis. The Guardian, July
4. Chaves, C.A., 2000. A marcha national dos sem-terra: um estudo sobre a fabricacao
do social. Relume Dumará. Rio de Janeiro. Colleti, C., 2002. Ascencao e refluxo do MST a da luta pela terra na década neoliberal.
Idéias 9 (1), 49–104. Comparato, B.K., 2003. A Acao Política do MST. Expressao Popular, Sao Paulo. CPT., 2004. Conflitos no Campo. Comissao Pastoral da Terra, Goiania. Davis, M., 2004. Planet of slums: urban involution and the informal proletariat. New
Left Review 26, 5–34. Delaney, D., Leitner, H., 1997. The political construction of scale. Political Geography
16 (2), 93–97. Desmarais, A., 2002. The Via Campesina: consolidating an international peasant and
farm movement. Journal of Peasant Studies 29 (2), 91–124. Fernandes, B.M., 1996. MST: Formacao e Territorializacao em Sao Paulo. Hucitec,
Sao Paulo. Fernandes, B.M., 2001. A Formacao do MST no Brasil, second ed. Editora Vozes,
Petropolis. Freire, P., 1993. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Continuum, New York. Gaiger, L., 1987. Agentes Religiosos e Camponeses Sem Terra no Sul do Brasil.
Editora Vozes, Petropolis. Gorgen, S., 1997. Religiosidade e fé na luta pela terra. In: Stedile, J.P. (Ed.), A Reforma
Agrária e a Luta do MST, second ed. Editora Vozes, Petrópolis. Gramsci, A., 1994. Some aspects of the southern question. In: Bellamy, R. (Ed.),
Gramsci: Pre-Prison Writings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Gramsci, A., 1971. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. International Publishers,
New York. Hammond, J., 1999. Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’
Movement. Bulletin of Latin American Research 18 (4), 469–489. Harvey, D., 1996. Justice Nature and the Geography of Difference. Blackwell,
Cambridge, MA. Harvey, D., 2003. The New Imperialism. Oxford University Press, New York. Issa, D., 2007. Praxis of empowerment: mística and mobilization in Brazil’s landless
rural workers’ movement. Latin American Perspectives 34 (2), 124–138. Jessop, B., 2005. Gramsci as a spatial theorist. Critical Review of International Social
and Political Philosophy 8 (4), 469–489. Joll, J., 1977. Gramsci. Fontana, Glasgow. Karriem, A., 2005. ‘‘Marching as to war”: a letter from Brazil to South Africa about
landlessness, agrarian reform and social movement struggles against
neoliberalism. Revista Nera 8 (6), 1–13. Katz, C., 1998. Whose nature, whose culture: private productions of space and the
‘‘preservation” of nature. In: Braun, B., Castree, N. (Eds.), Remaking Reality:
Nature at the Millenium. Routledge, London. Keck, M., Sikkink, K., 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in
International Politics. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY. Lefebvre, H., 1991. The Production of Space. Blackwell, Oxford. Mansfield, B., 2007. Privatization: property and the remaking of nature–society
relations. Antipode 39 (3), 393–405. Mansfield, B., 2004. Neoliberalism in the oceans: ‘‘rationalization’’, property rights,
and the commons question. Geoforum 35, 313–326. Marcon, T., 1997. Acampamento Natalino: História da Luta pela Reforma Agrária.
EDIUPF, Passo Fundo. McCarthy, J., Prudham, S., 2004. Neoliberal nature and the nature of neoliberalism.
Geoforum 35, 275–283. Meszaros, G., 2000. No ordinary revolution: Brazil’s landless workers’ movement.
26	Interview #76, 1/21/2005.
Capital and Class 42 (2), 1–18.
Moore, D., 1993. Contesting terrain in Zimbabwe’s eastern highlands: political ecology, ethnography, and peasant resource struggles. Economic Geography 69 (4), 380–401.
Morrisawa, M., 2001. A Historia da Luta Pela Terra e o MST. Expressao Popular, Sao Paulo.
Mouffe, C., 1979. Hegemony and ideology in Gramsci. In: Mouffe, C. (Ed.), Gramsci and Marxist Theory. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
MST, 1989. Normas Gerais do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra. MST, Sao Paulo.
MST, 1998. Mística: Uma Necessidade no Trabalho Popular e Organizativo. MST, Sao Paulo.
MST, 2007. Os Crimes da Syngenta Seeds – Nota do MST sobre o assassinato do Keno. Letraviva – MST Informa 5(144). Received via email.
Neumann, R., 1992. Political ecology of wildlife conservation in the Mt. Meru area of northeast Tanzania. Land Degradation and Society 3, 85–98.
Osava, M., 2002. 10 million Brazilians Vote Against Hemisphere’s FTAA. IPS September 18.
Peet, R., Watts, M. (Eds.), 1996. Liberation Ecologies: Environment, Development, Social Movements. Routledge, London.
Paulson, S., Gezon, L., Watts, M., 2003. Locating the political in political ecology: an introduction. Human Organization 62 (3), 205–217.
Pereira, A., 2003. Brazil’s agrarian reform: democratic innovation or oligarchic exclusion redux? Latin American Politics and Society 45 (2), 41–65.
Perz, S., 2000. The rural exodus in the context of economic crisis, globalization and reform in Brazil. International Migration Review 34 (3), 842–881.
Petras, J., 1997a. Os camponeses: uma nova forca revolucionária na América Latína. In: Stedile, J.P. (Ed.), A Reforma Agrária e a Luta do MST, second ed. Editora Vozes, Petrópolis.
Petras, J., 1997b. Latin America: the resurgence of the left. New Left Review 223, 17– 47.
Petras, J., Veltmeyer, H., 2003. Cardoso’s Brazil: a land for sale. Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham.
Ponce, R., Engelmann, S., 2006. ‘Brasil nao tem politica para agroecologia’ Available from: <http://www.mst.org.br/informativos/minforma/biblioteca/entrevistas/ tardinagroecologia.htm> (accessed 10 September 2006).
Rocha, G.M., 2002. Neo-dependency in Brazil. New Left Review 16, 5–33. Rossetto, N., 2005. Outro mundo se faz com terra para todas as pessoas. Democracia
Viva 25, 4–7. Shiva, V., 2000. Stolen Harvest: The Hijacking of the Global Food Supply. South End
Press, Boston. Simon, R., 1982. Introduction to Gramsci’s Political Thought. Lawrence and Wishart,
London. Smith, N., 1984. Uneven Development: Nature, Capital and the Production of Space.
Blackwell, Oxford. Stedile, J.P., 2002. Landless battalions: The Sem Terra movement of Brazil. New Left
Review 15, 77–104. Stedile, J.P., Fernandes, B.M., 2001. Brava Gente: A Trajetoria do MST e a Luta Pela
Terra no Brasil. Fundacao Perseu Abramo, Sao Paulo. Swyngedouw, E., 1997. Neither local nor global: ‘‘glocalization” and the politics of
scale. In: Cox, K. (Ed.), Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the
Local. Guilford Press, New York. Turner, M.D., 2004. Political ecology and the moral dimensions of ‘‘resource
conflicts”: the case of farmer-herder conflicts in the sahel. Political Geography
23, 863–889. Wainwright, J., 2005. The geographies of political ecology: after Edward Said.
Environment and Planning A 37, 1033–1043. Williams, R., 1973. The Country and the City. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Bank, World, 2000. World Development Report. Oxford University Press, New York. Wittman, H., 2005. The social ecology of agrarian reform: the landless rural workers
movement and agrarian citizenship in Mato Grosso. Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation, Cornell University. Wolford, W., 2004. Of land and labor: agrarian reform on the sugarcane plantations
of northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 31 (2), 147–170. Wright, A., Wolford, W., 2003. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the
Struggle for a New Brazil. Food First, Oakland, CA.
A. Karriem / Geoforum 40 (2009) 316–325	325

2009
International Service
Journal of Latin American Studies
The Landless Rural Workers Momement and Democracy in Brazil
Miguel Carter

Accessed: 15/03/2011 20:05
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=cup. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Latin American Studies.
http://www.jstor.org
Reviews 907
Inthelastchapterw,ereturntothetheatreitself.MartinsdeSouzaarguesthatthe
traditionavliew- thatafterthefailureoftherealistmovementtoachieveanylasting
successon the	theatre	fell into a decadencefilled	French stage,	simply	by superficial
importsandtheirimitators- too readilyacceptstheviewsof theintellectualswho dominatedtheConservat6rioI.nfact,someoftheselocaladaptationswerevery successful:onesuchis Orfeunarofab,ytheauthor/actorFranciscoCorreiaVasques,
a	of Offenbach's	aux	itselfa	There	the parody	Otphie	enfers,	parody.	is,
'O Chico', authorargues,a local,eclectictraditionlinkingMartinsPenain the 1830sto Artur
Azevedo at the end of the century. Thisisaveryusefulbook,thoroughlyresearcheda, valuablecontributiontothe
historyofBraziliantheatre.Inmanyways,itisamodelofculturahlistory,admirably placingthe dramain its socialcontext.To my mind,some of the spotlightcouldbe turnedbackontothestage.Itisapitysomeof theworksdiscussedarenotdescribed in more detail,especiallythose dealtwith in the finalchapter,some of which
miraculouslystillexistinlibrariesI. makeno apologyforaregularcomplaint:why do theseusefulbookslackindexes?
UniversitoyfLiverpool	JOHN GLEDSON
J. Lat. Amer. Stud.35 (2003).	DOI:	Io.1oi7/Soozzzl6Xo345704o SueBranfordandJanRocha, CuttingtheIFire:TheStoryoftheLandlessMovemenitn
Brail (London: Latin America Bureau, 2002),	pp. 3o5, ?14.99, pb.
This story has been long overdue. Sue Branford and Jan Rocha, two seasoned
British journalists with commanding knowledge of Brazil, have authored the most comprehensive book to date on Latin America's premier social movement: the Movement of Landless Rural Workers, best known by its acronym MST
Movimentodos	RuraisSem	Since its first Trabalhadores	Terra).	emergence
(in Portuguese, in Brazil's southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul, in 198I, the landless movement
has developed a formidable grassroots organization, with a nationwide presence, an
estimated million members, close to 1,200 agriculturalsettlements, a network of
12,000 primaryand secondary schools, 86 ruralcooperatives and 96 food processing plants. In the last two decades the MST has prodded the Brazilian government to
distribute five million hectares - a territory the size of Costa Rica. After the mid 99o0s,the MST earned fame as a leading critic of the government's neoliberal
policies and a forceful voice on behalf of Brazil's underprivileged majority.
Branford and Rocha provide a far-reaching, lively, empathetic and thoughtful account of the MST. Their narrativebuilds strongly on scores of interviews they
conducted across Brazil with MST participants and leaders, social activists, govern- ment officials, religious authorities and scholars who have studied the movement. Their vivid illustrations and shrewd observations reflect a close familiaritywith the MST.
The book contains fourteen well laid out chapters, grouped in four parts. The first section deals with the historical formation and expansion of the movement. In three chapters, the authors briefly recount the land struggles in southern Brazil that eventually led to the establishment of the MST in 1984; discuss how the movement was organised; and depict the MST's move northwards after its first national
congress in 1985. The subsequent section reviews three moments of the MST struggle: land
occupations, agriculturalsettlements and the movement's activities in the field of
908
Reviews
education. Organising land occupations and landless camps are a crucial MST tactic aimed at pressuring state authorities for agrarianreform. These and other forms of
non-violent action help galvanise the landless struggle and provide a powerful training experience for movement activists. The authors portray this in a vivid, first-hand account of a land occupation in the northeastern state of Pernambuco. Agricultural settlements are formed once the government allocates land to the farmers.Though less dramatic,this phase presents numerous trialsas the movement strives to find ways of ensuring the survival of these rural communities amidst adverse conditions. Education has been a longstanding cornerstone of the MST and is reflected in its Paulo Freire-inspired pedagogy for consciousness-raising in the landless camps, schools for children, adultliteracyprojects and trainingprogrammes for activists.
The next section discusses the main challenges confronting the MST in recent
years: violent repression, the hegemonic pretensions of the global food industry, and the onslaught, after 1997, of the Brazilian government under Fernando Henrique
Cardoso. Two chapters offer detailed case studies of police violence against the MST in the Amazonian frontier state of Paraiand in the southern, substantially modern
state of Parani. The Para story provides a gripping account of the April 1996 police massacreof19MSTpeasantsatEldoradodosCarajaisA.notherchapterexamines
the globalisation of Brazilian agriculture, and argues that the MST's attempts to further family farming, small cooperatives and agro-ecology are threatened by the
increasing presence of large-scale, high-tech, agri-business firms. The ensuing two chapters discuss the Cardoso administration'sworried reaction to the MST's highly
successful march to Brasiliain April 1997, and consequent efforts to undermine this movement - namely, by fostering a decentralised, market-based approach to land
reform (detrimental to the movement's capacity for collective action); criminalising a number of MST's protest activities; curtailing state resources for agrarianreform;
and promoting a media campaign to discredit the MST's positive public image. The last section of the book looks at future trends and tests. One chapter exam- ines the MST's gradual, uneven yet growing embrace of agro-ecology. The other probes cultural dispositions within the movement concerning internal decision- making processes, issues of gender and sexuality, and the movement's symbolic
repertoire and mystique. The final chapter views the MST from a broader historical perspective, and compares it to utopian peasant mobilisations and Britain,the United
States and Brazil. The conclusion, though open-ended, is optimistic. It believes the MST's capacity to adapt creatively to new situations will allow it to remain a forceful voice for social change in the years ahead.
Branford and Rocha's book offers a comprehensive coverage of one of the world's
most remarkable peasant organisations. While clearly sympathetic to the MST, its portrait of the movement is honest and balanced. It openly examines a number of
internal MST debates, and presents the views of some of its leading critics. The book's main strength stems from a superb use of interviews and artful display of
testimonies from MST participants. By allowing the protagonists of the story to speak for themselves, the text enhances awareness and nurtures empathy for the
people engaged in this popular movement. Cuttingthe Wireoffers a rich, lively and clear narrative,which makes it an excellent asset for college students.
The authors' great reliance on testimonial evidence, however, makes the book vulnerable to factual slips, romanticised depictions and unfortunate omissions. This is particularly so in their reconstruction of the MST's early history, the weakest
Reviews 909
sectionof thebook.Forinstance,contraryto whattheauthorsassert:thepriestwas neverarrestedandbeatenbythepolice(p. 19);theMSTleader(notedinp. io and p. 35) was not involved in organisingthe first land mobilisations;and the MST candidatewas actuallyre-electedas local mayor(p. 219). These problemsnotwith- standing,BanfordandRochahaveproduceda remarkableaccountof the MST.
In effect,CuttingtheWirehasvigorouslyopenedfrontiersto a fascinatingresearch topic for studentsof LatinAmerica.
Centre	MIG U EL forBrazilianStudiesO,xford CARTER
J. Lat. Amer. Stud.35	(2003).	DOI:	io.ioi7/Soo0zz26Xo3467047 Stuart F. Voss, Latin Americain theMiddlePeriod,170o-1929 (Wilmington, DE:
SR Books, zoox), pp. xxii+ 296, $65.00, $22.95 pb.
Over the last five years there has been a marked increase in the publication of
concise histories of Latin America, and of specific Latin American countries. The act
of synthesising has become trendy. The rise in students in Latin American studies
has clearly created a demand for user-friendly, jargon-free and easily accessible introductory textbooks. The entire history of Latin America has thus been taken
care of by historians such as John Charles Chasteen, and Benjamin Keen and Keith Haynes. The early and middle periods have been interpreted and made accessible by Peter Bakewell among others. The modern period has likewise been conveniently simplified by Lawrence A. Clayton and Michael L. Conniff, with the added bonus, in their case, of having fictionalised dramatic moments 'to give definition to a
particularage'. This is evidently a profitable market since a number of publishers have embarked upon the ambitious project of publishing whole series of concise
histories aimed at 'first-year undergraduates' and 'non-specialists'. Cambridge University Press, for instance, has a series of concise histories dedicated to specific
countries, which has produced new volumes on Brazil (Boris Fausto) and Mexico (Brian Hamnett). In tandem the University of New Mexico Press's series Diailogos
has popularised specific periods and/or concrete themes such as Independence in
Spanish America (Jay Kinsbruner) or US Capitalism in Latin America (Thomas F. O'Brien), adopting an equally student-led approach. StuartVoss's contribution is a new addition to this recent boom in introductory textbooks. Like the rest, it aims to offer useful tips, highlight the key points of an issue, and encourage the keener student to move on beyond the synthetic introduction.
However, Voss's synthesis merits some praise for its original approach. It is a social history, not a political one. That is refreshing. It focuses on regions rather than capital cities and nation-states. That is also new. And it adopts the periodisation favoured by the most recent (and revisionist) school of historians who view inde- pendence as part of an age of 'democratic revolutions' or 'destabilisation, frag- mentation and reconstruction' rather than the end of the colonial period and the beginning of the postcolonial one. Continuities matter. Change is a slow and complicated phenomenon. Independent Latin America was not so different from Colonial Latin America, at least in terms of the 179os and I83os, and especially in terms of the way regional societies lived. It is Voss's understanding of the dynamics of regional economies, customs, traditions, cultures and geopolitics that ultimately makes this text 'with classroom use in mind' (p. ix), a particularlyinsightful and helpful aide to have at hand. Divided into three parts (The Emergence of a New

2002
Biology
Environmental Science & Policy
Within and surrounding the Morro do Diabo State Park: biological value, conflicts, mitigation and sustainable development alternatives
Claudio Valladares-Padua

Suzana M. Padua, Laury Cullen Jr. Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), C. Postal 47, 12960-000 Nazaré Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil
Received 31 August 2001; received in revised form 20 December 2001; accepted 28 December 2001
The Brazilian Atlantic Forest in the State of São Paulo is one of the world most threatened ecosystems, as only 1.8% of its original coverage is left. With a biodiversity that includes endemic species, such as the black lion tamarin (Leontopithecus chrysopygus) a seriously endangered primate, the conservation of forest remnants has become a priority. The non-profit organization Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (Institute forEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ))hasstudiedtheforestinPontaldoParanapanemaandundertakenconservationinitiativessuchasenviron- mental education, community involvement, habitat restoration and the promotion of policies that protect natural areas while simultaneously empowering people to improve their conditions of living. Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) a movement of the land- less, has pressed local landowners and the government to distribute land for landless families, creating conflicts and diminishing the priority of nature conservation. Through transparent and participatory approaches IPEˆ has succeeded in bringing the conservationists and the land- less to work together in the planting of trees. Trees protect water, improve the soil and shield the settlers from environmental damages, while they form corridors for wildlife, buffer zones to protect forest fragments and “stepping stones” to propitiate seed dispersal. This innovative approach to conservation is already seen as an example to be followed in other contexts. © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Biodiversity conservation; Atlantic forest; Morro do Diabo State Park; Land conflict; Environmental education; Agrarian reform settlement; Community projects
1. Introduction
The Morro do Diabo State Park is located in the Pontal do Paranapanema: a wedge-shaped region bounded in the north by the Rio Paraná and in the south by the Rio Parana- panema and marking the westernmost extremity of the State of São Paulo (Fig. 1). Entirely forested, the region was de- creed a protected area, the “Grande Reserva do Pontal”, of 260,000 ha in 1942 (Leite, 1998). Despite this, however, the Pontal has suffered from serious conflicts over landowner- ship and the widespread destruction of its forests for timber and cattle pasture during the last 50 years. Today all that re- mains of the “Grande Reserva” is the Morro do Diabo State Park of 36,000 ha. It is the last significant remnant of Atlantic forest of the interior in São Paulo, where only 1.8% of the original natural vegetation is left. Despite the extensive loss of forest, the conservation of the Morro do Diabo Park and other widely scattered, smaller forest remnants is of enor- mous importance, still harboring the rich and endemic bio- diversity of the region and many of its endangered species.
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: cpadua@unb.br (C. Valladares-Padua).
The non-governmental organization Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas(InstituteforEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ))hasded- icated the past 15 years to protecting the region’s species and natural ecosystems through multidisciplinary projects and programs in research, environmental education and habi- tat regeneration. Based on the results of these programs, the over-arching mission of IPEˆ has been to influence lo- cal, regional and state policies to this end. Notable in the last 5 years has been the need to focus on the Agrarian Re- form Movement that has resulted in a major migration of settlers and small farmers to the Pontal. Many settlements have been established in the vicinity of the Park as well as nearby some other small, but important, forest fragments. The threats represented by this wave of immigrants are ob- vious and a particular challenge has been the integration of these families and the establishment of settlements within a framework that maintains the conservation of the region’s natural ecosystem as a major priority.
One mechanism, which has been given increasing em- phasis over recent years, has been the establishment of agro-forestry practices. They provide for forest regeneration and restoration and at the same time contribute to increased income and improved standard of living for the settler
1462-9011/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1462-9011(02)00019-9
70	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
families. IPEˆ has set up agro-forestry green belts around the forest fragments that provide concrete benefits for the economies of the local communities, so-called “benefit zones” (Cullen et al., 2001b). Direct and immediate benefits include firewood, timber, fruits, grains and animal fodder, relieving the pressure on the forest fragments which would otherwise be rapidly hunted-out and cut. This approach is based on the premise that stimulating the planting and use of multipurpose trees and shrubs (MPTS) along forest edges will contribute to the conservation of the forests and their wildlife. Encouraging a limited exploitation of natural products from these benefit zones will provide the means for people to live in the vicinity of forest fragments without further depleting the local biodiversity.
Agro-forestry workshops and the development of nurs- eries and tree plantations are giving local people the opportu- nities to improve their properties. They are also encouraged to participate in the establishment of regional conservation measures such as the creation of forest corridors, buffer zones and “stepping-stones” (small patches of trees planted to provide a degree of continuity between otherwise isolated forest remnants). This has resulted in a two-fold benefit, the enrichment of the regional landscape and improved pro- tection of the forests from deleterious edge effects and iso- lation. Native trees are planted together with fast-growing trees so as to rapidly provide a forest cover beneficial for the people, the wildlife and the forest fragments.
In this paper, we examine how combining ecological re- search and conservation action can provide direct benefits to both communities and wildlife: landscape conservation
being the underlying objective through the incorporation of social, economic and institutional issues and the collabo- ration of the many segments of local communities. Special emphasis is given to encouraging the participation of and empowering, the local people. Stakeholders particularly have been encouraged to make decisions that incorporate both social and environmental interests.
2. The Atlantic forest
When Europeans first arrived in Brazil in the 16th cen- tury, the Atlantic coastal forest covered more than 1.2 million km2, extending well inland in the southeast and accounting for about 12% of the entire country. These forests have been largely destroyed and those that remain are highly fragmented and total about 7% of the original extent of this biome (Fonseca, 1985; SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE, 1993). The biological diversity of the Atlantic forest is of global significance, containing nearly 7% of the world’s species, many of which are endemic and threatened with extinction (Quintela, 1990). Fifty-one mammal species and 160 birds are endemic, as are 53% of the trees, 64% of the palms and 74% of bromeliad species (Quintela, 1990).
In broad terms, the Atlantic forest can be subdivided into three major regions based on vegetation types and geograph- ical features (Caˆmara, 1993; Eiten, 1974; Mori et al., 1981). The first is the Tropical evergreen mesophytic broadleaf forest, which originally covered most of the eastern slopes of the coastal mountain ranges and lowlands extending
Fig. 1. Map of São Paulo State indicating the Pontal do Paranapanema region.
to the coastline. Mean annual precipitation is around 2000 mm and mean annual temperatures range from 16 to 19 ◦C (Hueck, 1972). Tropical semi-deciduous mesophytic broadleaf forest (Eiten, 1974), also known as the Atlantic forest of the interior or Mata de Planalto (plateau forests), extends to the west, inland in the southeast over the Brazil- ian plateau. Originally covering large areas of the states of Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Paraná, plateau forests have lower annual rainfall (1000–1500 mm) with a pronounced dry season of 5–6 months. These are tall forests despite the reduced precipitation and seasonal- ity and include both evergreen and semi-deciduous species (Eiten, 1974; Alonso, 1977). The third formation, known as mixed forest, is found at high elevations in southern Brazil, where temperatures are seasonally much cooler. The forests there are dominated by commercially-important conifers (Araucaria and Podocarpus). Today only 2–4% of theses forests remain. They are still under threat, with only 0.22% officially protected (Caˆmara, 1993).
Most of the remaining strongholds of Atlantic forest are in mountainous regions along the coast in the southeast of Brazil; very little is still to be found in the plateau region inland (Dean, 1995). Agricultural and industrial develop- ment have resulted in the loss of more than 98% of the forests there, represented today by scattered fragments and totaling a mere 280,000 ha (SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE, 1993). The majority is privately owned. Even though most of these remnants are small and isolated, they still support an outstanding diversity of flora and fauna (Quintela, 1990). Few extinctions have been documented so far, but many can be predicted for the very near future (Brooks and Balmford, 1996).
In the State of São Paulo, the large majority (84%) of the inland Atlantic forest still remaining is in the Pontal do Paranapanema (Fig. 2). In terms of biodiversity conserva- tion, the Pontal is ranked as of highest priority in the con- text of the Atlantic forest (Brazil, MMA, 2000), while also
considered one of the poorest and most underprivileged re- gions of the state and despite the legal measures in place to preserve the remaining forests, undergoing rapid depletion of its natural resources and an accelerating process of envi- ronmental degradation, aggravated by the land reform and colonization underway in recent years (Cullen et al., 2001b).
3. The Pontal do Paranapanema
The Pontal do Paranapanema is one of the poorest regions of São Paulo State. It belongs to the administrative zone of the district of Presidente Prudente, comprised of 20 munici- palities that integrate the extreme western region of the State. Located at the confluence of the Rios Paranapanema and the Paraná, the Pontal is included in the Federal Decree No. 750 of 1993 that legally defines the Mata Atlaˆntica domain and regulates its use. The region’s history is marked by land dis- putes. Still forested, in 1942 the governor Fernando Costa declared the entire extreme west of the State of São Paulo a refuge for the native fauna and flora, the “Grande Reserva do Pontal” of 260,000ha (Leite, 1998; Valladares-Padua, 1987, 1993). However, in the 1950s, the State Governor Ademar de Barros, distributed the land to his friends and allies, who rapidly initiated a wave of deforestation as a means to guarantee their ownership and forestall any future attempt to return it to its status as a wildlife reserve. Today, only 1.85% of the forest of the “Grande Reserva” remains (Dean, 1995), and mostly in a single block, the Morro do Diabo State Park of 36,000ha with the remainder being small isolated forest fragments within properties, which to this day, have no legal status in terms of ownership (Fig. 2). The Pontal was distributed among relatively few people, only 8% of the rural landowners were the illegal occupants of 75% of the former “Grande Reserva” (CATI, 1996).
This was the scenario when the second migration wave began, this time of poor “landless” people who are part of
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	71
Fig. 2. Map of the Pontal do Paranapanema region showing the Morro do Diabo State Park and some of the larger neighboring forest fragments.
72	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Rural Landless Workers’ Movement (MST)), one of the best organized social movements in Brazilian history. Cur- rently, more than 3000 families have been settled in small properties	of	15–18 ha,	totaling	80,000 ha	(São	Paulo, ITESP, 1998). Throughout Brazil, the target is to settle 50,000 families in one million ha of lands that have no legal ownership, as in the case of the Pontal (José Rainha, MST leader, personal communication).
Of necessity, our conservation group, which had been concentrating on protecting the remaining forests through research and environmental education, had to broaden its scope to take into account these new developments. It be- came imperative to address changes in land use policies defining how families should be settled near forest frag- ments. After a long negotiation, in 1998, the Instituto de Terras do Estado de São Paulo (Land Institute of the State of São Paulo (ITESP)) signed a formal agreement that assured the maintenance of a belt of 50m free of human settlements around remaining forest fragments. The aim of this measure was to protect these forests from such threats as edge effects caused by fires and the invasion of exotic species (Cullen et al., 2000b, 2001b; Valladares- Padua, 1999).
We have developed a participatory approach with the set- tlers in which we share scientific knowledge of the region’s biology and our concerns for the conservation of the re- maining forest fragments and discuss with them the means to achieve sustainable alternative development practices that can improve their quality of life without increasing the pres- sures on the natural environments. Respect and transparency have been fundamental in building the harmonious relation- ship that has made cooperation possible.
The Morro do Diabo experience is pioneer in that it has brought together two groups with objectives, conservation and agrarian reform that have been historically incompati- ble. This cooperation has generated initiatives that improve the quality of life for the settlers while at the same time guaranteeing the survival of the wildlife and forests in the region. The aim is to re-connect people to their natural en- vironments so that a more balanced and sustainable future can be possible for all.
In this process, IPEˆ and the Cooperativa dos Assentados da Reforma Agrária do Pontal (Agrarian Reform Settlers’ Cooperative in the Pontal (COCAMP)) along with other regional institutions, signed a formal partnership agreement in August of 1996, which allowed for the establishment of agro-ecological projects in the region. The challenge has been to design and adopt sustainable models for agrarian reform. Among the explicit objectives of this partnership is the integration of socio-economic development for the settlers and the conservation of the region’s biological di- versity. It is ultimately a search for a sustainable agrarian reform model based on agro-ecology, where rural settle- ments interface with the conservation of the remaining forests.
Fig. 3. The black lion tamarin (L. chrysopygus), a critically endangered primate endemic to the inland Atlantic forest in the State of São Paulo. Photo by Luiz Claudio Marigo.
4. IPEˆ and wildlife conservation in the Pontal
In the early 1980s, conservation program was set-up for the black lion tamarin, Leontopithecus chrysopygus (Fig. 3); a critically endangered primate today almost entirely re- stricted to the Pontal (Valladares-Padua, 1987, 1993). The first stages focused on biological studies of the species and its habitat. However, with human pressures increas- ing it became clear that research alone was insufficient. To reverse the historical trend of forest destruction it was deemed essential to involve the local communities. Initially, we established an environmental education program for school groups. However, also adults had to be included to encourage and empower them to participate in conservation efforts. Educational activities have since been designed for all regional audiences, with conservation-oriented music festivals, plays and sporting events (Padua, 1991, 1994, 1997; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The participatory approach of the education program is based on both biological and pedagogical sciences, making it possible to plan a more effective management strategy for the remaining natural areas throughout the region. Environ- mental education has furnished the necessary conditions for building up sustainable development alternatives that include tree-planting and the protection of forests as part of conser- vation extension practices (Cullen et al., 2001b; Padua and Tabanez, 1997; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The objectives of the interdisciplinary team of environ- mentalists were gradually modified with the widening scope of their activities. Education and participation form the un- derlying themes while working continuously for a common cause: the conservation of the Pontal’s biodiversity and the search for sustainable human livelihoods. By sustainable, we mean conditions that can at the same time improve people’s quality of life and reduce the current environmental pres- sures on natural habitats. In 1992, we founded the non-profit organizationIPEˆ.IPEˆwasalreadyactiveinthePontalwhen
the massive immigration of the landless farmers began in the mid 1990s, targeting the Pontal particularly because of its politico-geographical history.
5. Land dispute: impacts on the plateau fragments
In Brazil, as in many other Latin American countries, the struggle for land determines the fate of forests (Colchester and Lohmann, 1993). Brazil is the world’s ninth largest economy and has abundant natural resources. However, next to Paraguay, it has the most uneven ownership of land in the world. The top 2% of landowners own 44% of the land; the poorest 67% only 6% (Brazil, IBGE, 1996). A government census of rural workers in 1985 identified 4.8 million people without a plot of land to farm. The MST (landless movement of rural workers) has challenged this skewed land-ownership during the past decade. The MST is the largest Brazilian social movement of this century and won the Right Livelihood Award in 1993. Its objec- tives are land ownership, agrarian reform and a just society (Mansano (1995) for a history of the MST).
Obscure and dubious ownership, along with outright speculation, has meant that the Pontal has become an area of violent conflict and intense disputes over land. The MST has achieved the settlement of more than 3000 families and another 1200 are camped and waiting. Typically, after prolonged delays on the part of the land agency, the MST assembles a convoy of tractors and leads a squatter invasion at night, the aim being to have so many people occupying the land by dawn that the police are unable to dislodge them. Intense land disputes and the increasing concentration of hopeful landless rural workers have prompted the State and local large landowners to engage in a process of “ownership negotiation”. The trend in these negotiations so far has been for farmers to donate 30–70% of cleared land in exchange for the, till then lacking, legal title to their remaining prop- erty. The land is then officially and permanently transferred to the settlers, who divide up the area into groups of family size plots, the “Glebas Rurais”, or rural plots.
5.1. Socio-economic and cultural issues
Today, the large majority of rural people (around 70%) in southeast Brazil, including the current landless migrants living in the Pontal, are unfamiliar with lowland tropical forests. Most have no tradition as subsistence hunters and gatherers and have instead experienced only commercial agriculture, being employed as permanent farm workers, renting plots, or sharecropping. Around 20% have spent most of their lives in urban centers, alternating between menial jobs and unemployment. Most of the remainder are “opportunists”, awaiting a piece of land to own, often just to sell later.
Past and current economic, political and demographic constraints have resulted in forest patches being isolated, as
are the people who live near them. Forest patches are on private land and are mostly regarded as unproductive. While there are laws that limit forest clearing, they are often in- effective due to the lack of integration between landowner and community land management systems or because they are beyond the enforcement capability of the state. Some of the remaining fragments, however, exist due to the law that requires farmers to leave 20% of their property covered with original forests (Cullen et al., 2001b).
The social values given to forest patches are insignifi- cant, except where conservation organizations develop en- vironmental education programs and conservation training initiatives. Long-term education has shown, however, that local people can become supporters of and active partici- pants in, forest conservation once they have opportunities to be sensitized, to shift values to include ecological con- cerns and to become more knowledgeable of environmen- tal issues (Padua, 1991, 1994; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998).
The biological value of even the small remaining Atlantic forest fragments is unquestionable. Some are gallery forests that protect watersheds and promote soil conservation. For- est patches are habitats for species that disperse and pollinate native vegetation, increasing regional genetic flow. They also serve as refuges for local and long-distance migratory birds (Cullen et al., 2001b; Powell and Bjork, 1995; Greenberg, 1996). Finally and most importantly, they are the “seed banks” for these endangered ecosystems that can be used for forest restoration programs (Cullen et al., 2001b).
Illegal hunting, erosion of the forest edges by fires, colo- nization by vines and climbers, wind desiccation, cattle graz- ing, the spread of invasive plants and the use of pesticides results in the gradual loss of biodiversity and degradation of the forests close to rural communities. Over time, these impacts modify the forest structure, adversely affecting eco- logical processes and causing significant losses of animal and plant species because of the insidious consequences of edge effects (Laurance, 1991, 1997). Forest edge perturba- tions are recognized as the main problem for the remaining forests in the Pontal.
6. Forest fragments and landless people: governance, conflict mediation and institutional responses
Currently, our main interest is in the future of the Atlantic forest fragments when the disputes for land are set- tled. The majority of remaining forest fragments are small, privately-owned and now protected by law. During the orig- inal establishment of most of the large farms, landowners cleared the forest where soil conditions were favorable for crops and cattle pasture and forest patches were intention- ally left in areas where soil was poor (Cullen et al., 2001b). Large landowners have usually “donated” marginal lands or those at the edge of forest fragments to landless families in exchange for legal ownership. Consequently, settlements
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	73
74	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
are on unproductive soils or those that can cause further threats to the natural environment.
Factors that influence the (often irrational) use of the Pontal’s forest fragments include their small size, minimal or non-existent knowledge of the involved forest types and legal impediments. Forests do provide opportunities for the commercial harvesting of certain species and even sustain- able subsistence hunting. However, as these practices are not common in the region and when they do occur they are not being carried out in a sustainable manner, most forest frag- ments are undervalued and are being ecologically depleted (Cullen et al., 2000a,b, 2001a,b).
In the face of these challenges, innovative approaches must be developed as a viable forest conservation strat- egy for the Pontal region. They must target land uses that are socially acceptable, that comply with the needs of lo- cal people and that ensure ecological sustainability, while incorporating conservation education and participation (Padua et al., 2002), adaptability analysis (Hildebrand and Russel, 1996) and a farming system framework in con- junction with agro-forestry practices (Nair, 1993). Together these strategies should enhance the conservation of the re- maining forests and the production of multiple outputs for local communities. Forest corridors, buffer zones and small forest patches (functioning as “stepping-stones”) main- tained and exploited as agro-forestry parcels can contribute to the genetic flux of many species, ease conflicts, and reduce “edge effects”, as well as help disseminate native species through seed dispersal and pollination.
Agro-forestry is a type of land management in which woody perennial plants are grown on the same land man- agement units as agricultural crops, in either a particular spatial arrangement or in a temporal sequence and with ecological and economic interactions between the differ- ent components (Fernandes and Nair, 1986; Michon and de Foresta, 1999). MacDicken and Vergara (1990) cite a number of beneficial attributes of agro-forestry compared to even-aged monocultures of annuals: improved micro- climate; enhanced nutrient cycling; increased soil fertility and soil organic matter; reduced wind effects, the develop- ment of shelterbelts and disease barriers; improved weed and pest control; increased economic sustainability; in- creased soil porosity and aeration; increased protection of soil from rainfall impact; improved erosion control and ter- race effects; exploitation of larger soil volumes; decreased fertilizer requirements and control of leaching.
However, little attention has been given to the potential of agro-forestry systems in protecting forest fragments and as sources of useful or profitable products for local people. Diversified agro-forestry belts around forest fragments have only recently been considered as potential buffers for bio- diversity reserves or as bridges for fragmented habitats in the tropics (Wilson and Diver, 1991; Gajaseni et al., 1996). Surrounding forest edges with agro-forestry buffers instead of open pasture or cropland can thus greatly reduce edge ef- fects (Cullen et al., 2000a,b). The practice of agro-forestry
can also be useful in planting forest corridors and small patches or “stepping stones”. In any of these options, one of the major challenges and opportunities lies in harnessing the enormous potential of MPTS (Nair, 1993). In addition to their potential as windbreaks and buffering belts, MPTS are recognized to provide multiple benefits. Use of MPTS has not been explored in the Pontal do Paranapanema region, and the marriage of MPTS with local needs would enhance productivity and sustainability of local cropping practices while providing the transition zone needed to promote and conserve biological diversity.
7. Drumming up public participation
We have used environmental education with a broad par- ticipatory approach in order to establish conservation ini- tiatives for environmental and social benefits. Information about local nature is continuously disseminated, together with agro-ecological principles that can be put into practice by local people. The participatory approach follows specific steps but always respects the opinions of the local people and takes into account cultural values and other contextual real- ities (Table 1). It includes a great deal of listening to ideas and working through issues in an open and democratic way so that solutions may be constructed and implemented with shared responsibilities. Such respect on the part of the educa- tor or facilitator raises the local people’s self esteem, which in turn empowers them to act and behave ethically, based on values that include a common ideal. Above all, the process stimulates a community feeling of a common goal. Once lo- cal people understand their potential in changing their reali- ties and their role in influencing decisions, it is easier to seek external input or support to stimulate local conservation ini- tiatives. This is the basis for encouraging a creative process that can be directed to designing strategies to solve local problems. A continuous evaluation and follow-up process is critical to assess the effectiveness of the different stages of a program or of its total product, to guide actions and to optimize the efforts and save energy, time and resources.
The use of a participatory approach to stimulate agro-ecological management for the Pontal region has proved effective and has resulted in the planting of trees on privately-owned plots. The idea is to introduce an agro-ecology mentality with sustainable practices such as seed preparation, seedling production, adequate planting techniques and the establishment of agro-forestry modules that can serve as demonstrations to be adapted and improved in larger scale projects.
The introduction of agro-forestry for conservation and development purposes is a challenge for traditional rural practices, and requires a shift in the local mentality. The perceived juxtaposition of human interests and the environ- ment needs to be challenged and human and environmental concerns be understood as complementary and mutually dependent. That human needs can be satisfied with reduced
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	75
Table 1 Steps to the participatory approach
Steps	Structure of program
Evaluation 6	Follow-up
Modifying strategies Disseminating results Seeking support
5	Partnerships
4	Strategies Seek local resources (human, environmental and material)
Bring external “inputs”
3	Dream or vision Goals and objectives
2	Reflection on local potentials Exchange of ideas, experiences and knowledge
1	Problem or theme identification
Observation: numbers begin at the bottom to demonstrate that the process resembles a construction, although better represent its dynamics. Based on Padua and Tabanez (1997) and Padua et al. (1999).
Corresponding values
Flexibility, altruism, renovation
Solidarity, cooperation Humility, enthusiasm, daring, persistence
Creativity, intuition, affectivity Self-esteem, ethics
Respect, empathy, receptivity
it is not a linear process. A spiral would
or no environmental impact and can often be better satisfied with the integrity of natural ecosystems is a new concept and needs to be matured and demonstrated in practice. Farmers may reject agro-forestry innovations as the learning and mastery of new technologies are sometimes challenging, especially because positive results can take time and often require some trial and error (Hildebrand and Russel, 1996). For this reason, we have been careful to discuss the choices and the means for implementing agro-forestry modules with each individual farmer. In this way we are planning with the farmers and not for the farmers (Cullen et al., 2001a,b). Through participatory diagnosis and design the farmers and our researchers are learning to work collectively and select how best to implement new crop options and how to modify and adapt them to specific local conditions.
We have been able to implement a gradual forest restora- tion program, in three context depending on the location of the settlement: (1) corridors that link one forest fragment to another; (2) buffer zones planted around fragments to pro- tect them from edge effects and (3) “stepping stones”, small patches of trees that serve to enrich the soil and increase the connectivity among forest fragments. These methods have been openly discussed with all involved, resulting in a more in-depth understanding of the advantages and dis- advantages of such practices. Regional biological diversity can be protected, while also improving soil quality and pro- tecting watersheds. The trees and other forest products can thus become a source of revenue for the settlers. Brazil’s forestry regulations have evolved in the last few years. Only until recently, the idea of planting exotic species near na- tive forests was unacceptable. Now, it is recognized as an alternative procedure when combined with the planting of nativetreesandspecificallytoprotectforestremnants.IPEˆs activities in the Pontal region have strongly influenced such
policies and its practices are proving to be a “win-win” situation, where both people and nature benefit.
Families have organized themselves into small groups and are involved in every stage of the project, from training and experimenting, to planning, implementing, monitor- ing and evaluating. We have provided initial training in agro-forestry extension through short courses where com- munity members learn and experience the various benefits of agro-forestry systems. Slides and video presentations show how agro-forestry systems can improve microclimate, en- hance nutrient cycling, and increase soil fertility and soil or- ganic matter. It is important to note that only about 10–15% of the total land area of each farmer (approximately 2.5 ha) is assigned to these agro-forestry projects, often involving a strip of land that, when possible, borders the edge of a forest fragment, while the remaining area, usually under subsis- tence/cash crops or dairy production, is likely to receive direct and indirect benefits from the agro-forestry zone.
8. Community involvement
There are many benefits of working with education and participation as the basis of a broad socio-environmental program. Community involvement has been evident in is- sues directly linked to forest protection, such as the help to extinguish forest fires, the actual work of clearing fire lanes, and support for measures that can protect biodiver- sity (Jacobson and Padua, 1995; Padua, 1991, 1994; Padua and Valladares-Padua, 1997, 1998). Other outcomes have in- cluded an increasing interest in environmental matters: the demandformoretrainingopportunities,andparticipationin creating nurseries and of adopting adequate planting of trees.
76	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
Fig. 4. Agro-forestry workshop with rural workers learning how to plant, what to plant and why. Photo by Laury Cullen Jr.
So far, 400 settler families, technicians and local leaders haveparticipatedincoursesandworkshopsofferedbyIPEˆs team and other local partners. As a result, there are now eleven community agro-forestry nurseries in the Pontal re- gion, each with an average capacity of 30,000 seedlings per year (Fig. 4). Many participants have acted as multipliers, so there is a clear ripple effect of the training. The nurseries have also served to initiate an agro-ecology culture, stimu- lating the participation of other settlements in the region.
The first demonstration nursery was established at the Morro do Diabo State Park, an important step in establish- ing a dialogue between the State and third sector groups or institutions. The seedlings are being planted to link the Park to forest fragments in the region. This has created concrete connections between public and private sectors in integrat- ing settled families and natural areas. A feeling of shared ownership and responsibility among participants is being constructed for an environmentally and socially improved landscape.
9. Conclusions
The Pontal experience shows that, with a continuous and systematic effort based on education and participation, trans- parency and trust, and flexibility and clarity, it is possible to integrate several segments of a complex society and apply research findings to implement conservation measures. Pro- moting agro-ecology, adaptive management, adequate mon- itoring and appropriate policies can be critical to integrate individuals and groups into prioritizing measures beneficial to human and wildlife. This approach will hopefully weaken arguments, common in Brazil, that tend to disqualify con- servation measures in the face of social needs. When one is intrinsically linked to the other, any action will lead to the protection and amelioration of life in general.
The challenges of practicing conservation in complex andunderprivilegedenvironmentsarecommoneverywhere today. Human pressures have increased even in remote areas and alternative development models that can be eco- logically sustainable, economically viable and socially just are crucial. Given the dramatically increasing population resulting from the agrarian reform movement settled in the Pontal region, it is unrealistic to expect that conservation efforts will include all families in a short period of time and with limited resources. However, our experience over the past decade has shown that community-based education and conservation has to be continuous and long-term. We intend to increase our efforts in the Pontal on all fronts and believe it will be possible in a few years to compare conditions and hopefully show that our approach has contributed to the sustainability of agriculture and wildlife in the region as a whole. We intend to increase the planting of trees and at the same time understand more profoundly those processes that have worked, in order to improve and implement ever more effective measures. For example, a comparison between families involved in agro-forestry projects with those that are not, may bring some light as to the measures and ap- proaches to be considered in the future. Surveys conducted with other segments of the local community can also be valuable to identify significant suggestions that may have been disregarded for lack of opportunity to express them.
The Pontal experience can be considered a pilot program, where testing, learning and adjusting have been predomi- nant. With limited resources it has been possible to imple- ment a program that now identifies the paths that need to be traced and expanded. Important has been the demonstration that it is possible to improve social and environmental con- ditions in a region of conflict. We believe the current pro- gram can be broadened to the entire region in the future and the methodology may certainly be replicated with pertinent adjustments in other sites where conditions are similar.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Forestry Institute of São Paulo, especially the Morro do Diabo State Park director, Helder Faria, Apoena, Cocamp and all people who have contributed over the years to make the Pontal experience so rich and promising. We thank the confidence people have deposited on us and hope to be able to show more and more that it has been worthwhile. We would like to thank Dr. Mary Pearl and Dr. Kent Redford for reviewing earlier versions of this manuscript. We are especially grateful to Dr. Anthony Rylands who has so patiently reviewed this text and helped to put it into an acceptable English. We are also grateful to UNESCO and Columbia University for inviting us to present our work at International Conference on Biodiversity and Society in May 2001. Finally, we thank the beauty of the natural environment of the Pontal region that helped inspire us to get so involved in matters related to conservation.
References
Alonso, M.T.A., 1977. Vegetação. Região Sudeste. Geografia do Brasil. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estat ́ıstica (IBGE), Rio de Janeiro. Brazil, IBGE. 1996. Atlas Fundiário. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e
Estat ́ıstica (IBGE), Rio de Janeiro. Brazil, MMA. 2000. Avaliação e Ações Prioritárias paara a Conservação
da Biodiversidade da Mata Atlaˆntica e Campos Sulinos. Conservation International do Brasil, Fundação SOS Mata Atlaˆntica, Fundação Biodiversitas, Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), Secretaria do Meio Ambiente do Estado de São Paulo (SEMAD), Instituto Estadual de Florestas. Secretaria de Biodiversidade e Florestas, Ministerio do Meio Ambiente (MMA), MG, Bras ́ılia.
Brooks, T.M., Balmford, A., 1996. Atlantic forest extinctions. Nature 380, 115.
Caˆmara, I. de G., 1993. Plano de Ação para a Mata Atlaˆntica. Fundação SOS Mata Atlaˆntica, São Paulo.
CATI, 1996. Relatório Técnico No 26. Casa da Agricultura de Teodoro Sampaio, São Paulo.
Colchester, M., Lohmann, L., 1993. The Struggle for Land and the Fate of the Forests. The World Rainforest Movement, Malaysia.
Cullen Jr., L., Bodmer, R.E., Valladares-Padua, C., 2000a. Effects of hunting in habitat fragments of the Atlantic forests. Brazil Biological Conserv. 95, 49–56.
Cullen, Jr., L., Valladares-Padua, C., Padua, S., Morato, M.I.R., 2000b. Projeto Abraço Verde: Zonas de benef ́ıcio múltiplo e a recuperação de fragmentos florestais no Pontal do Paranapanema, São Paulo. In: Diegues, A.C., Viana, V.M. (Eds.), Comunidades Tradicionais e Manejo dos Recursos Naturais da Mata Atlaˆntica. NUPAUB, São Paulo. pp. 43–55.
Cullen Jr., L., Bodmer, R.E., Valladares-Padua, C., 2001a. Ecological consequences of hunting in Atlantic forest patches. Oryx 35 (2), 137– 144.
Cullen Jr., L., Schmink, L.M., Valladares-Padua, C., Morato, M.I.R., 2001b. Agroforestry benefit zones: A tool for the conservation and management of Atlantic forest fragments. Nat. Areas J. 21, 346–356.
Dean, W., 1995. With broadax and firebrand, The Destruction of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Eiten, G., 1974. An outline of the vegetation of South America. In: Proceedings of the Symposium of Congress of International Primatology Society, Vol. 5. pp. 529–545.
Fernandes, E.C.M., Nair, P.K.R., 1986. An evaluation of the structure and function of tropical homegardens. Agric. Syst. 21, 279–310.
Fonseca, G., 1985. The vanishing Brazilian Atlantic forest. Biol. Conserv. 34, 17–34.
Gajaseni, J., Matta-Machado, R., Jordan, C.F., 1996. Diversified agroforestry systems: buffers for biodiversity reserves, and landbridges for fragmented habitats in the tropics. In: Szaro, R.C., Johnston, D.W. (Eds.), Biodiversity in Managed Landscapes, Theory and Practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 506–513.
Greenberg, R., 1996. Managed forest patches and the diversity of birds in southern México. In: Schelhas, J., Greenberg, R. (Eds.). Forest Patches in Tropical Landscapes, Island Press, Washington, DC, pp. 254–273.
Hildebrand, P.E., Russel, J.T., 1996. Adaptability analysis: A Method for the Design, Analysis and Interpretation of On-Farm Research-Extenuation. Iowa State University Press, Amsterdam.
Hueck, K., 1972. As Florestas da América do Sul. Editora Pol ́ıgono e Editora Universidade de Bras ́ılia, São Paulo.
Jacobson, S., Padua, S., 1995. A systems model for conservation education in perks: examples from Malaysia and Brazil. In: Jacobson, S. (Ed.), Conserving Wildlife: International Education and Communication Approaches. Columbia University Press. Methods and Studies in Conservation Biology Series, pp. 3–15.
Laurance, W.F., 1991. Edge effects in tropical forest fragments: application of a model for the design of nature reserves. Biol. Conserv. 57, 205– 219.
Laurance, W.F., 1997. Hyper-disturbed parks: edge effects and the ecology of isolated rainforests reserves in tropical Australia. In: Laurance, W.F., Bierregaard Jr., R.O. (Eds.), Tropical Forest Remnants: Ecology, Management and Conservation of Fragmented Communities. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 71–83.
Leite, J.F., 1998. A ocupação do Pontal do Paranapanema. Editora Hucitec, Fundação UNESP, São Paulo.
MacDicken, K.G., Vergara, N.T., 1990. Agroforestry: Classification and Management. Wiley, New York.
Mansano, B.F., 1995. Espacialização e Territorialidade da Luta pela Terra. Ph.D. Dissertation, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Presidente Prudente.
Michon, G., de Foresta, H., 1999. Agro-forests: incorporating a forest vision in agroforestry. In: Louise, E.B., Lassoie J.P., Fernandes, E.C.M. (Eds.), Agroforestry in Sustainable Agricultural Systems. CRC Press, New York, pp. 381–406.
Mori, S.A., Boon, B.M., Prance, G.T., 1981. Distribution patterns and conservation of eastern Brazilian coastal forests species. Brittonia 33, 233–245.
Nair, P.K.R., 1993. An Introduction to Agroforestry. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Padua, S.M., 1991. Conservation awareness through an environmental education school programme at Morro do Diabo State Park, São Paulo State, Brazil. Master’s Thesis, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Padua, S., 1994. Conservation awareness through an environmental education programme in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Environ. Conserv. 21 (2), 145–151.
Padua, S., 1997. Uma pesquisa em educação ambiental: a conservação do mico-leão-preto (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). In: Valladares-Padua, C., Bodmer, R. (Eds.), Manejo e Conservação de Vida Silvestre no Brasil. MCT, CNPq, Sociedade Civil Mamirauá, Bras ́ılia. pp. 34–51.
Padua, S., Tabanez, M., 1997. Uma abordagem participativa para a conservação de áreas naturais: educação ambiental na Mata Atlaˆntica. In: Milano, M.S. (Ed.), Anais do Congresso de Unidades de Conservação, Vol. 2. Curitiba, Paraná, pp. 371–379.
Padua, S., Valladares-Padua, C., 1997. Um programmea integrado para a conservação do mico-leão-preto (Leontopithecus chrysopygus) pesquisa, educação e envolvimento comunitário. In: Padua, S.M., Tabanez, M.F. (Eds.), Educação Ambiental: Caminhos Trilhados no Brasil. Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (IPEˆ), Bras ́ılia, pp. 119–131.
Padua, S., Valladares-Padua, C., 1998. The Conservation of Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus): from research and education to landscape ecology, agrarian reform movement and policy. Second Pan American Congress on the Conservation of Wildlife through Education. Wildlife Conservation Society (http://www.wcs.org).
C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78	77
78	C. Valladares-Padua et al./Environmental Science & Policy 5 (2002) 69–78
Padua, S., Tabanez, M., Souza. M.G., von Höeffel, J.L., 1999. Participação: Um elemento-chave para envolvimento comunitário, uma experieˆncia em educação ambiental na Ärea de Proteção Ambiental—APA Piracicaba. Revista de Educação e Ensino, Vol. 4, No. 2. Universidade de São Francisco, São Paulo, pp. 75–84.
Padua, S.M., Tabanez, M.F., Höeffel, J.L., De Souza, M. das G., 2002. Conservação da biodiversidade o envolvimento de comunidades locais na proteção de áreas naturais. In: Sauvé, L. Orellana, I. Sato, M. (Eds.), Sujets choisis en éducation relative à l’environnement. D’une Amérique à l’autre/Textos escogidos en educación ambiental. De una América a otra/Textos escolhidos em educação ambiental. De uma América à outra. Les Publications ERE–UQAM: Chaire de recherche du Canada en éducation relative à l’environnement, Université du Québec à Montréal. ISBN 2-89276-213-8. Tome I: p. 140–147.
Powell, G.V.N., Bjork, R., 1995. Implications of intratropical migration on reserve design: a case study using Pharomachrus mocinno. Conserv. Biol. 9, 354–362.
Quintela, C.E., 1990. An SOS for Brazil’s beleaguered Atlantic Forest. Nature Conserv. Magazine 40 (2), 14–19.
São Paulo, ITESP, 1998. Terra e Cidadãos: Aspectos da Ação de Regularização Fundiária no Estado de São Paulo. Série Cadernos ITESP/Secretaria da Justiça e da Defesa da Cidadania No 4. ITESP, SãoPaulo.
SOS Mata Atlaˆntica and INPE. 1993. Evolução dos remanescentes Florestais e ecossistemas associados do dom ́ınio da Mata Altaˆntica. SOS Mata Atlaˆntica e Instituto de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE), São Paulo, Brazil.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1987. Status and Conservation of the Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). Master’s Thesis, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1993. The Ecology, Behavior and Conservation of the Black Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysopygus). Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Valladares-Padua, C., 1999. A Conservação da Mata Atlaˆntica. Mundo Virtual, Ageˆncia Estado: hhttp://www.agestado.com.br/mvirtual/liana/ aspas/ htm.
Wilson, R.J., Diver, S.G., 1991. The role of birds in agroforestry system. In: Garret, E. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second Conference on Agroforestry in North America, School of Natural Resources, Springfield, MO, p. 114.
Claudio Valladares-Padua holds a PhD from University of Florida, Gainesville. He is a co-founder of Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas (Institute for Ecological Research (IPEˆ)) in Brazil where he works as Director of Conservation Science. In Brazil, he is also a Professor at the University of Bras ́ılia. In the US, he is an Associate Researcher at Columbia University, New York and senior researcher with the Wildlife Trust. He is also vice-president for conservation of the International Primatological Society. He edited two books and has more than 40 articles published in national and international journals.
Suzana M. Padua is a Brazilian doctoral student with a Masters on environmental education from the University of Florida. She works for the conservation of protected areas by raising local people’s awareness and conducts courses and workshops for educators all over Brazil. She gives talks in her country and abroad and has published widely in many countries and has editted two books. She is the president of Instituto de PesquisasEcológicas(InstituteforEcologicalResearch(IPEˆ)),aBrazilian conservation organization and the director for the Brazil Program of the Wildlife Trust. Suzana is an Ashoka fellow and a member of IUCN’s Commission on Education and Communication and of the North American Association for Environmental Education (NAAEE).
Laury Cullen Jr. is conservation biologist and research coordinator with IPEˆ—Institute for Ecological Research, a Brazilian conservation NGO based in the State of São Paulo. His main interests are the ecology and conservation of large mammals in the Atlantic Forest, particularly using umblella species as landscape indicators for ecological planning. He holds a MSc degree from University of Florida and is currently a PhD student at the University of Kent, England.

2006
Political Science
Latin American Perspectives
Race and Equality in Brazil: Cultural and Political Dimensions
Jo?o Roberto Martins Filho

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
Book Reviews
From	his
countryside	relationships
contribution	would	seem	to	be dynamics	of	the	landless	peasant
Against
the Current
by Jo?o Roberto Martins Filho
Translated	by Laurence	Hallewell Luca Fanelli La scelta della terra: Studio di urn insediamento rurale del Movimento
Sem	Terra	in Brasile.	Turin:	Silvio	Zamorani	Editore,
Since its beginnings	in the 1980s, the Movimento
2003.
dos Trabalhadores	Sem Terra subject	of	a	considerable	body
(Landless	Workers'	Movement?MST)	has	been	the of literature both in Brazil and abroad. Much of this research has sought to analyze
the movement	in its national	or regional	setting?its	history,	development,	and con tradictions. Other research from a wide range of specialties in the human sciences
has	analyzed	its micro-sociological	and micro-economic	aspects,	ranging	from	the soil quality of particular invasion sites to the specific social dynamic of individual land seizures. What does this book by a young Italian researcher who spent just a couple	of months	on one MST	settlement	in upstate	Paran?	contribute	to this already
rich and well-developed	bibliography? We must first of all understand that this settlement, Santa Maria, established in
1993, is, as the author admits from the start, an exceptional and nonrepresentative case within	the movement	as a whole.	It was	intended	to test the possibility	of an
innovative producer-cooperative	in a locality specially selected by the directors of the MST at the state level, with its leadership hand-picked as members who had already
played a significant role in the movement and had shown a desire to follow a differ ent path from the usual one by returning to the countryside after having lived in town.
Moreover,	it was	offered	to	the	researcher	as	a field	study	by	the MST
itself.
combining	a movement	in
perspective,	Fanelli's approach	to	the
with	a micro-sociological On	the	macro	level,	Paran?	has	undergone	many	long-term	changes	in	town
macro-sociological Paran?	in	the
context	of	city-country settle in the Fazenda Santa Maria.
relations focusing on changes in the lives of the several score of families who had come to
that attracted the attention of this Italian researcher because
Jo?o Roberto Martins Filho is a professor of political science at the Federal University of S?o Carlos and an associate editor of Latin American Perspectives. Laurence Hallewell is a retired
librarian from Columbia University, where his specialty was Latin American bibliography.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 149,Vol. 33 No. 4, July 2006 144-146 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X06289869 ? 2006 Latin American Perspectives
144
analysis
BOOK REVIEW	145
of	their	connection	with	what	has	been	happening	in	rural	areas	in Europe.	The	state is known for its tradition of coffee cultivation in the north and of small farms in the southeast and east. It is also characterized by significant waves of migration into the countryside when coffee cultivation was expanding in the 1940s, away from the
countryside and into the cities from the 1970s onward, from the countryside to new
agricultural areas being opened up in Brazil and Paraguay during the various crises of the agricultural economy, and then away from the land again when this was
appropriated for large-scale hydroelectric schemes such as that of Itaipu in the far west of the state.
It was	not	by	chance	that	Paran?	witnessed	the	creation	of	both	the Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra do Oeste do Paran? (Movement of Landless Peasants in
Western Sudoeste
Paran??MASTRO)	and do	Paran?	(Movement MASTRO	is closely
the Movimento	dos	Agricultores	Sem
of	Landless	Peasants	in	Southwest connected	with	the Comissao	Pastoral
Terra	do Paran??
da Terra
MASTES). (Pastoral Land Commission?CPT) tors of the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches, directed toward work with the
and with the militancy of the progressive sec
people displaced by the building of the ItaipuDam. MASTES	ismainly made up of the sons and daughters of smallholders who have been finding itmore and more dif
ficult to stay on the land in the face of the advance of agri-business,	ismore linked
to rural trade unions, and operates rather deliberately. The first land occupation in Paran? took place in 1984, and the state capital, Curitiba, became the venue for the First Landless Workers' Conference, marked by its supporters' camping out as a his
toric protest demonstration right in the middle of town. The author has thus chosen a state with a wealth of experience that is central to the history of the MST. At the end of the 1980s, with the rise of the Uni?o Democr?tica Ruralista (Democratic
Countryside	Alliance?UDR),	which	represents	the	landowners'	response	to MST tactics, and with the election in late 1989 of Fernando Collor to the presidency of Brazil	over	the	Partido	dos	Trabalhadores	(Workers'	party?PT)	candidate,	the	state
MST	turned	strongly	inward,	consolidating	its	settlements,	organizing	production, and securing the political space that it had already won. This is the context out of
which the idea of the Santa Maria settlement The most obvious richness of Fanelli's work lies, then, in the suggestion that these
general	processes	do	not	take	into	account	the multitude	of	pathways	and	choices	that led precisely these families and these individuals to the experience of cooperative pro
duction just outside the city of Paran?, in the north of the state. For Fanelli, it is neces sary to understand the element of planning and choice that has caused many peasants who had already left the countryside for towns to decide to go back to the country, start ing with their evaluation of the negative side of town life but chiefly the result of a con
scious political choice in which the central element has been the opportunity for an
experience	of	cooperative	production	as	a middle	way	between	small-scale	capitalist production and a wider social program that could point to an alternative to capitalism.
Hence the title of his book, "Opting for the Land." It is, however, in the intersection of these two elements that Fanelli's work finds
its natural limitations. Analyzing the paths of people's lives and the concrete experi ence of the Santa Maria settlement fills a whole chapter of this book with humanity and comes across as its greatest contribution, providing a story in opposition to the
emerged.
146 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
usual	demonization	of	these	men,	women,	and	children	fighting	splendidly	for	their survival and dignity. Over and above this, the story of Santa Maria, although atypi
cal, contradicts	the reactionary	assumption	that any type of alternative	experience	in
rural Brazil is impossible. This is, however, as far as the book's contribution goes. Without	diminishing	it, we	must	recognize	that	its	analysis	is	insufficient	to	answer the book's opening question, "Can there be any balance between town and country other than the one offered by the highly industrialized countries?" Any valid answer
would have to go far beyond the heroic experience of the Santa Maria settlers. The book could, however, be used in Brazilian classrooms to provide an alternative to
the dominant but distorted vision spread by the mass media of the rich experience of struggle and resistance undergone by those Brazilians who have chosen to swim
against	the prevailing	current.

2003
Political Science
Journal of Developing Societies
Globalization in a Time of Neoliberalism: Politicized Social Movements and the Latin American Response
Harry E. Vanden 

Additional services and information for Journal of Developing Societies can be found at: Email Alerts: http://jds.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://jds.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://jds.sagepub.com/content/19/2-3/308.refs.html
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM: POLITICIZED SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND THE LATIN AMERICAN RESPONSE
Harry E. Vanden*
ABSTRACT
This article examines the emergence of new, highly politicized social movements in Latin America as a response to deteriorating economic and social conditions and the related growth of neoliberal economic policies advocated by International Financial Institutions like the IMF and the World Bank and by national political elites. It argues that the decline of bureaucratic authoritarianism and the growing democratization in the region have helped to move the struggle for more equitable societies and the empowerment of popular sectors away from armed struggle toward new repertoires of action conducted in civil society by new social and political movements. An overview of the phenomenon, examines the Zapatistas in Mexico, the National Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), the breakdown of traditional parties and the rise of the Chávez movement in Venezuela, recent political move- ments in Bolivia, the rise of neo-populism in Peru, and the political and economic crisis that delegitimized governments and politics in Argentina and led to popular assemblies and demonstrations that removed succes- sive governments from power in 2001 and 2002. Finally, a case study of the Landless movement in Brazil (the MST) is offered as an example of how such movements develop and contest power.
*	Professor of Political Science and International Studies, Department of Government and International Affairs, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620-8100, USA, vanden@chuma1.cas.usf.edu.
The author wishes to thank his many friends, informants, and participants in rallies and demonstrations in Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador, and Mexico for sharing their knowledge of events and perspectives with him.
© de Sitter Publications 2003	JDS 19(2-3):308-333
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	309
“The emergence of new political and alternative movements despite their scant participation in [traditional] political life marks the start of a new way of conducting politics which responds to the legitimate demands of the marginalized majorities.”
—Juan del Grando, Mayor of La Paz greeting rise of the new political movement MAS and its leader and Coca Growers Federation head, Evo Morales (Los Tiempos July 2, 2002)
Introduction
In Latin America there is a backlash against economic neoliberal- ism and the globalization process that is growing ever stronger.1 The New York Times and other mainstream English publications such as The Economist, The Financial Times, and Newsweek have even begun to catalog the reaction. Several of these noted a resultant change in Latin American politics, but initially viewed the backlash as a resurgent populism or simply a turn to the left (Shifter 2003:51). The progression of events suggests that there is a realign- ment that is much more profound and that may well represent a significant change in politics in the region.
Ever since the Caracazo in 1989, there have been different forms of popular protest against austerity measures and elements of the conservative economic policies that came to be called neoliber- alism in Latin America. These have been manifest in diverse forms: the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico in 1994; the neopopulist Movimiento V República led by Hugo Chávez in Venezuela from the late 1990s on; the national indigenous movement led by the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (CONAIE) in Ecuador and the growth of its related party, Pachakutik; the Movement of Landless Rural Laborers (MST) in Brazil; the Asambleas de Barrios and other protest organizations in Argentina; and the Cocaleros Federation, and its linked political movement MAS, in Bolivia. The election of Lucio Gutíerrez and the emergence of his New Country Movement, and the election of Lula and the strength of the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) in Brazil can also be seen as part of a strong popular reaction to neoliberal poli-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
310	HARRY E. VANDEN
cies advocated by the IMF and other International Financial Institutions, and a further indication of a movement away from traditional politics and an authoritarian political culture to new forms of popular democratic participation.
Electoral alternatives to politics as usual have not always been present, and even progressive parties such as the PT (the Workers Party in Brazil) do not necessarily have the trust of new social movements. Though not always well or precisely articulated, new demands are being registered. These demands, however, are not always addressed to the political system per se, but to society more generally since there are growing questions about the system’s rele- vancy and legitimacy. Nor has the populace in most nations looked to armed struggles and revolutionary movements to remedy their problems (Colombia is the significant exception here). Something different is being sought. Different groups are looking for new polit- ical structures that allow for, if not encourage, their participation. Civil society is becoming the new locus of conflict and contention. Specific segments of the population are seeking forms of political organization that they can call their own. There is a search for new structures that can respond to the perceived—though not always clearly articulated—demands being formulated from below by the popular sectors.
A broad segment of the population (from the lower and middle classes) has begun to mobilize and seek new and different political involvement and responses in parties, governmental struc- tures, and social movements. They want something that works for them. Indeed, the increasing promotion of democracy and democra- tization tells them that their voices should be heard and that the political system should somehow respond to them. When it is unclear how their votes count (if at all) and whether the political class is responding to their hue and cry, many become disillusioned and angry. Similarly, the return to democracy after authoritarian military rule or the strengthening of democratic governmental insti- tutions during intense democratization convinces broad sectors of the population to expect better, cleaner, more efficient, and hope- fully less corrupt, government. In this respect, the political culture is beginning to change. If nothing else, elections are not expected to
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	311
be fraught with fraud and the resultant governments are expected to be more responsive. Similarly, the populace is generally becoming less tolerant of some of the traditional vices in Latin American poli- tics: corruption, ineffective rule, and non-substantive political discourse (politiqueo). As suggested by the following, political regrouping has begun.
Chiapas: Regional Victory
In southern Mexico, local and community organizations began to resist the dire economic consequences engendered by globalization and globalized integration through free trade and even NAFTA. It is argued that similar forms of resistance have occurred throughout the hemisphere since the region was interjected into the international capitalist economic system. Yet, these previous struggles were more akin to traditional peasant or indigenous rebellions in that they did not spawn strong national or international links and, as such, were easily marginalized or defeated. Indeed, localized resistance had bubbled to the surface sporadically since the time of the conquest. This certainly had been the case in southern Mexico and the Yucatan as well. Perhaps stimulated by this tradition of rebellion, the indige- nous rural population in Chiapas in the 1980s began to resist and organize against the traditional land inequity and the hardships that the commercialization of agriculture and Mexico’s further integra- tion into the global market structure caused. Racial identity and unequal land distribution helped to solidify the movement and led to the formation of a social movement that eventually spawned the EZLN (the Zapatista Army of National Liberation). Unlike some other groups, the Zapatistas were successful in linking their strug- gle to a growing continental indigenous identity and the disastrous effects of globalized free markets on local small farmers. Their ingenious use of the Internet, the mountain mask, public relations, marches, and mobilizations kept their cause before the Mexican nation and the international community. They were able to create a highly politicized movement with considerable regional power and national visibility. They were not, however, able to link their strug- gle to other large politicized social movements to form a national
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
312	HARRY E. VANDEN
coalition. Nor were they able to mobilize support behind a nation- wide new political party or new political movement (as would be done in Ecuador and Brazil) that would be sympathetic to their demands once it achieved national power or that would at least ensure adequate space in civil society to continue to mobilize support and pursue their demands as would be done in Bolivia.
Beyond Populism
In previous times, populism like that championed by Getulio Vargas in Brazil had offered some alleviation of similar dissatisfaction. But even traditional populism seemed unable to staunch the growing mobilizations in Ecuador, Brazil, Venezuela, or Argentina. One might even conclude that traditional populism had run its course. It had responded to a time of increasing enfranchisement, growing literacy, and increased political knowledge. Higher levels of educa- tion, ever-wider suffrage and greater female gender equality, an increasingly sophisticated political culture, and more widespread involvement in politics had called for other forms of political partic- ipation. This was beginning to develop in places like Chile under Allende, Brazil, El Salvador, and Guatemala before the onset of bureaucratic authoritarian regimes and military-run repression. Other responses included authoritarian Nasserite reformism in Peru under Juan Velasco Alvarado, and a military populist form of the same in Panama under Omar Torrejos. Although both military regimes paid attention to popular needs, both Velasquismo and Torrejismo represented top-down authoritarian movements that did not provide adequate, effective political institutions to incorporate demands from below and the growing political assertiveness and participation of large sectors of the population. Their nationalist populism did, nonetheless, mobilize segments of the masses—albeit in pro-government forms—and served to keep political expectations high in their own countries as well as in other nations. It also suggested that progressive nationalist sectors of the militaries would and could respond to the growing restiveness of the masses and at least some of the economic and social problems. These ideas would later find resonance in Venezuela from the 1992 coup attempt on
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	313
and in Ecuador after the January 2000 coup. Indeed, coup leaders in both countries were later elected president (Chávez and Gutiérrez).
Right Wing Populism in Peru
The legacy of Velasquismo was mixed in Peru. The military had retreated to the barracks by the end of the 1970s and taken much of their nationalist vision of development with them. By the 1980s, Peru was again suffering from a profound economic crisis and the populist variant of Aprismo under Alan García. Warmed-over Aprismo without Haya de la Torre proved unable to lead the coun- try out of the quagmire. This, in turn, led to the de-legitimization of the political system, with the concomitant growth of political move- ments that represented non-traditional options. Though there were social movements, they remained relatively small and did not reach national proportions. Rather, political competition developed among a violent Maoist guerrilla group, Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path); a Fidelista guerrilla group, the MRT (The Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement); and a rising political movement led by Alberto Fujimori. The latter had broken away from traditional party groupings and created his own ad hoc political coalition that later evolved into a brand of right-wing populism. As the 1990s progressed, dissatisfaction with traditional political leaders and traditional political parties became widespread, as did a growing trend to doubt the legitimacy of the political system itself.
In Peru and throughout the region, traditional personalism, clientelism, corruption, and personal, class, and group avarice became subjects of ridicule and anger, if not rage. The effects of neoliberalism and continued racism amid calls for economic and racial equality began to be felt. Traditional parties like APRA and attempts at leftist unity in Peru had fallen before political newcomer Alberto Fujimori and his ad hoc political movement, Cambio 90. Yet, the Fujimori government became increasingly authoritarian in the face of continued success by Shining Path and eventually closed down congress and altered the Supreme Court as it pursued an extremely brutal, but ultimately successful, war against the guerril- las. After experiencing some popularity for stopping the guerrillas
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
314	HARRY E. VANDEN
and restoring calm, Fujimori was discredited for corruption and forced into exile in Japan. However, by late 2003 the neoliberal poli- cies championed by the successor government of Alejandro Toledo were also under attack as economic conditions worsened and his government lost support. There were no strong, national social movements or new political groupings to offer alternatives and the legitimacy of the political system was again being questioned. Amid strikes and demonstrations, Shining Path once again became active.
Leftist Populism and the Rise of Chavismo in Venezuela
Yet, when the voting populace is presented with what they perceive as a real choice that they believe could actually generate policies that would counteract the most economically and socially damaging aspects of economic globalization and neoliberalism, voter turnout often tends to peak and reformist leaders and their parties or coali- tions regularly reap the benefits.
This was certainly the case in Venezuela with the anti-glob- alization campaign of Hugo Chávez Frias. The identification of the two traditionally dominant parties (Acción Democrática and COPEI) with the status quo and neoliberal policies connected to economic globalization led to their resounding defeat in the 1998 election (neither was able to achieve double digits in the presiden- tial election). After a spirited campaign and a somewhat demagogic appeal to the 80 percent of the population Chávez classified as poor, his Movimiento V Républica and the Polo Patriótico coalition made a strong showing in the polls and won a resounding victory in the December presidential elections (56.5 percent). Voter turnout increased for the first time in recent years to some 64 percent of the registered voters. Even more remarkable was that the main competi- tor (Henrique Salas Rómer) was from neither of the two main parties either. The popular classes had responded with enthusiasm to Chávez’s anti-neoliberal, neo-populist rhetoric and program. Although his political movement was not well organized at the national or grassroots levels, his criticisms of Venezuela’s self- indulgent, and increasingly corrupt, political elite and the neoliberal policies they were pushing on the people paid big dividends at the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	315
polls. Indeed, the political momentum of the election and the popu- lar mobilization that made the Chávez victory possible carried the new government to a majority in a Constituent Assembly (approved in a popular referendum) and the subsequent new presidential elec- tions under the new constitution in 2000. Here Chávez got 59.5 percent of the vote, though faltering confidence in his ability to actually make the promised changes and his authoritarian approach to political dissent caused voter turnout to be much lower (see Ellner and Hellinger 2003). The resonance of his attacks against the wealth, the corrupt traditional political class, and neoliberal policies that promote economic globalization can still be seen in his support among the poorer segments of the population. It was precisely the ability to mobilize these sectors in the face of growing opposition from traditional political groupings and their upper and middle class allies that thwarted a temporarily successful coup attempt in April of 2002, placing Chávez back in the Presidential palace after he had been removed to a military base by the coup leaders.
Ecuador
Southern Mexico was not the only place where the effects of neolib- eral policies and the globalization process generated innovative responses. Since Incan times, local indigenous communities have been marginalized from important decision-making processes in Ecuador. This practice was extended to virtually all indigenous people after the conquest and continued during the republic. Yet, by the 1990s the traditional struggle for land, power, and some modicum of justice for the indigenous, mostly peasant masses was gradually transformed from local community-based struggle to a national struggle coordinated by CONAIE, the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indigenas del Ecuador. The Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador had become a national organi- zation that was able to mobilize thousands of people in land takeovers and marches. It connected different ethnic and regional groups and used modern means of communication to forge a national social movement. In the process it became a major power contender that could challenge governmental action by the late
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
316	HARRY E. VANDEN
1990s. After the disastrous dollarization of the economy and the imposition of other neoliberal economic policies by President Jamil Mahuad, CONAIE was able to mobilize tens of thousands of its constituents for a march on Quito that culminated in the taking of the Congress building and—backed by a few progressive army offi- cers and civilian politics—the formation of a short-lived junta. This was the first time indigenous people hade governed substantial parts of Ecuador since the conquest. Their victory was, however, short lived. Although some horizontal contacts with other organizations had been made, the CONAIE militants were not part of a broad based national coalition that could retain power. With the support of the United States, the traditional political class was able to retake power and negotiate the exit of Mahuad by placing Vice President Gustavo Noboa in power. Once moblilized, CONAIE, learning from the experience, initiated a national political strategy, and even started an affiliated political party, Pachacutik. In the 2002 elections they continued to cultivate their highly politicized national social movement, but were also able to field successful local and congres- sional political candidates. Eventually they threw their support behind Lucio Gutiérez, the army colonel who had been part of the short-lived junta in January of 2000. Thus, they helped to elect Gutiérez to the presidency, though their support was not uncondi- tional. They maintained their autonomy, but ensured that their demands would at least receive a hearing at the highest level, and might even be received with some sympathy.
Local Struggles and New Social Movements at the Local and Regional Levels
In Bolivia, the simultaneous national mobilizations of several new social movements in the national political arena and their common alliance (and support for national political alternatives) contributed to massive popular mobilizations in 2002 and 2003, and successful regime change. However, long before such national mobilization occurred, local communities often formed their own organizations to fight some aspect of globalization that was affecting them at the most local level. This reaction can be seen in the strong grassroots
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	317
movement against the privatization of the public water supply in Cochabamba, Bolivia in 2000. The Coordinadora de Defensa del Agua y de la Vida, remained locally rooted (see Shultz 2003). Yet their struggle was always framed in an international and national context. They championed their cause through the Internet and sent delegations to international meetings like the World Social Forums in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Further, they were not only very aware of the international dimensions of their struggle and of its globalized causes, but also were equally aware of the possibilities of interna- tional links with similar struggles and the international anti-globalization movement generally. This awareness and their electronic and personal links to other movements in Bolivia and elsewhere later facilitated their integration into the broad national coalition that set forth a national agenda through support for Evo Morales and his MAS Party in the 2002 presidential election. This awareness and extensive networking with other new social move- ments allowed this and other local or regional movements to become part of a near unstoppable national mobilization that, as will be explained, toppled the Sánchez de Lozada government. By linking the local effects of the neoliberal privatization of the water supply in Cochabamba to global policies and national politics, they linked their struggle to a growing regional and international consen- sus, and to a national movement with concrete, achievable objectives.
National Social Movements and the Bolivian Crisis
The intensity of the politicization of social movements in Bolivia was demonstrated by the massive protests and the popular mobiliza- tions that rocked the nation in 2003. As had occurred in Ecuador in 2000, there was a popular mobilization of indigenous peoples and rural peasants through a newly formed peasant indigenous federa- tion that called for the blockading of roads and popular mobilizations. They had quickly been joined by the Cocaleros of the now famous Coca Growers Federation led by Evo Morales, who had finished barely a percentage point behind President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada in the 2002 elections. Other groups, like the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
318	HARRY E. VANDEN
Cochabamba movement against the privatization of water, also joined. An ongoing economic crisis and a crisis in traditional poli- tics combined with strong U.S. pressure to open Bolivian markets and virtually eliminate the centuries old cultivation of coca leaves stimulated the masses to heed the calls of the social movements for action. The precipitating event was a U.S. backed plan to sell Bolivian natural gas through a Chilean port that landlocked Bolivia had lost to the former in the ill fated War of the Pacific (1879-1881). The disastrous failure of the neoliberal model that U.S. educated President Sánchez Lozada had so strongly advocated added to the widely shared perception that this new trade deal was but one more ruse to extract wealth from the nation and leave the indigenous masses even more poverty ridden. In the words of one protester, “Globalization is just another name for submission and domination. We’ve had to live with that here for 500 years and now we want to be our own masters” (Nicanor Apaza in Rohter 2003). The indige- nous federation and the Cocaleros were soon joined by the Coordinadora de Defensa del Agua y de la Vida in Cocabamba, urban unions, and students as they mobilized in massive demonstra- tions in La Paz and then other major cities. The government futilely tried to repress the demonstrators, causing the loss of 80 lives. This enraged the opposition even more and increased the president’s isolation. Bolivian miners and their unions also joined the protests and decided to march on the capital. As his political backers dropped away in the face of the mass mobilization, Sánchez de Losada was forced to resign and leave the country. The new social movements in Bolivia were able to take politics out of the presiden- tial palace and halls of congress where traditional politics—and the traditional political class—dominated and into the streets and rural highways that they could control. They were able to forge a broad, national coalition that cemented the president’s downfall and estab- lish the viability of their social movements as key political actors whose demands had to be heeded. Unlike Ecuador in 2000 and the Bolivian revolution of 1952, they had done so without seizing power themselves, but had demonstrated just how effectively they could use and mobilize massive political power on a national scale. And they had done it from below, through a broad coalition of social
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	319
movements with strong identities and deep, democratic ties to their constituencies.
Argentine Manifestation
The strength of the reaction to neoliberal policies and the loss of confidence in traditional institutions of governance and their susceptibility to corruption and personal/corporate/small group appropriation of public resources is manifest in various contexts throughout the region. For instance, in Argentina, popular mobiliza- tions, street demonstrations, strikes, and neighborhood Asambleas Populares (or Asambleas Barriales) shook the political system and the political class to the core at the end of 2001 and occasioned the resignation of elected president Fernando de la Rúa and the rapid replacement of three other appointed presidents (the Vice President had already resigned). In early 2002, a declared anti-neoliberal Peronist president, Eduardo Duhalde was voted in office by the Argentine Congress. The unresolved economic crisis, default on the foreign debt, and Duhalde’s perceived need to make some conces- sion to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), other international financial institutions, and U.S. policy, kept the population angry and mobilized (see Gaudin 2002). Demonstrations and protests contin- ued through early 2003 as the Argentine nation groped to find a political force capable of ending the crisis. There was so little confi- dence in traditional parties or politicians that one could frequently hear a popular refrain among many Argentinians: que se vayan todos! (Throw them all out!). Both the economic and political systems were losing their legitimacy, with many of the nations’ problems being blamed on the IMF, neoliberal policies, and a corrupt and incompetent political class. The situation remained chaotic in 2003 as a wide array of candidates competed in a new presidential election amid continued demonstrations, strikes, and economic uncertainty. The different new social movements were united in their anger over economic conditions and political leader- ship, but were unable to put together a national coalition that coalesced into a national political movement or favored one politi- cal candidate. Ironically, former President Carlos Menem was seen
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
320	HARRY E. VANDEN
by some as a stabilizing force amid the chaos and managed to finish first in the first round of voting. However, as the second round developed and the anti-globalization forces united against him, his comeback faltered as the millions protesting economic and political failures remembered his identification with neoliberal policies. Ultimately, his showing was so low in the polls that he pulled out of the second round before the vote could be taken. The winner by default was the left wing Peronist candidate, Néstor Kirchner, who had been much more critical of IMF recommendations and neolib- eral policies and seemed to respond to the demands made by the highly politicized social movements that had toppled previous governments.
Initial Analysis
The nature of the massive protests that have continued to rock Buenos Aires and other Argentine cities, and which deposed Bolivian President Sánchez de Lozada in October of 2003, suggest that political change is sweeping across Latin America. Although these new movements have many new characteristics, they are also a recent and vociferous manifestation of the specter of mass popu- lar mobilization against the governing elite that has haunted Latin America since colonial times. In the last few years, a great many of the masses—and some of the middle class—seem to be hit by a feeling that the much touted return to democracy, the celebration of civil society, and incorporation in the globalization process has left them marginalized economically if not politically as well. The reac- tions in Argentina, Mexico, Ecuador, Bolivia, Brazil, and Venezuela are strong and significant and, in varying ways, suggest that the political project is not working for the common people. It is also quite possible that the democratization and celebration of civil soci- ety allow (some would say encourage) the political mobilization that is manifest in the widespread emergence of new social and political movements.
Dissatisfaction seems prevalent. Selected abstention rates are indicative of growing disillusion with government and the polit- ical system. For instance, in Venezuela, the abstention rate for local
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	321
elections had reached 55.8 percent in 1992, the year of the first coup attempt (García Díez, 1999:26). In elections in Argentina in 2001, some 41 percent of the voters abstained, or cast annulled or blank ballots (Kaufman Purcell 2001). The 1998 national elections in Brazil saw a similar phenomena, with 40.1 percent of the electorate either abstaining, or casting blank or annulled ballots (Banco de Datos Políticos das Américas 2002). In the Mexican presidential election of 2000, the abstention rate alone was 36 percent (Direccion Ejecutiva de Organización Electoral 2002).
Indicators of the growing malaise are many: not only the growing abstention rates in elections, but also the abandonment of traditional political parties for new, more amorphous, ad hoc parties; the upsurge of new, more political social movements and mass organizations; and a plethora of national strikes, demonstra- tions, and protests such as those that washed across Argentina at the end of 2001 and the beginning of 2002, and that spread across Bolivia in 2002 and 2003.
Economic Conditions and Democratization As Catalysts
Before the recent push for globalization and neoliberal economic policies, the economic slowdown during the “lost decade” of the 1980s had combined with increased political space for social and political mobilization created by democratization. The political repression that had so greatly constrained political action and the rapid development of new social movements was greatly reduced with the end of authoritarian rule and expansive democratization advocated by the United States. The result was a new political dynamic in many of the Latin American nations. The projection of an elitist armed vanguard as the spearhead of necessary change began to fade in the face of unarmed political and social mobiliza- tions. The assertion of power that had been seen in popular mobilizations like the pre-coup Peasant Leagues in northeast Brazil began to bubble up in new and different forms. By the time economic neoliberalism became more widespread in the 1990s, there were growing questions as to whether the extant political systems in much of Latin America were proving unable to formulate
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
322	HARRY E. VANDEN
economic policies that could provide some modicum of economic and social security for the vast majorities. Many wondered aloud if the much touted democratization and free elections were not, in fact, new political mechanisms supported by the national and inter- national economic and political elites to keep the masses subordinated (and not rebelling) and in an ongoing state of debilita- tion and poverty. Further, the effects of the economic contraction of the 1980s and the unbalanced economic growth of the 1990s often left segments of the middle class economically marginalized as well. The formation of a strongly neoliberal Washington Consensus among the leaders of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank and the U.S. Department of State’s Agency for International Development introduced yet another ingredient into Latin American politics (see Mander and Goldsmith 1996; Oxhorn and Ducantenzeiler 1998). As national political leaders felt increasing international pressure to adhere first to structural adjustments and then to neoliberal dictates from International Financial Institutions, they found that they were often obliged to implement policies that caused a further deterioration of living conditions for the masses and some segments of the middle class. For instance, the UNDP’s Human Development Report 1999 noted that inequalities have been rising since the 1980s and that “the past decade [the 1990s] has shown increasing concentration of income, resources and wealth among people, corporation and coun- tries” (United Nations Development Program 1999:3). This report goes on to note the new threats to human security and that problems associated with globalization and the turn to neoliberal policies have outstripped the ability of governance to remedy them (United Nations Development Program 1999:8). In its Social Panorama of Latin America 2001-2002, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean noted that as of 2001, 214 million people or some 43 percent of the population in Latin America were living in poverty and that of these 18.6 percent were indigents. The report also indicates that in several countries, including Ecuador and Venezuela, the levels of extreme poverty were greater in 2000 than they were in 1990. In Argentina, the poverty rate rose from 19.7 percent in 1999 to more than 30 percent in 2001; and it contin-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	323
ued to rise through 2002 (“Social Panorama of Latin America” 2002:1-2). Some conclude that the Washington Consensus is not holding in Latin America and the economic consequences it has wrought are causing social disintegration. As has been the case all too often in the region, the political systems have been unable to provide basic security in food, housing, education, employment, or monetary value and banking to wide sectors of the population. That is, these sectors are or have been marginalized from the nation proj- ect, and the governing institutions have been unwilling or unable to provide solutions to their situations. Indeed, in the eyes of most of the Latin American popular sectors, the structural adjustments and neoliberal reforms advocated by international financial institutions like the IMF have threatened their security and well-being. Their insecurity and dissatisfaction thus drive them to new forms of protest and to seek new and different political structures that might better respond to their needs. Traditional parties and governments are increasingly seen as unable to respond or even comprehend their needs. In the process, the traditional parties, if not the political systems themselves, are rapidly loosing their legitimacy.
New Elements, New Movements
Consequently, the current mobilizations seem to be different. The systems of mass communication and related communication tech- nologies and easy, low-cost access to the Internet have combined with higher levels of literacy and increased access to higher educa- tion and much greater political freedom under the democratization process (United Nations Development Program 1999:3-9). The result has been a new wave of highly political social movements that are often different in their organization and strategy from traditional movements and endeavor to articulate popular needs in new ways. This has occurred when ideas of grassroots democracy, popular participation, and even elements of Liberation Theology and Christian-based community organizations have been widely disseminated. Likewise, there is a growing belief that racial, gender, and economic inequality should not exist and that systems that perpetuate such inequality need to be changed.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
324	HARRY E. VANDEN
Unlike the radical revolutionary movements of the last few decades, these new movements do not employ or advocate the radi- cal restructuring of the state through violent revolution. Rather, their primary focus is to contest power by working through civil society to push for modification of the existing political system, and push it to the limits to achieve necessary change and restructuring. As suggested above, there have been some exceptions like the initial Zapatista uprising of early January 1994 and CONAIE’s very brief participation in a junta that held the Ecuadoran Congress building overnight in January of 2000. However, both movements quickly moved from trying to insert themselves as the regional or national rulers to negotiating power with existing national political elites while at the same time trying to change the composition of the national political class (see Collins 2000).
These new political movements all contest power, but do so in a political environment that is substantially different from the past. National-level political participation was quite restricted at the time of Latin America’s independence. Mass political movements like that led by Hidalgo failed, while those led by the less popularly oriented members of the criollo elite, like Iturbide, succeeded and set the stage for the elitist politics of the nineteenth and much of the twentieth centuries. Later, the voting franchise—and concomitant political participation—were gradually widened. This, in turn, chal- lenged the political elite to seek mechanisms to incorporate (if not manipulate) more of the population. This eventually led to the emer- gence of mass-based parties, reformist and revolutionary parties, and the emergence of populism as a means of incorporating the masses into a national project led by a political elite. Some reformist parties like Liberación Nacional in Costa Rica and Acción Democrática in Venezuela were able to bring about economic and political structural change and incorporate wide sectors of the masses into national society and competitive, two-party-dominant political systems. A few populist projects, such as Peronism in Argentina, were also able to achieve significant economic redistrib- ution, break the oligarchy’s economic domination, and incorporate the laboring masses and segments of the middle class into the (one- party-dominant) party system, albeit under the somewhat
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	325
demagogic leadership of Juan and Evita Perón. The Cuban revolu- tion challenged traditional elitist rule in a different way, but left little space for the development of autonomous social movements, though it did respond to the needs of the masses and developed the mechanism of poder popular that fomented active participation at the neighborhood and local levels. The widespread rebellion against Anastacio Somoza in Nicaragua helped make it possible for the Sandinista-led revolution to take power and for the FSLN-led government to begin an economic, social, and political restructuring of the Nicaraguan nation. Indeed, the strength and relative auton- omy of many of the mass organizations in Nicaragua in the early 1980s was significant and helped to show that new organizational structures and political movements that supported them could radi- cally change the way power was exercised in Latin America (See Vanden and Prevost 1993). Likewise, the strength and dynamism of neighborhood and community-based movements that began to flower all over Latin America in the 1980s (even under repressive military regimes) redefined the parameters of political activism and suggested new repertoires of action for emerging social and politi- cal movements.
New Social Movements and New Politics: The MST
The radically different nature of these new social movements and the new politics can perhaps best be seen in the largest of the new social movements in Latin America: The MST or Movement of the Landless Rural Workers in Brazil. Their ranks currently exceed two hundred thousand and on one occasion they were able to mobilize one hundred thousand people for a march on the Brasilia. Their views are well articulated. In a draft document on the “Fundamental Principles for the Social and Economic Transformation of Rural Brazil,” they note, “the political unity of the Brazilian dominant classes under Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s administration (1994- 2000) has consolidated the implementation of neoliberalism [in Brazil],” and these neoliberal policies led to the increased concen- tration of land and wealth in the hands of the few and the impoverishment of Brazilian society. The document continues
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
326	HARRY E. VANDEN
claiming, “popular movements must challenge this neoliberal conceptualization of our economy and society” (Landless 2001:153-54). In a pamphlet titled “Brazil Needs a Popular Project,” the organization calls for popular mobilizations, explain- ing, “All the changes in the history of humanity only happened when the people were mobilized.” And that in Brazil, “all the social and political changes that happened were won when the people mobilized and struggled” (O Brasil Precisa 2001:29). Their political culture and decision-making processes break from the authoritarian tradition. The movement has been heavily influenced by Liberation Theology and the participatory democratic culture that is generated by the use and study of Paulo Freire’s approach to self-taught, criti- cal education (see Freire 1960).
The MST itself was formed as a response to longstanding economic, social, and political conditions in Brazil. Land, wealth, and power have been allocated in unequal ways in Brazil since the conquest in the early 1500s. Land has remained highly concentrated and as late as 1996, 1 percent of the landowners who owned farms of over 1,000 hectares owned 45 percent of the land (Petras 2000:35). Conversely, as of 2001 there were some 4.5 million land- less rural workers in Brazil. Wealth has remained equally concentrated. In 2001, the Brazilian Institute of Government Statistics reported that the upper 10 percent of the population aver- aged an income that was nineteen times greater than the lowest 40 percent (Brazilian Institute of Statistics 2001). The plantation agri- culture that dominated the colonial period and the early republic became the standard for Brazilian society. The wealthy few owned the land, reaped the profits, and decided the political destiny of the many. Slavery was the institution that provided most of the labor on the early plantation system and thus set the nature of the relation- ship between the wealthy landowning elite and the disenfranchised toiling masses laboring in the fields. Land stayed in relatively few hands in Brazil, and the agricultural laborers continued to be poorly paid and poorly treated. Further, after the commercialization and mechanization of agriculture that began in the 1970s, much of the existing rural labor force became superfluous. As this process continued, not only were rural laborers let go, sharecroppers were
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	327
expelled from the land they had farmed and small farmers lost their land to larger family or commercial estates. This resulted in grow- ing rural unemployment and the growth of rural landless families. Many were forced to migrate to the cities increasing the numbers of the urban poor while others opted for the government sponsored Amazon Colonization program whereby they were transported to the Amazon region to cut down the rainforest and begin to cultivate the land. Few found decent jobs in the city and the poor soil of the former rainforest did not support sustained agriculture. As condi- tions deteriorated, the landless realized that they were fighting for their own existence as a group and, as such, they were the authors of their own destiny. One analyst observed that it is possible to clas- sify them, as did Eric Hobsbaum, in the context of the nineteenth century working class as one of the groups that held the conviction that its social salvation was in its own hands. She argued that “The landless become social subjects to the extent that they constituted a collectivity that brings with it...the struggle to guarantee its own social existence as workers on the land” (Caldart 1999:25). The origins of the organization are rooted in the bitter struggle to survive under the agricultural policies implemented by the military govern- ment. The landless in the southern Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul began to organize in order to demand land. Other landless people soon picked up the cause in the neighboring states of Paraná, and Santa Catarina. These were the beginnings of the MST (see Stedile 1999). The MST is built upon a long tradition of rural resist- ance and rebellion that extends back to the establishments of palenques or large inland settlements of run-away slaves, including the famous rebellion by the poor rural peasants of Canudos in the 1890s. The tradition also includes, more recently, the famous Peasant Leagues of Brazil’s impoverished Northeast in the 1950s and early 1960s and the Grass Wars in Rio Grande do Sul and the southern states in the 1970s (see Bastos 1984). When the MST was founded in southern Brazil in 1984 as a response to rural poverty and lack of access to land, wealth and power, similar conditions existed in many states in Brazil. Indeed, there were landless work- ers and peasants throughout the nation. Thus the MST soon spread from Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná in the South to states like
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
328	HARRY E. VANDEN
Pernambuco in the Northeast and Pará in the Amazon region. It rapidly became a national organization with coordinated policies and strong local participatory organization and decision-making, and frequent state and national meetings based on direct representa- tion (see Bradford and Rocha 2002). By 2001 there were active MST organizations in 23 of the 26 states (Fontes Interview 2003).
This type of national organization had not been the case with the Zapatista movement because conditions and identity were much more locally rooted. Yet, in both cases, traditional politics and tradi- tional political parties were unable and unwilling to address the deteriorating economic conditions of the marginalized groups who were suffering the negative effects of economic globalizaton. Their response was grassroots organization and the development of a new repertoire of actions that broke with old forms of political activity. Developing organization and group actions began to connect indi- vidual members through an increasing group identity. They were sometimes assisted in this task by progressive organizations concerned with economic and social justice. In the case of Brazil and the Landless, the Lutheran church and especially the Pastoral Land Commission of the Catholic Church offered their support. Although these organizations assisted the landless as did some segments of the Workers Party (PT), the organization never lost its autonomy. It was decided from the outset that this was to be an organization for the Landless Workers that would be run by the Landless Workers for their benefit as they defined it. They engaged in direct actions such as land takeovers from large estates and public lands, the construction of black plastic-covered encampments along the side of the road to call attention to their demands for land, and marches and confrontations when necessary. They even occupied the family farm of President Fernando Enrique Cardoso in order to draw attention to his landowning interests and the consequent bias they attributed to him. They were, at times, brutally repressed, assas- sinated, and imprisoned, but they persevered, forcing land distribution to their members and others. Their ability to mobilize as many as 12,000 people for a single land takeover or 100,000 for a national march suggested just how strong their organizational abili- ties were and how well they could communicate and coordinate at
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	329
the national level. They also created a great deal of national support and helped to create a national consensus that there was a national problem with land distribution and that some substantial reform was necessary.2
The Landless were well attuned to the international global- ization struggle and considered themselves part of it, helping to organize and participating in the World Social Forums in Porto Alegre and sending their representatives to demonstrations and protests throughout the world. Indeed, at least one recent work suggests that this was part of a developing global backlash against economic globalization (Broad 2002). Struggles that were once local and isolated became international and linked. The news media and growing international communications links, like cellular phones and especially electronic mail, greatly facilitated the global- ization of struggle and global awareness of local struggles and support and solidarity for them. This, and dramatic actions like massive land takeovers by the MST, also generated considerable support at the national level and helped to define what might have been considered a local problem as a national problem that required national attention and national resources to remedy it.
The interaction between the MST and the Workers party (PT) is also instructive. Although relations between the two organi- zations are generally excellent at the local level, with overlapping affiliations, the national leaderships have remained separate and not always as cordial. The MST has maintained a militant line in regard to the need to take over unused land and asserting their agenda, whereas much of the PT leadership has wanted to be more concilia- tory. Thus, the Landless supported Lula (Luiz Inacio “Lula”da Silva) and the Workers Party in most local campaigns and the national campaign for the presidency. In this way they helped to achieve significant regime change in Brazil, where Lula was elected with 61.27 percent of the vote in the second round of voting in 2002. Indeed, realizing the PT’s historic challenge to neoliberal policies and elitist rule, the landless turned out heavily in the election to join some 80 percent of the registered voters who participated in the voting in both rounds (IFES 2003). Once the election was over, the Landless did not press to be part of the government. Rather, they
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
330	HARRY E. VANDEN
continued to pressure the government for a comprehensive land reform program and a redistribution of the land and the wealth. There would be no return to politics as usual. The PT would push its “0 Hunger” program and other social and economic initiatives and the MST would press the PT government for the structural reforms (e.g., comprehensive agrarian reform) that it considered necessary.
Conclusion
As suggested by the example of the MST, as these new social move- ments grow and are politicized, they come to represent a clear response to the neoliberal economic policies that are being foisted on Latin American nations by International Financial Institutions and the U.S. government. They have become bulwarks in the resist- ance to the process of neoliberal globalization advocated by the Washington Consensus and have aggressively resisted the imple- mentation of neoliberal policies. In the process they have changed how politics are conducted in most Latin American nations. Their growth and militancy have generated whole new repertoires of actions that include national mobilizations so massive that they can topple governments and/or force them to change their policies. They have left the traditional parties far behind as they forge new politi- cal horizons and create a non-authoritarian, participatory political culture. Such movements are also using existing political space to maximum effect. In the process they are strengthening participatory democratic practice substantially.
They have vigorously resisted the corporate-led economic globalization process that many are heralding as the panacea to underdevelopment and poverty. Indeed, the economic realities that people all over Latin America are living have provided a potent empirical antidote to the universal prescription to globalize. The formulation of highly political social movements and the participa- tory democracy they practice provide a new and potent response to globalization in a time of neoliberalism. Further, these responses represent a substantial change from previous forms of political action—one that is transforming the conduct of politics throughout Latin America.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	331
NOTES
1	See most recently (Rohter 2003) for strong Bolivian reac- tions to now deposed President Sánchez de Lozada’s globalization and neoliberal free trade policies in Bolivia and the movement to force him from office. Most tellingly, Rohter notes, “Two decades of free-market reform leave many resentful.”
2	It should, however, be noted that much of the press was not always sympathetic and condemned their land takeovers as illegal actions. The rural landowners also did everything in their power to stop their actions and discredit them in the public eye.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, Sonia, Evelina Dagino, and Arturo Escobar, eds. 1998.
Cultures of Politics, Politics of Cultures, Revisioning of
Latin American Social Movements. Boulder, Co.: Westview. Banco de Dados Políticos das Américas. 2002. “Brazil: Eleções Presidenciais de 1998.” Retreived April 19, 2002 (http://
www.georgetown.edu/pdba/Elecdata/Brazil/pres98.html). Bastos, Elide Rugai. 1984. As Ligas Camponesas. Petópolis: Vozes. Bradford, Sue and Jan Rocha. 2002. Cutting the Wire. London:
Latin American Bureau. O Brasil Precisa de um Projecto Popular. 2001. Published by the
Secretariat of Popular Consultation of the MST. São Paulo. Brazilian Institute of Statistics. 2001 Statistical Report 2001, as cited from “Pais Termina Anos 90 Tão Desigual como Comenou,” Folha de São Paulo April 5, 2001 in Tom Lewis, “Brazil: The Struggle Against Neoliberalism.” International
Socialist Review June-July. Broad, Robin, ed. 2002. Global Backlash, Citizen Initiatives for a
Just World Economy. Laham, Maryland: Rowman &
Littlef ield. Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1999. Pedagogia do Movimiento dos Sem
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
332	HARRY E. VANDEN
Terra. Petrópolis: Vozes. Collins, Jennifer N. 2000. “A Sense of Possibility, Ecuadors’s
Indigenous Movement Takes Center Stage.” In “Adelante. The New Rural Activism in the Americas.” NACLA, Report on the Americas 33(5):40-46.
Dirección Ejecutiva de Organización Electoral. 2002 “Estadística de las Elecciones Federales de 2000.” Retrieved April 9, 2002 (www.ife.org.mx/wwworge/esta2000/gcprepcn).
Eckstein, Susan, ed. 2001. Power and Protest: Latin American Social Movements. Berkeley: University of California Press. Ellner, Steve and Daniel Hellinger. 2003. Venezuelan Politics in the Chávez Era: Class, Polarization and Conflict. Boulder:
Lynne Rienner. Escobar, Arturo and Sonia E. Alvarez. 1992. The Making of Social
Movements in Latin America: Identity, Strategy and
Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press. Fontes, Geraldo. 2003. Interview with author. São Paulo. September 17. Freire, Paulo. 2000. The Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York:
Continuum. Gaudin, Andrés. 2002. “Thirteen Days that Shook Argentina—And
Now What? In “Who Owns Knowledge?” NACLA, Report
on the Americas 25(5):6-9. García Díez, Fátima, 1999. “The Emergence of Electoral Reforms
in Contemporary Latin America.” 27th ECPR Point Sessions
Workshops, Designing Institutions, Mannheime. IFES. 2003. Retrieved March 24, 2003 (ifes.org/eguide/
turnout2002.htm). Kaufman-Purcell, Susan. 2001. “Electoral Lessons.” América
Economía (December 6):40. The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST). 2001.
“Fundamental Principles for the Social and Economic Transformation of Rural Brazil” Journal of Peasant Studies 28(2):146-152.
Levine, Robert M. 1998. Father of the Poor? Vargas and His Era. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mander, Jerry and Edward Goldsmith, eds. 1996. The Case Against the Global Economy and for a Turn Toward the Local. San
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
GLOBALIZATION IN A TIME OF NEOLIBERALISM	333
Francisco: Sierra Book Club. Moreley, Samuel A. 1995. Poverty and Inequality in Latin America,
the Impact of Adjustments and Recovery in the 1980s.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Oxhorn, Philip D. and Graciela Ducatenzeiler. 1998. What Kind of Democracy? What Kind of Market? University Park: The
Pennsylvania State University Press. Petras, James. 2000. “The Rural Landless Workers Movement.” Z
Magazine (March):32-36. Rohter, Larry. 2003 “Bolivia’s Poor Proclaim Abiding Distrust of
Globalization.” New York Times October 17, A2. Shifter, M. 2003 “Latin America’s New Political Leaders: Walking
on a Wire.” Current History (February) 102 (661):51-57. “Social Panorama of Latin America 2001-2002.” 2002. CEPAL
News 22(11):1-2. Stedile, João and Bernardo Mançaano Fernandes. 1999. Brava
Gente: a Trajetória do MST e a luta pela Terra no Brasil.
São Paulo: Fundacão Perseu Abramo. Shultz, Jim. 2003. “Bolivia: The Water War Widens.” NACLA,
Report on the Americas January/February 36(3):34-37. Vanden, Harry E. and Gary Prevost. 2002. Politics of Latin America: The Power Game. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press. ––––––. 1993. Democracy and Socialism in Sandinista Nicaragua.
Boulder: Lynne Rienner. United Nations Development Program. 1999. Human Development
Report 1999. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2010
Sociology
Critical Criminology
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
Erin C. Heil


Published online: 18 November 2009 Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009
Abstract Throughout Brazil, landless resisters are being violently victimized at the discretion of large landowners. The main goals of this article are to (1) Explain the historical and current conditions that have facilitated the violent oppression experienced by the landless movement, (2) illustrate the mass violence experienced by the landless pop- ulation, (3) provide a review of the existing research regarding the relationship between land reform, violence, and state strength, (4) introduce a new explanation of decentralized state power in relationship to the persistence of violence against the landless movement. I explore the Brazilian landless movement through content analyses, fieldwork, and a review of existing data. The approach used to study and understand the powers associated with the landless movement is unique to the existing literature of the Brazilian landless move- ment in that it moves beyond advocacy towards a criminological and political analysis.
Introduction
The use of violence as a tool of oppression against landless resistance groups has been a permanent feature of rural Brazil since the country was first colonized by the Portuguese in the 1500s. In the last 30 years, thousands of landless peasants have been victims of individual bloodshed and property destruction. This project is an analysis of the current Brazilian landless movement and the external violence used as a tool to hamper the movement. Based on an ongoing content analysis of Brazilian newspaper articles, as well as a secondary data analysis and fieldwork, this article demonstrates that the violence experienced by the current landless movement is not a modern phenomenon, but rather is systematic oppression fostered by historical circumstances and the power of the landed elite.
In this article, it is theorized that the powers associated with opposition to the landless movement are evidence of decentralized state power, and that social control is
E. C. Heil (&) Department of Criminal Justice Studies, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Peck Hall, Box 1455, Edwardsville, IL 62026, USA e-mail: erconle@siue.edu
123
78	E. C. Heil
predominantly managed by large landowners and transnational corporations. Because power is concentrated in the hands of the dominant land owning class, social injustices against the landless population flourish with relative impunity for the instigators and enforcers of violence. The theory of decentralization follows the pattern of integration often found in critical criminology. As many critical criminologists have already expres- sed, social injustices perpetuated by state actors are best understood in the ‘‘selection of a strategy resulting in a viable model of conceptual integration’’ (Arrigo 2000, p. 8). For example, in Quinny’s ‘‘Class, State, and Crime’’ (1980), the domination and accommo- dation of capitalists and their workers was discussed in terms of integrating theories of political economy and social control. Kauzlarich and Kramer (1998) discussed under- standing state criminality in terms of motivation, control, and opportunity. More recently, Mullins and Rothe (2008) have extended the integrated approach to understanding state crime in their discussion of control at the macro-level over militia movements. Throughout the field of critical criminology, theories are integrated conceptualizations to understand wider social injustices. As Barak argues, ‘‘the diversification of models is liberating to the extent that they allow for a creative plurality of knowledge based frameworks’’ (www.greggbarak.com, accessed September, 2009). Not surprisingly, the theory developed in this article will follow the method of critical criminologists who are integrated in their approach to understanding social injustices perpetuated by the state. However, the theory developed in this article is best understood through the lens of criminology, political science, and Latin American studies. Therefore, the theory in this article moves beyond integrating current criminological and sociological theories towards an understanding and explaining of social injustice through competing social sciences.
The article is divided into three sections. The first section provides a brief historical backdrop to the current landless movement, O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (The Landless Worker’s Movement, or the MST) (www.mst.org.br), who began to organize during the last days of the military regime and are active today. This section develops an understanding of the land conflict prominent in Brazil, and how the revolu- tionary movement that has evolved over the past 25 years is still victimized by state oppression. The second section discusses the most current instances of violence against landless resisters. The examples and statistics in this section provide evidence of the extreme violence that the landless peasants face, and more importantly, the impunity experienced by the perpetrators and managers of violence. The article concludes with a discussion of decentralized state power as an element conducive to the current violence experienced by the landless population. The three sections in this article build upon one another to address the political and social environment of the Brazilian countryside, and how the overt violation of peasant rights associated with the land conflict should be understood.
Building the MST
The modern landless movement active throughout Brazil is known as the MST. The MST was created during the ending years of the military dictatorship. Prior to the dictatorship, other landless movements emerged, but were quickly dismantled. However, during the 1970s, the military government began to show signs of weakness as internal splits and public opposition began to mount, as the once clandestine acts of violent repression became widely publicized. Suddenly, students were seen taking to the streets and pro- testing the government and its tactics. Business men began to hold conferences to discuss
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	79
democracy and the restoration of civil liberties. Workers who had assisted in the economic growth of Brazil began to strike. Because the acts of repression could no longer justify economic stability, the government, under former general, President Ernesto Geisel, pro- posed a political opening that would allow for organizing and protest, acts that would have been crushed under the previous political rule. This political opening not only affected the cities, but it also had a tremendous impact on the rural poor.
In the 1970s, the rural poor were living in a different Brazil than their urban counter- parts. Many rural workers were being replaced by agricultural machinery and sought a new life in the cities, while other workers and peasants continued to exist in a cycle of migration and land eviction fostered by the military takeover. Many of these families migrated from one piece of land to the next only to be evicted by the large landowners. As the peasants demanded land, the government proved to be indecisive. With this, the landless, backed by the power of the sympathetic Catholic Church,1 formed a movement with revolutionary potential. The Catholic Church assisted in land expropriation to the landless and became an integral component to the longevity of the new movement in its early years (See Diario de Pernambuco, September 9, 1981).
By 1984, the movement had begun to organize at a national level, and movement leaders felt it was time to convene with other revolutionary organizers and leaders and discuss the potentials of the new landless movement. Landless organizers, lower ranking priests sympathetic to the plight of the landless, and union leaders met in Cascavel, Parana ́ to debate and discuss the future of the movement. Four issues were of prevalent concern to the organizers: (1) Whether the landless should maintain their dependent relationship with the Catholic Church, (2) Whether the group should develop ties with the rural trade unions, (3) The characteristics of the new organization, and (4) The aims of the new movement.
Because the Catholic Church had provided assistance to the movement’s previous actions, there was a major debate as to whether or not the group should maintain its dependence on the Church. However, the group realized that there had been past efforts by the Church to control other movements in a direction contrary to the movement’s goals. In the end, the new organization took the stance of ‘‘if the movement learns to walk on its own feet, it would go much further’’ (Quoted in Branford and Rocha 2002, p. 22).2 With this, the movement made the following decision in terms of it’s organizational charac- teristics: ‘‘It would be run by the landless workers themselves, independent of the Church, the trade unions, and the political parties; it would be open to the entire family; and it was to be a mass movement’’ (p. 23). The goals of the movement were: ‘‘To fight for agrarian reform; to fight for a just, fraternal society and for an end to capitalism; to include rural workers, tenant farmers, share croppers, small holders, and so on, in the category of landless worker; and to ensure that the land be used for those who work and live from it’’ (p. 23). The new independent organization developed its name through the press who referred to the group as the Sem Terra (Landless). Thus, the group eventually came to call itself O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (The Landless Workers Move- ment, or the MST) (Stedile 2002).
1 The Comissa ̃o Pastoral da Terra (CPT) (www.cptnac.com.br) is a Catholic organization which used its political power during the military dictatorship to protect peasants and their rights, and continues to fight for the land and human rights in the Brazilian countryside.
2	The CPT, led by lower ranking priests and a liberal theology, openly acknowledges and supports the MST, but has no power in the actual movement. The CPT is currently active with indigenous movements and landless not affiliated to the MST. Because of this separation from the Church, the MST only receives social support from the Church and other movements. However, the actors that support the movement are influ- enced with a strong understanding of the problems associated with poverty and landlessness.
123
80	E. C. Heil
Today, the MST is considered the largest social movement in all of Latin America with approximately 1.5 million members. According to Geraldo Fontes (2004), there are approximately 5,000–6,000 MST settlements in the country and according to the official MST website (accessed 2007), approximately 350,000 families are legally settled,3 while another 80,000 families are living on encampments.4 The goals of the movement have not drastically changed from its founding: The redistribution of land, income and social equality, and sovereignty. The MST has also added two new goals, which are to eliminate fields of genetically modified crops and to destroy the neo-economic liberal model (mst.org.br, accessed 2007). The actions utilized to achieve the objectives are land occupations, road blocks, hunger strikes, theatrics, and a National Conference organized every 5 years.
From its founding days in 1984, the MST has developed into an institutionalized organization focusing its mass efforts on the redistribution of land and social equality. Despite the efforts of the MST, the struggle for land continues to increase throughout the Brazilian countryside, as approximately 4 million families struggle to exist in extreme poverty with no land to call home. As the MST organizes and enlists more members, many other peasant families are increasingly being displaced by transnational corporations and the increased reliance on machinery. Every day, members of the landless community are being arrested, threatened, tortured, or murdered by hired gunmen.
Violence Against the Landless
Landless violence is divided into two categories: Violence against the person and violence against occupied families. The types of violence that individuals experience are: murder, attempted murder, death threats, torture, physical attacks, and imprisonment. The types of violence that occupied families experience are: judicial eviction, threat of eviction, and the destruction of homes. Violence against the individual and violence against occupied families are not mutually exclusive. Evictions are rarely peaceful events, many times ending with a number of arrests, injuries, or deaths. Nearly all of the violence in rural Brazil is carried out by off-duty police, ill-trained private security hired by large land- owners or jagunc ̧os, or hired gunmen.
All of the data regarding violence against the landless and landless communities has been derived from the CPT website (cptnac.com.br), which has a data archive on violence against the landless between the years 1997 and 2003. Between the years 1997 and 2003, the following information in Table 1 was obtained regarding the total numbers of violence against the person.
As Table 1 illustrates, landless individuals are most likely to be arrested or physically attacked. Members of the landless community are also more likely to be threatened rather than murdered. Therefore, the violence experienced by the landless may not necessarily be physical, but rather mental, as the landless community live in a constant state of fear of death or assault.
According to the CPT, between 2005 and 2006, threats of murder decreased by 22.18% (266 in 2005 and 207 in 2006). Torture also decreased by 9.09% (33 in 2005 and 30 in
3	A settlement is land that has been expropriated to the landless community for housing, sustainable living, and education. Land may be expropriated at the local, state, or federal level.
4 Encampments are ‘‘spaces of struggle and ... collective action, located in the countryside ... where landless families demand settlements’’ (CPT 2005, p. 14).
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
81
Table 1 Number of individual victims of violence
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Year Murder Threatof Attempted murder	murder	attacked
Torture
5 35 62 27 15 20 16
Table 2 Violence against occu- pied families
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Year	Families evicted
1997	17,070 1998	19,119 1999	21,468 2000	16,020 2001	13,455 2002	9,715 2003	25,292
Threat
23,515 7,937 5,009
22,304 16,142 25,876 35,352
of eviction
Homes destroyed
2,624 2,825 3,483 2,108 2,041 1,459 6,877
1997 30 1998 47 1999 27 2000 21 2001 29 2002 43 2003 39
37	92 46	89 52	96 82	58
132	37 244	36 266	64
640	381 247	449 445	611
95	365 33	254 26	158
405	380
2006). Interestingly, attempted murder of the landless increased by 176.92% (26 in 2005 and 72 in 2006) (cptnac.com.br, accessed 2008). According to the Human Rights Watch World Report (2009), ‘‘28 people were killed and 428 arrested in total conflicts throughout the country in 2007’’ (p. 162), and another 28 were killed in 2008 (cpt.org.br, accessed September, 2009).
Those guilty of contracting the murders of rural sympathizers or landless peasants are relatively immune from prosecution. The CPT found that ‘‘from 1985 to 2006, there were 1,104 incidents of conflict of which the murders of 1,464 workers were registered’’ (cptnac. com.br, accessed 2007). During the same period, 71 of the actual gunmen were convicted for the murders, and 19 of the individuals who had ordered the murders were also con- victed. What this data illustrates that it is highly unlikely for the gunman, let alone the landowner who ordered the murder, to be convicted for the assassination of a landless individual.
In terms of violence against occupied families, the following events occurred (Table 2).
As with Table 1, threats of judicial eviction are more common than actual evictions, thereby accentuating the constant fear of not only physical attacks, but also the loss of home.
One of the more disturbing phenomenons that have occurred in 2008 was the federal criminalization of the landless movement. Based on a decision at a governmental meeting in 2007, the Supreme Counsel of the Public Ministry of Rio Grande do Sul approved the ‘dissolution’ of the MST. According to Betto (2008), it was revealed that the government approved to ‘‘outlaw any mobilizations of the landless workers, including marches and walks, to intervene in settlement schools, to criminalize leaders and members, and to deactivate all encampments in Rio Grande do Sul’’ (accessed 2008). Mass police violence, death threats, forced evictions, arbitrary arrests increased rapidly throughout the country.
Physically Arrested
123
82	E. C. Heil
Landless resisters were being associated with the revolutionary armed forces in Colombia and were charged with the aim to change state law (ibid, 2008). With this new govern- mental approach to dismantle the landless movement, it is predicted that the numbers of violence perpetuated against landless resisters and their occupations will continue to increase.
Theorizing Decentralized State Power to Understand Social Injustices Against the Landless
The theoretical framework utilized in developing an understanding of decentralized state power is drawn from Mullins and Rothe’s (2008) discussion of state control at the macro- level over militia movements. According to Mullins and Rothe, ‘‘when laws are present and able to be enforced, regimes are in positions to ignore, or at best use symbolic means to appease, countering pressures’’ (p. 208). In other words, the Brazilian state is in a unique position in that it tolerates the violence against the landless until civil society (and possibly international society) speaks out against mass atrocities. Only when the civil society pressures the government will the media present images of arrests of the hired gunmen. On the other hand, as illustrated earlier, only a handful of instigators and perpetrators are ever prosecuted for the crimes against the landless. Therefore, the civil society is appeased with the image of justice while the unreported mass violence persists.
Aside from appeasing the civil society through minimal arrests, Mullins and Rothe offer a second aspect to their explanation of state control.
...[T]he ability of the state to bring enough force to bear to enforce the existing laws and reassert a monopoly on the use of force is indeed a crucial control. How- ever...the government is often unwilling or unable to do so. Governmental forces are too few and too scattered across the landscape to effectively bring militias under control (p. 208).
Whereas Mullins and Rothe were analyzing militias throughout Africa, this same philosophy may be applied to the power of the landowners. The landowners have historically structured a system of control amongst the Brazilian countryside that even if the state were to reassert its power and truly enforce laws that would benefit the landless, to overcome the landowners at this stage is practically impossible. Violence has become an accessible and acceptable tool in oppressing the landless movement because power is concentrated amongst the large landowners. Although a political democracy, the Brazilian state is relatively weak due to the historical circumstances that fuel the modern epoch of land reform. In other words, regarding issues of land reform and violence against the landless, the power of the landowners surpasses that of the governing and legal powers, and therefore, the Brazilian state has limited interest in controlling the actions of the landowners and their hired gunmen to protect the rights of the landless.
To understand the system of decentralized state power, there needs to be a discussion of the major players of Brazilian land reform. Each of these actors plays a role in the landless movement, as well as directly or indirectly facilitates the violence against the peasant resisters. The groups central in the battle for land are: The Instituto Nacional de Colon- izac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (The National Institute of Colonization and Land Reform, or Incra) (www.incra.gov.br), the Brazilian government (Federal level, state level, and municipal level), large landowners, and the transnational corporations.
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
83
Table 3 Families legally settled
Data derived from
www.incra.gov.br
Year
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Total
Families settled
63,477 43,486 36,301 81,254
127,506 136,358 488,382
Instituto Nacional de Colonizac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (Incra)
The Instituto Nacional de Colonizac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (Incra) is an institution federally created in 1970 with the overall purpose to prioritize land reform. More recently, Incra has focused its priorities on the development of landless settlements. According to its website (incra.gov.br, accessed 2007), its mission is: ‘‘to implement land reform... and to con- tribute to a sustainable rural development.’’ Its vision of the future is to be the international reference for those looking for a solution that will give way to social inclusion (ibid).
Active in the 27 Brazilian states as state level institutions, the role of Incra is to investigate land disputes. If the area in question is deemed unproductive, Incra initiates plans to expropriate the land for the purpose of landless settlements. Between the years 2001 and 2006, Incra has settled 488,382 families within the Brazilian countryside (See Table 3).
The State
The Brazilian state consists of major actors in the battle for the right to land, as some of the members have proven to be supportive players in landless rights. In its ideal form, land power for these state bodies comes from their ability to regulate land and to create and implement laws.
The current leader of Brazil is President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva (President Lula) who was first elected on January 1, 2003 as a member of PT (Worker’s Party). Lula was designated as the people’s president, for he was a former union president now rallying for land reform and workers’ rights in his electoral campaign. He received 60% of the popular vote in 2002, and there was an overwhelming ‘‘collective sense of relief on the part of many rural and worker’s rights movements, who felt that their grassroots call for social justice through agrarian reform would finally be realized (Whittman 2005, p. 1). Although not officially endorsing Lula through his first election, the MST publicly endorsed Lula during his second electoral campaign. Despite Lula not entirely fulfilling his campaign promises of 2002, the MST argued that the Brazilian society must vote for Lula to avoid ‘‘a return of US hegemony in Latin America’’ (Ste ́dile, quoted in Marques and Nakatani 2007, p. 2). In other words, Lula had strong support not only from the working class, but also the Brazilian landless who had previously rallied against unsympathetic governments.
A major land component of Lula’s presidency was the development of II National Plan for Agrarian Reform (II PNRA). Branching off of the failed PNRA established in 1985, II PNRA had the plan to settle 1,000,000 families in an 8 year period ‘‘in addition to
123
84	E. C. Heil
restructuring Brazil’s agricultural policy to provide more support for family farmers’’ (Whittman 2005, p. 1). By 2005, II PNRA still had not been implemented, yet landless movements continue to advocate for the plan’s full realization in the rural countryside.
Apart from the federal legislation is the local level government active in each state and municipality. Each state has a governor and vice-governor who are elected to office for a term of 4 years. To uphold the constitutionality of land reform, the governor works with the state level Incra offices active in each state. Although the state level legislation has a direct contact with the state organized offices of Incra, the municipal governments have first contact with those disputing over land.
The judicial branch is comprised the Supreme Federal Tribunal, the Higher Tribunal of Justice, and the Regional Federal Tribunals. Although the Supreme Federal Tribunal practices legal proceedings that are effective throughout the entire Brazilian union, the courts that are more prominent in the process of land expropriation are the individual state courts. According to Articles 125 and 126 of the Brazilian Constitution (1988): ‘‘The states shall organize their judicial system observing the principles established in the Constitu- tion’’ (Article 125) and ‘‘For the settlement of conflicts relating to the land property, the court shall designate special level judges with exclusive competence for agrarian matters’’ (Article 126). In other words, the agrarian disputes that are being analyzed are most likely to be solved within the state courts rather than the Supreme Federal Tribunal. Ideally, the role of the state courts should be that of the mediator and regulator of land policy. It is expected that the state courts enact the constitutional right to land, as well as to invoke judicial power over those guilty of criminal actions impeding land rights.
Large Landholders
The large landowners are the prominent actors in the fight against land reform. To them, land reform violates the constitutionality of privacy rights. In 1985, the large landholders developed an organization known as the Unia ̃o Democra ́tica Ruralista (UDR) (www.udr.org.br). ‘‘The UDR supporters represent a conglomeration of rural elites opposed to land reform, the progressive Church, and Communism. They are in favor of hands-off capitalism and the unregulated arming of all landowners’’ (Rose 2005, pp. 204– 205). According to the UDR’s official website (udr.org.br), ‘‘The Unia ̃o Democra ́tica Ruralista is a group determined to bring together the landowners under the rule of property rights, the maintenance of order, and the respect for the laws of the country’’ (Accessed 2008). The UDR claims to ‘‘provide judicial services to their [landholding] associates in cases of landless invasions. The type of judicial aid prohibits the reintegration of the landless groups, provides an inquiry of the land which has been invaded, as well as hold those who committed the crime [of land invasion] criminally responsible’’ (ibid). The group retains two permanent lawyers on staff to legally dispute the claims made by the landless. The UDR claims to have 2000 associates in their headquarter location (Presidente Prudente-SP), as well as the membership and support of all landowners throughout Brazil.
The membership base of the UDR remains anonymous, yet there exists information regarding the president is agricultural businessman Luiz Antonio Nathan Garza. Garza is the spokesperson and ambassador of the movement. He prominently negotiates with the Ministry of Agriculture and Incra, defending the constitutional right to maintain productive land. Although the membership is anonymous, some names of prominent landowners are available from media sources either through landless disputes or a public position against
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	85
land reform. Overall, however, it must be mentioned that the identity of the majority of landowners is highly secretive.
Transnational Corporations
The actors associated with transnational corporations are not as vocal as the landowners in their defense of land rights. Rather, the actors remain quiet unless they are countering an accusation made by the MST. Being so, this section will discuss the MST’s claims against the transnational organizations, and how these organizations obstruct true land reform and social equality throughout Brazil.
The leaders of the MST argue that what was once a battle against the large landholders has today become a struggle against transnational corporations. In an urgent action pub- lished on the MST website, the group argues:
...Latin America is the object of the great of the ‘neoliberal global colonizers,’ via the action of dozens of transnational corporations...who are shamelessly engaged in bio piracy... [Today] it is the race to monopolize genetic and pharmacological resources and the traditional and local knowledge that accompanies them, which have become strategic resources for the future of business in the global market (MST, Informa #114, accessed 2007).
According to the MST, transnational entities partake in attacks ‘‘against agriculture in order to control land, seeds, water, and soil’’ (MST, Informa #147, accessed December, 2007). The main ‘‘destructive’’ activities of the transnational corporations include: genetic modification (GM), monoculture, and environmental degradation. One of the main concerns of the landless movement is the increase of bio-fuels (which are commonly referred to as agro-fuels). According to the Transnational Institute Report (2004), ‘‘as the [agro-fuel] industry expands, it is ... providing a new promotional vehicle for GM crops, and posing a serious threat to food sovereignty’’ (p. 6). Thus, the MST sees their battle for land rights and social justice as a battle against global businesses that are monopolizing the Brazilian agriculture to advance the emergence of alternative fuels and an emerging agro-economy.
The top twenty companies that participate in the Brazilian agriculture are displayed in Table 4.
Many of these companies are openly acknowledged as enemies of the MST and the landless movements. Some other transnational organizations the MST battles are: Mons- anto, Syngenta Seeds, Bayer, and Aracruz. As stated by MST leader Joa ̃o Stedile, ‘‘[t]en transnational companies—Monsanto, Bunge (agribusiness and food), Cargill, ADM, BASF (chemicals),	Bayer,	Syngenta,	Norvartis,	Nestle ́ ,	and	Danone—control	virtually	all agrarian production, pesticides, transgenic seeds, and foreign commodities trading’’ (Ste- dile 2002, p. 51). In other words, members of the MST believe that the actors associated with the transnational corporations are attempting to control Brazilian agriculture in its entirety as they continue to explore Brazil’s workforce, food, water, seeds, and soil.
In this analysis, transnational corporations and landowners are regarded as a single power source. According to the MST, the obstacle to land reform has changed from the hands of the landowners to the owners of transnational corporations. The main reason for this comes to the point of land expropriation. Once an area of land is deemed unproductive by Incra, the land has to be bought, either by the federal government or some other body. The Constitution only states that unproductive land shall be sold for a productive manner, and the business created by transnational corporations is considered a productive manner.
123
86
E. C. Heil
Table 4	Top twenty agricultural companies in Brazil
Data derived from Anua ́rio Exame. Agronego ́cio, June, 2007
Company
1	Cargill 2	Bunge Alimentos 3	Souza Cruz 4	Wal-Mart 5	Sadia 6	Copersucar 7	Nestle ́ 8	Perdiga ̃ o 9	JBS 10 Sonae 11 Makro 12	Bunge Fertiliantes 13 ADM 14	Kraft Foods 15 Klabin 16 Suzano 17 VCP 18	LDC Brasil 19	Groupo Martins 20	Atacada ̃ o
Country of origination
USA Holland England USA Brazil Brazil Switzerland Combination Brazil
USA Holland Holland USA USA Brazil Brazil Brazil France Brazil Brazil
Annual Brazilian sales (millions of US dollars)
6,604 6,538 5,309 4,946 4,703 3,404 3,300 3,256 2,672 2,666 2,607 2,600 2,402 2,118 1,995 1,924 1,829 1,790 1,767 1,761
Agroindustrial
Thus, when transnational corporations place a higher bid than the federal government can afford for the said piece of land, the landowner will sell to the transnational. In the end, the landless are still without land, and a new corporation has created a role of productivity on what was previously deemed unproductive land. Because there are no Constitutional limitations to this process of buying and selling, and because the landowner has the right to sell the land to the highest bidder, this practice of transnational corporations buying out unproductive land is becoming increasingly more popular. Therefore, the landowners and transnational corporations, for the purposes of this analysis, become a single source of power. Although their power differentiates between global and national markets, because this analysis is focused on national power, the global differential will not be discussed.
Decentralized Power
Brazil has been identified as ‘‘an ‘autonomous institutional state’ [that] exercises a sig- nificant measure of autonomy from the dominant class and other societal forces’’ (Mid- larsky and Roberts 1985, p. 182). This type of state pursues ‘‘state interest that are distinguishable from those of the dominant class,’’ but in other instances, ‘‘class biases are implicit in its actions and policies’’ (ibid, 183). Although this type of state authority may be relevant in political and social realms where the dominant class does not feel threa- tened, I argue that a dual political world exists in which the land revolution threatens the dominant class’ capital accumulation and political interests. In the system of land conflict evident in rural Brazil, the state is weakened and decentralized as it primarily serves the
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	87
interest of the dominant class and controls the resisting masses through immense violence and arbitrary law. Accordingly, the state system evident in rural Brazil would be more akin to Midlarsky and Roberts’ ‘‘instrumentalist state’’ that is characterized by ruling ‘‘in the interests, and often through the persons, of the dominant class’’ (ibid, pp. 181–182). This type of system, which I argue as decentralized, rules ‘‘by proxy, though...coercive power’’ (ibid, p. 182).
In the decentralized system, the groups that exhibit the most strength in the battle for land are not members of the federal government, but rather the large landowners and the transnational capitalists. For this reason, to understand the power structure of those who are capable of controlling land reform, the structure must be understood as a web of dominant class power exerting control in all realms of land reform.
Figure 1 illustrates the immense power sharing, as well as the decentralization of state power. The first main element to understand in the power model of oppositional powers is to notice the power lines that attach the organizations together. Each power source is attached to each other with one of the two types of power levels. However, there is limited ‘strong’ power amongst the power systems. Strong power exists between: Landowner power over the federal government, the state government, the municipal government, and Incra; the power between Incra and the state government and municipal government, and; Federal government power over Incra. The weak systems of power stem from all forms of government over the landowners, from Incra to the landowners, and between the federal and state government. What this system implies is that each system has power over the other systems, but it is the landowners that demonstrate the most power over all other systems of power.
How, in a democratic state, is it possible that a small proportion of the overall popu- lation is able to generate such great oppositional strength and utilize illegal measures to control the population? The reasons are fourfold. One, in terms of politics, we will see that a number of the large landowners are either political figures themselves or have relatives who are political officers. Also, the landowners have the ability to raise the consciousness of small landowners who may not realize that they too are at ‘risk’ of having their land expropriated for the landless. Second, legally, as with the political power, a number of large landowners have special connections with legal powers. These connections may either be through being members of the judicial agencies themselves, friendship or support from the judicial bodies, or economically. In line with the first and second reasons,
Land Owners
-- Minimal Power — Strong Power
Federal Gov
State Gov
Incra
Municipal Gov
Fig. 1 Decentralized state power
123
88	E. C. Heil
landowners, as well as transnational corporations, have the means to pay political and legal elites to favor their fight against land reform. Finally, because of their anonymity in media sources, they are publicly absolved from any criminal wrongdoings on their land. The landowners who choose to use the media as an outlet have ability to criminalize the landless movement by speaking out against the actions of the landless, and how they, the landowners, are the true victims in the struggle for land.
As mentioned earlier, to know the names of all of the landowners is an almost impossible task. However, through the newspaper articles collected over a 6 month period, I was able to identify some of the landowners (See Table 5).
Although the names (or lack of names) of the landowners illustrates the notion of secrecy and irresponsibility, what is more powerful is the relationship of some of the landowners to the other power systems. Consider Table 6 which follows Table 5.
Of the 22 landowners identified, 41% were either political figures or related to political figures. One was a contact for a transnational corporation, one was the president of the UDR, one was a founder for a global Church, one was the mother of a famous artist, while the others were elite ranchers. Only one of the 22 landowners was acknowledged as a criminal in the sense that he was a Colombian drug dealer. It is inferred from this data is that a high percentage number of landowners have either a political connection or have high power associated with being a member of the dominant land owning class.
It must be reiterated that not all landowners are politicians, nor are all landowners so vehemently against the landless movement. However, those landowners that are against the movement are in a position to not only speak out against the movement, but also destroy the movement in its effort for true land and social reform. Consider the following quotes from landowning advocates/political figures against the movement:
•	‘‘Brazil is being victimized by a stealthy movement that is contesting the basic rights of out constitution, the right to property...We are going to fight for the right to have peace in the countryside, with guaranteed agricultural rights, without [land] invasions’’ (Valdir Colatto, Federal Deputy, June 22, 2007).
•	‘‘His first mandate, if re-elected...is to ‘destroy the MST’ and other groups that act on the margin of the law’’ (Jornal O Estado, referring to Federal Deputy Abelardo Lupion, September 18, 2006).
Table 5 Names of landowners
Names of landowners
Valdir Colatto
Luiz Antonio Nabhan Garcia
Guido Pellicciari Neto
Reverend Moon
Dr. Marmeleiro Nelso Rosalino Sandini
Eloy Bezerra da Silve Ad ́ılio Augusto Valada ̃o Miranda
Gustavo Duran Celso Biancardini Renan Calheiros Olavo Calheiros
123
Cleide Bergamaschi Pelicciara An ́ısop Loureiro An ́ısio Loureiro Neto Renato Festugato Neto
Maria Arau ́jo
Oscar Erm ́ıro
Carlos Frenderico Machado Dias
Alan de Silva e Silva Abelado Lupion Stael Fernanda Vitalmiro Bastos de Moura
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
89
Table 6 Vocation of large landowners
Names of landowners
Valdir Colatto
Luiz Antonio Nabhan Garcia
Guido Pellicciari Neto
Reverend Moon
Dr. Marmeleiro Nelso Rosalino Sandini
Eloy Bezerra da Silve
Ad ́ılio Augusto Valada ̃o Miranda
Gustavo Duran
Celso Biancardini
Renan Calheiros
Olavo Calheiros
Cleide Bergamaschi Pelicciara
An ́ısop Loureiro
An ́ısio Loureiro Neto
Renato Festugato Neto
Maria Arau ́jo
Oscar Erm ́ıro
Carlos Frenderico Machado Dias
Alan de Silva e Silva Abelado Lupion Stael Fernanda Vitalmiro Bastos de Moura
Vocation
Federal Deputy President of UDR
Cattle-dealer Founder of the Unification Church Medical Doctor
N/A Coordinator of the national park
Colombian drug dealer Legislative seat (1996) Senator Brother of Renan Calheiros N/A
Mayor Brother in law of ex-governor Contact for Monsanto Seeds Cascavel Mother of artist Eduardo Arau ́jo Owner of 40 ranches N/A
N/A
Federal Deputy
Mother of Licensed deputy Jose ́ Janene
Rancher accused of assassinating American nun
•
‘‘Invasion is a crime, and as he threatened to fulfill [this crime], we are asking for the suspension of the benefits that permit his liberty’’ (Nabhan in reference to MST leader Jose ́ Rainha, June 26, 2007).
Landowner opposition to the landless movement is far from publicized, and given the political position of many of the landowners, the actions of opposition have proven to be successful.
Because of the landowners’ level of political, economic, legal, power, as well as media persuasion, they have the ability to dictate intervention with limited legal repercussions. This is done either by dominating the local courts or enlisting the help of local and state police to remove the landless from their camps. If either of these mechanisms fails, the landowners are known to recruit hired gunmen to eliminate rural leaders, as well as rural sympathizers. According to Rose (2005), by 2000, rural killings were on a steady increase, as was the cost to kill a judge, sheriff, mayor, or bishop (A rural union official could be murdered for $329–$987, whereas the murder of a rural judge, sheriff, mayor or bishop costs approximately $19,737). The majority of the payment has to be made in advance by the person who is hiring the killing. Interestingly, there is no price for the killing of a
123
90	E. C. Heil
landless community member. The importance of their life or death is not economically quantifiable, and their murder can easily be accomplished by the landowner’s jagunc ̧o.
Aside from relative impunity from violent acts (discussed earlier), the landowners have also utilized their privileged (i.e., politically, economically, and legally powerful) position to hamper land reform. For example, the UDR quickly learned that in order to protect their land from government expropriation, they had to defend the land themselves. According to Rose (2005), in the 1980s, ‘‘[e]very affiliate of the UDR was rumored ‘to have an executive committee that overlaps with the death squad in the State Department of Public Safety.’ Thus, the UDR regularly employed hit men to knock off troublesome individuals in the interior of the country’’ (p. 206). The UDR, because of their political ties, clearly under- stood their impunity for they understood that ‘‘the fix was...in so well that a mandate (the hirer of an assassin) did not have to worry about going to jail’’ (Rose 2005, p. 206). As the earlier CPT data has already illustrated, only a handful of the mandates actually serve any sort of jail time.
Aside from the landed elite, there also exists a power overruling the state’s control that results in illegal coercion of the landless resisters facilitated by the transnational class. The government has obligations to fulfill for the various economic factions that have pressured the political body, and because of this, leaders of the MST argue that the absence of land reform is caused by the relationship between transnational capital and the federal state.
A key reason for the relationship between the federal state and transnational corpora- tions is due to Brazil’s external debt. According to the World Bank’s World Development Report (2006), the external debt of Brazil is 235,432 millions of US dollars. 54% of the Gross National Income5 is spent of debt relief. The origination of the debt crisis facing Brazil today dates to the 1970s when North American companies offered cheap loans to finance investments in South American countries. According to Marcos Arruda (1994):
The main component of the adjustment process prescribed by [the lending institu- tions] for Brazil...involves restructuring [the] economy so as to drive all savings to investments in exports. The logic was: exports are the main source of foreign cur- rency; sell your products abroad and you will have currency to pay the debt. So everywhere in [Brazil] there has been a massive effort to produce enough goods for export at the expense of the internal economy (p. 46).
Thus, what has occurred in Brazil has been a process of filtering the internal economy towards the external market.
Even more appealing to the Brazilian state is the investment of transnational corpora- tions in the Brazilian system, especially the agricultural sector. The end result of the export service and debt relief is that ‘‘the countryside is transformed into a territory of material production for exportation; this productions is fundamentally of monoculture on a great scale, [plus] the intensive use of machines and agro-toxins- which expels workers- and banked by international capitalists’’ (www.biodiversidadla.org, June 21, 2007). In other words, due to the economic priorities of the state, the possibility of land reform has been overshadowed by the investment of transnational corporations.
The transnational class incorporates coercive measures against landless resistance groups by affecting the right to property and work. The agribusiness does not cater to the state or to landowners, but rather to transnational capital. In order to establish the most efficient practices in combination with profit, many private agribusinesses have incorpo- rated a system of modern day slavery. Slave laborers are from the most impoverished class,
5	The GNI of Brazil is 552.1 billion of US dollars (World Development Report 2006). 123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
91
Table 7 Slave labor in Brazil
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Slave freed
2001	2,416 2002	5,559 2003	5,010 2004	3,221 2005	4,585
laborers
Slave laborers revealed
N/A N/A 8,385 6,075 7,707
most of who have been displaced by agricultural machinery. The slave laborers work in the harshest conditions, face immense violence, and are indebted to their contractors. In 2001, the CPT reported 2,4166 recognized slave laborers. In 2005, 4,585 slave laborers were freed, while 7,707 incidents of slave labor were reported.7 The following data, derived from the CPT 2006 report, represents the numbers of slave laborers exposed as well as freed slaves from 2001 to 2005 (Table 7).
According to Human Rights Watch (2009), in 2007, 8,653 people were in conditions of slave labor. Although some transnational corporations have hired private security to forcefully remove landless resisters from their property,8 the majority of the violence associated with the transnational class is related to the system of labor.
As the web of decentralized power becomes more complex, Incra, the governmental body enlisted as the land reform agent, becomes relatively invisible. Incra is in a precarious position in that it has the responsibility to bend to the demands of the landless, the state, and landowners. Although it is the body that has the power to define productivity of land and expropriate the unproductive areas, a review of media stories revealed that Incra as a land institution has limited power.
In some instances, Incra has the ability to negotiate with landless organizations and meet the needs of land expropriation. Most of the negotiations end with the landless putting an end to their protest activity, which demonstrates Incra’s political hold over the landless movements. In other words, the landless have some faith in Incra’s ability, in that the movements will halt their protest activities under the auspices that Incra will negotiate land reform. On the other hand, Incra also works under the power of landowners, and in many cases, is unable to fulfill its obligation of settling land that had been deemed unproductive. Of these lands, some have been in the process of appeals or negotiations for over 2 years, yet Incra is unable to expropriate the land for settlement. Much of the land expropriation barrier is due to the landowners, with the assistance of the UDR, obstructing the expro- priation process.
The political power of Incra is mainly held in the ability to expropriate lands for settlement, as well as to pick which lands will be settled and how many landless may register for the settlements. In the larger Brazilian society, Incra still yields to the pressure of the state and the large landowners. Thus, whereas Incra may display an element of political power, it is not that of the state or the large landowners. Therefore the role of Incra in the web of power is best understood as Incra actors bending to demands from external
6 7 8
61 of these cases individuals were minors.
Slave labor is reported to the CPT by victims, families of victims, and rural syndicates.
For example, On October 21, 2007, Valmir Mota de Oliveira (Known as ‘‘Keno’’), an activist and landless leader, was shot two times point-blank range by security guards hired by the transnational Swiss corporation Syngenta.
123
92	E. C. Heil
sources. Incra does not have autonomy, and is at most times, overtaken by appealing landowners or protesting landless. Thus, because Incra sways between fulfilling the demands of the resistance groups and the demands of the oppositional groups, their own power is limited.
Thus far, the different players have been identified in terms of their ability to accom- modate or criminalize resistance organizations. What has yet to be discussed is the role of corruption as a key factor in the decentralization of the state. In order for the system of decentralized state authority evident in the rural countryside, it is crucial to understand that many of the actors who appear to be weak under the power of the large landowners are actually corrupted through legitimate desires of capital accumulation and occupational protection. Numerous examples of political and legal corruption in Brazil have been documented (Geddes and Neto 1992; Prillaman 2000; Weyland 1998; Fleisher 1996...) and these elements of corruption are an underlying factor regarding the weakened state in the Brazilian countryside. Landowners and transnational corporations have the ability to pay off state agents or buy political or judicial seats. Because their power is so intimately tied to land rights and capital growth, landowners and transnational corporations have historically blocked attempts at land reform either through threats to withhold political support (i.e., votes), payoffs, or incestuous political and judicial relationships resulting in decisions that represent and facilitate the interests of the dominant class. Because of the historical system of political and judicial corruption evident in rural Brazil, the state’s authority is illegitimate and decentralized amongst the dominant land holders and trans- national class.
Corruption also plays into the relative impunity experienced by the instigators and perpetrators of violence. The landed elite and transnational class has the ability to pay off or threaten the job security of judicial agents if the investigation of a violent act draws near to a landowner. More importantly, landowners and members of the transnational class have the resources to pay security officers, off-duty police officers, or jagunc ̧os to conduct the violent acts against the landless resisters. With money and occupational threats, the per- petrators of violence will uphold their silence and maintain autonomy from the actual managers of violence. With this, it is evident that corruption is both intimately tied to land reform and coercive control, and is a key element in the decentralized state structure.
Discussion
This case study has shown that the Brazilian landless live in a constant state of fear for life and home. Relatively unheard of, the Brazilian landless lives in a constant state of fear for life and home. Brazil has been deemed by the international community as becoming a powerful player in the global economy, but the reality is that the Brazilian state is rela- tively weak and unable to exert control over the actions of the powerful landowners. More importantly, the Brazilian state and society has come to tolerate the violence against the landless for they are deemed as a disposable population.
In this article, I have presented a theoretical framework to add to the existing integrated critical criminological theories that explaining the historical circumstances of land tenure and rural violence that have led to the current system of decentralization, corruption, and the political and legal subordination to the dominant landholding and transnational classes. Power in the Brazilian countryside has historically rested in the hands of the landowners. The end result is a democratic system based on ideals, but a reality of control by pow- erfully anonymous entities. Because of the concentrated power exhibited by the
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	93
landowners, there exists limited control on their activities, and therefore, these agents opposed to the landless movement have the opportunity to utilize illegal means of control and oppression. The effect of decentralized power, the criminalization of the movement and the relative impunity to those guilty of crimes against humanity, fosters a system favorable to violence and the expulsion of a marginal class. Thus, the landowners continue their hold of power throughout Brazil, thereby invoking the strength to socially control the landless movement with criminalization and violence.
References
Arrigo, B. (2000). Social justice and critical criminology: On integrating knowledge. Contemporary Justice Review, 3(1), 7–37.
Arruda, M. (1994). Brazil: Drowning in Debt. In 50 Years is enough: The case against the World Bank and the international monetary fund. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Betto, F. (2008). Abolish the MST, or the unproductive latifundos? Grassroots International from www.biodiversidadela.org.
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Comissa ̃o Pastoral da Terra. www.cptnac.com.br. Commisa ̃o Pastoral da Terra. (2006). Conflitos no Campo Brasil 2005 CPT, Goiaˆna- GO. Federal Constitution of Brazil. (1988). From planalto.gov.br. Fleisher, D. (1996). Political corruption in Brazil. Crime, Law, and Social Change, 25(4), 297–321. Fontes, G. (2004). Interview with Geraldo Fontes of the MST. In Motion magazine, September 2,
inmotionmagazine.com. Geddes, B., & Neto, A. R. (1992). Institutional sources of corruption in Brazil. Third World Quarterly,
13(4), 641–651. Human Rights Watch. (2009). World report from http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2009. Kauzlarich, D., & Kramer, R. C. (1998). Crimes of the American nuclear state: At home and abroad.
Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press. Marques, R. M., & Nakatani, P. (2007). The state and economy in Brazil. Monthly Review, 58(8).
www.monthlyreview.org. Midlarsky, M., & Roberts, K. (1985). Class, state, and revolution in central America: Nicaragua and El
Salvador compared. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 29(2), 163–193. Mullins, C. W., & Rothe, D. L. (2008). Blood, power, and bedlam: Violations of international criminal law
in post-colonial Africa. New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing. Prillaman, W. (2000). The judiciary and democratic decay in Latin America: Declining confidence in the
rule of law. Westport, CT: Praeger. Quinny, R. (1980). Class, state, and crime. United Kingdom: Longman Group. Rose, R. S. (2005). The unpast: Elite violence and social control in Brazil, 1954–2000. Athens, OH: Ohio
University Press. Stedile, J. P. (2002). Landless battalions: The Sem Terra movement of Brazil. New Left Review, Trans-
national Institute Agrofuels: Towards a Reality Check in Nine Key Areas June, 2007, tni.org/reports/
ctw/agrofuels.pdf. Unknown Author. (1981). Comissa ̃o de Justic ̧a defende Religiosos. Diario de Pernambuco September 9,
p. 3d. Weyland, K. (1998). The politics of corruption in Latin America. Journal of Democracy, 9(2), 108–121. Whittman, H. (2005). Agrarian reform under lula- marching to a historic crossroads. Mstbrazil.org, February
26, 2005. World Bank. (2006). World development report.
123

2003
Economics
Journal of Agrarian Change,
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements in the Brazilian Agrarian Reform
CARMEN DIANA DEERE

This article examines the evolution of the demand for women’s land rights in the Brazilian agrarian reform through the prism of the three main rural social movements: the landless movement, the rural unions and the autonomous rural women’s movement. Most of the credit for raising the issue of women’s land rights rests with women within the rural unions. That women’s formal land rights were attained in the constitutional reform of 1988 was largely a by- product of the effort to end discrimination against women in all it dimensions. The achievement of formal equality in land rights, nonetheless, did not lead to increases in the share of female beneficiaries of the reform, which remained low in the mid-1990s. This was largely because securing women’s land rights in practice was not a top priority of any of the rural social movements. Moreover, the main social movement determining the pace of the agrarian reform, the land- less movement, considered class and gender issues to be incompatible. By the late 1990s, nonetheless, there was growing awareness that failure to recognize women’s land rights was prejudicial to the development and consolidation of the agrarian reform settlements and thus the movement. The growing consensus among all the rural social movements of the importance of securing women’s land rights, coupled with effective lobbying, encouraged the State in 2001 to adopt specific mechanisms for the inclusion of women in the agrarian reform.
Keywords: agrarian reform, social movements, women’s land rights, Brazil
INTRODUCTION
From a gender perspective, the Brazilian agrarian reform stands out in terms of its relatively low share of female beneficiaries as compared with other Latin
Carmen Diana Deere, Professor of Economics and Director of the Center for Latin American, Caribbean and Latino Studies at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. e-mail: Deere@econs.umass.edu
Most of the research for this paper was undertaken while the author was a Fulbright-Hays Scholar during 2000 at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. I am grateful to Paola Cappellin, Maria José Carneiro, and Anita Brumer for facilitating my research in Brazil, to Merrilee Mardon for research assistance, and to all the above for insightful comments on earlier versions of this article. I am also indebted to Magdalena León, with whom I conducted initial research in Brazil in 1998, for permis- sion to use material in an earlier co-authored working paper.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Henry Bernstein and Terence J. Byres 2003.
258	Carmen Diana Deere
American countries. This is curious since Brazil in 1988 was among the first to stipulate explicitly that women could be potential beneficiaries and, along with Colombia, to introduce the possibility of joint adjudication and titling to couples of land distributed through the agrarian reform. Yet, in the mid-1990s, women constituted only 12.6 per cent of the beneficiaries in Brazil compared with 45 per cent in recent land distributions in Colombia. Further, a comparative analysis with Latin American countries that introduced gender-progressive agrarian legis- lation in the 1990s shows that these measures were least implemented in Brazil (Deere and León 2001). This raises the question of why it has been such a laggard in securing women’s land rights.
One reason is that whereas in Brazil joint adjudication and titling to couples is an option, in most other countries it is now mandatory that lands distributed by the State be jointly titled. Given deep-seated cultural practices, supported by legal norms until recently,1 that only husbands represent the household and man- age its assets, it is not surprising that joint titling must be mandatory for this measure to be implemented in practice. Moreover, in most countries the attain- ment and implementation of gender-progressive legislation has depended on the existence of strong rural women’s organizations and their persistence in demand- ing recognition of women’s land rights (Deere and León 2001, chapter 6).
What is also curious about the Brazilian case is that rural women, beginning in the 1980s, began to participate in growing numbers in rural unions and in the nascent landless movement, as well as to form their own autonomous organiza- tions (Deere and León 1999). Their demands for land rights were formally at- tained in the 1988 Federal Constitution, which established that in land to be distributed through the agrarian reform, ‘land titles or use rights be given to men, to women, or to both, independent of their civil status’ (Article 189, in da Luz 1996, 177). But, after 1988, there was relatively little follow-up with respect to implementing women’s land rights.
It took 12 years until some of the rural social movements successfully cham- pioned women’s land rights at the national level. In August 2000, the demand for the joint adjudication and titling of land to couples under the agrarian reform finally figured prominently in the largest national demonstration yet to be held of rural women. This march on the capital city of Brasilia, known as the Marcha das Margaridas, was coordinated by the Women’s Commission of the national agricultural workers’ union, CONTAG (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura), in coalition with one of the regional organiza- tions of autonomous rural women, the MMTR-NE (Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Noreste) and other groups. As in other Latin American countries, once organized rural women began to demand land rights and consist- ently confront the State on this issue, the institute of agrarian reform, INCRA
1	The 1988 Federal Constitution of Brazil established that ‘the rights and obligations of the marital society are to be jointly exercised by the man and the woman’ (Article 226, in CFEMEA 1996, 49). Most Latin American countries established the dual headed household through constitutional or civil code reform in the 1970s and 1980s (Deere and León 2001, Table 2.1).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	259
(Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agraria) was forced to revise its regulations.
The main question addressed in this article is why it took so long for organ- ized rural women to demand effective recognition of their land rights. I argue that this is related to the multiple and often competing venues for participation which opened up to rural women in the 1980s and 1990s and the many priorities of these rural social movements. Moreover, it was not until the exclusion of women began to have real practical consequences for the consolidation of the agrarian reform settlements (the assentamentos) that women’s land rights became an issue within the main social movement leading the agrarian reform, the MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra), and for the State.
Recognition of the importance of women’s land rights generally takes place for two reasons, what we have called elsewhere the ‘productionist’ and the ‘em- powerment’ arguments (Deere and León 1998, 2001).2 The productionist argu- ment refers to the recognition that women’s land rights are associated with an increase in the well-being of women and their children, as well as an enhance- ment of their productivity and, hence, the well-being of their community and society. The empowerment argument recognizes that women’s land rights are critical to enhancing their bargaining power within the household and commun- ity, to ending their subordination to men and, hence, to achieving real equality between men and women. In Brazil, women gained formal land rights as a by- product of the process to achieve equality between men and women in all of its legal dimensions, through the expansion of women’s rights in the 1988 Consti- tution. But the attainment of specific mechanisms of inclusion of women in the agrarian reform – to increase the share of women with effective land rights – was not achieved until the productionist arguments were better understood and inter- nalized both by the State and all of the rural social movements.
Agrarian reform was once again on the Brazilian national agenda in the 1980s largely as a result of the actions of the landless movement, the MST. The move- ment was born in southern Brazil in the late 1970s around a series of land occu- pations. By the early 1980s – the period of transition to democracy from military rule – these occupations had spread nationally (Fernandes 1996, 66–7). The ori- gins of the movement are found in the Christian-base communities that prolifer- ated in rural areas and shantytowns, beginning in the 1960s, in concert with liberation theology. The land invasions which grew out of this consciousness- raising process were supported by the Pastoral Land Commission, the CPT (Comissão Pastoral da Terra), which was organized by the National Council of Catholic Bishops in 1975, and which increasingly publicized and gave coherence to these land struggles. The CPT also played a crucial role in bringing together landless workers from different states. After a series of regional meetings, the
2	These are a synthesis of Bina Agarwal’s (1994) detailed development of the four principle argu- ments for women’s land rights: to enhance their welfare, efficiency, equality and empowerment. For a summary of how women’s land rights have evolved in the thinking of international institutions, the international women’s movement and among governments, see Deere and León (2001, chapter 4).
260	Carmen Diana Deere
first national meeting in 1984 resulted in the founding of the MST (Fernandes 1996, 70–8; Stedile and Fernandes 1999). The MST today is organized in 22 states and is the leading force in the struggle for agrarian reform (Hammond 1999).
The other main force behind agrarian reform has been the rural unions. These have quite a heterogenous membership, being composed of agricultural wage workers and tenants, as well as family farmers. They were consolidated on a national scale under the federated union structure of CONTAG during the period of military dictatorship (1964–84). In this period they were the main vehicle of State control as well as of assistance in rural areas, primarily through their provision of social services such as health care.3 In the period of transition to democratic rule, local and state federations became main foci of contestation by the forces of the new unionism, led by the leftist oppositional national union, the Central Workers’ Union, the CUT (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores) (Maybury-Lewis 1996). In the mid-1990s, CONTAG affiliated with the CUT. By then, both organizations were militant participants in the struggle for agrar- ian reform, often acting in concert with the MST, but also competing with it at times at the local, state and/or national level. The autonomous rural women’s movement, today linked in the National Articulation of Rural Women Workers, ANMTR (Articulação Nacional das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Agricolas), has its roots in the activities of the Christian-base committees in the 1960s and 1970s as well as in the rise of the new unionism in the 1980s.
In the next section, I briefly summarize agrarian reform efforts up to the mid- 1990s. I then trace the development of the rural women’s movement and show how the demand for women’s land rights within the unions and autonomous rural women’s movement led to its inclusion in the 1988 Constitution. The next section considers the mechanisms of exclusion of women in the meagre agrarian reform efforts during the period of military rule, and how these were not ameli- orated in the renewed reform efforts of the 1985–96 period. The subsequent section considers why none of the rural social movements, but particularly the MST, were very effective advocates for women’s land rights in this period. The sixth section turns to developments since 1996, when all of the rural social move- ments began to internalize gender concerns and, specifically, women’s land rights, to a much greater degree than in the past, resulting in the adoption in 2001 of specific mechanisms of inclusion of women in the agrarian reform. The main findings are summarized in the conclusion.
BACKGROUND
The struggle for agrarian reform in Brazil dates from the early 1960s. In this period, the labour and peasant movements were gaining strength, the latter organizing against the injustices of the traditional landholding system, the fazenda,
3	The rural health care system is financed by a 1 per cent tax on farm sales. On the growth of union membership during the period of military rule, see Maybury-Lewis (1996).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	261
or large estate with a dependent labour force working under non-capitalist labour relations. Under the regime of President João Goulart, the first labour legislation was passed, which extended to rural workers many of the rights and privileges of urban workers, including the right to organize into unions. In addition, an agrarian reform institute was created and legislation was introduced defining which lands could be expropriated for the purpose of agrarian reform. These measures were sufficient to provoke a military coup in March 1964, one which ushered in 21 years of military rule (Cardoso 1997, 18–19).
Given the high degree of mobilization around agrarian reform at the time, as well as pressure from the United States Government, which was championing agrarian reform under the Alliance for Progress,4 the military government of General Castelo Branco was forced to adopt a mild land reform law in 1964, the Estatuto da Terra. This law provided for large landholdings (latifundia) to be expropriated with compensation when it was considered to be in the social interest.5 However, farms considered to be ‘rural enterprises’, vaguely defined as those that ‘exploit the land economically and rationally’, were exempt from the reform (Hall 1990, 216–17). Among the intended beneficiaries of the reform were those who worked on the expropriated estate, including squatters, wage workers, sharecroppers and renters (Minc 1985, 90).
Little was accomplished with respect to land redistribution under military rule, since the military was beholden to the traditional landlord class, and its primary interest was in supporting the modernization of agriculture. Govern- ment policy in the 1970s centred on the modernization of the fazendas through the provision of abundant, subsidized credit. The larger the estate, the more credit it was eligible for, encouraging the growing concentration of land (Cardoso 1997, 19). Particularly favoured were the growing of soya for export and agribusiness interests in lumber and cattle ranching. The modernization policy also provoked a change in labour relations, with the resident labour force of tenants on the fazendas replaced by a temporary wage labour force. The military government’s priority in terms of solving the problems of landlessness and rural conflict was focused on planned and spontaneous colonization of the Amazonian frontier, which coincided in purpose with the evolving doctrine of Brazilian national security.6 For the millions dispossessed by the modernization policy, the main option was migration to urban areas and Brazil’s major cities mushroomed in size.
4	Under the Alliance for Progress, promulgated in 1961, shortly after the Cuban revolution, United States development assistance was made conditional on Latin American countries pursuing agrarian reform. 5	Latifundia were defined as those 600 times larger than the regionally defined farm module. The size of these farm modules was determined by a combination of criteria, including the population density of the region, land quality, type of activities pursued, etc., and ranged from 2 to 12 hectares. 6	In order to secure its borders, the military embarked on a very ambitious road-building project throughout the Amazon region. Spontaneous settlement of the North, West-central and Northwest of Brazil ended up being a much more important phenomenon than planned settlement (Hall 1990, 208–9; Cardoso 1997, 21). But through the 1980s, rural–urban migration significantly exceeded rural–rural migration.
262	Carmen Diana Deere Table 1. Distribution of farmland in Brazil, 1985
Farm size (ha)
Total number of farms (%)
less than 10 10 –100 100 –1000 1000+ 0.9
100.0 (5,793,004)
Source: Brasil (1990, 2–3).
During the whole period of military rule, 1964–84, only 185 estates were expropriated (Cardoso 1997, 22). Thus at the beginning of the democratic tran- sition, land continued to be extremely concentrated, as shown in Table 1. One per cent of the farms, those larger than 1000 ha, held 44 per cent of the land. The Gini coefficient of land concentration had increased from 0.825 in 1940, to 0.853 in 1980, being among the highest in Latin America (Thiesenhusen and Melmed- Sanjak 1990, 396). In the mid-1980s, the number of landless and near-landless families was estimated to be of the order of between 6 and 11 million (Maybury- Lewis 1996, 28–9; Hall 1990, 207).
Upon the return of civilian rule in 1985, President Jose Sarney introduced a proposal for a National Agrarian Reform Plan of the New Republic (PNRA- NR) and created a new Ministry for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (MIRAD). With the goal of stemming rural–urban migration and encouraging small-scale production, his administration set the goal of expropriating 43 mil- lion hectares of land and settling 1.4 million households over a period of four years (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 110). The landed oligarchy quickly organized themself in opposition, creating the União Democratica Ruralista (UDR), which became a very effective anti-reform lobbying group in the national congress. The PNRA-NR was redrafted 12 times before it became law in October 1985. In the final version, many more properties were ineligible for expropriation than under the original legislation. The debates over the PNRA-NR overlapped with the drafting of Brazil’s new constitution. The landlord’s lobby, the UDR, was successful in making sure that the constitutional provisions for agrarian reform were left quite vague. For example, while land that does not serve a social function could still be expropriated, ‘productive’ farms, irrespective of size, were made exempt from expropriation (Hall 1990, 219–20).7 Given this context, little progress was made in the late 1980s on agrarian reform. Under the Sarney Government, only 89,950 families were settled on 4.5 million hectares of land
7	A productive farm was defined as one on which 80 per cent of the surface is effectively utilized, where ecological and labour standards are respected, and where ‘the use is considered to be of common benefit to land owners and workers’.
52.9 37.3 8.9
Total area of farmland (%)
2.7 18.6 35.0 43.7 100.0
(374.9 million ha)
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	263
(Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 110). Many of the expropriated estates were ones that had been occupied by peasant groups in land occupations, particularly in the South. The main innovation of this period was that beneficiaries were provided with credit at subsidized terms through a programme known as PROCERA (Hall 1990, 225). But, by 1989, the reform effort was weakening and during the next administration came to a virtual standstill (Cardoso 1997, 23). All told, between 1964 and 1994 only 850 agrarian reform settlements were created, bene- fiting 143,514 families (Cardoso 1997, 23). The total amount of land incorpor- ated in these settlements (8.1 million hectares) represented only around 2 per cent of the total land reported in farms in the 1985 agricultural census.
PLACING WOMEN’S LAND RIGHTS ON THE AGENDA
The genesis of the rural women’s movement is found in the context of the democratic opening of the 1980s and the consolidation of the feminist and women’s movement in Brazil (Alvarez 1990). In rural areas, the Christian base communities and women’s groups organized by the CPT in the previous decade often provided the formative experience that led rural women to question social injustice, often linked to health or education issues (Cappellin 1997, 646). But, given that the main organizational structures in rural areas were the unions, in the decade of the 1980s the rural women’s movement developed around two central demands: the incorporation of women into the unions and the extension of social security benefits, including paid maternity leave and retirement, to rural women workers (Siqueira 1991, 58). These demands reflected the growing par- ticipation of rural women in the agricultural labour force and the discrimination that women faced both as wage workers and within the rural unions.
Through the mid-1980s, in the unions affiliated with CONTAG, it was gen- erally assumed that only one person per household could be a union member, generally the male household head. Moreover, women were rarely considered to work in agriculture, their work being ‘invisible’, whether as unpaid family workers or temporary wage workers. In the north-eastern state of Paraíba, for example, union leaders argued that women were not rural workers; that since they were a dependent of their husbands they had no need to join the unions because they had guaranteed benefits; and they even claimed that the unionization of wives was prohibited by law, although this was not the case (MMTR-NE 1987; Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 328).
Since the unions were the main source of health care in rural areas, the exclu- sion of women from union membership meant that female household heads were at a severe disadvantage. Women were also at a disadvantage in terms of retirement benefits, since only one person per family was eligible for retirement benefits, the household head. Moreover, whereas workers received 50 per cent of the minimum wage upon retirement, their widows received a survivor’s pen- sion equivalent to only 30 per cent (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 122–3). But it was not until 1985, at the Fourth Congress of CONTAG, that rural women’s issues were seriously addressed in a national forum of the labour movement.
264	Carmen Diana Deere
The impetus came from the first official gathering of the Movement of Rural Women Workers (MMTR, Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais) of the Sertão Central in the north-eastern state of Pernambuco. The roots of the MMTR in the Northeast can be traced to meetings held in Brejo, Paraíba and Serra Tablada in the Sertão Central of Pernambuco during 1982 and 1983, largely focused on the emergency situation provoked by a prolonged drought. But by 1984, when the MMTR-Sertão Central was officially founded, the main concern was how to increase the participation of rural women workers within the union movement (Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de Pernambuco: FETAPE 1986). At this meeting a proposal was formulated to present to the CONTAG Congress in Brasilia that a priority of the organization should be the unionization of rural women workers and consideration of their concerns (Cappellin 1989, 256). The women’s demands were backed by the male leaders of FETAPE, who accompanied the women to Brasilia.
Rural women union members in the South were also meeting regularly in the early 1980s, concerned principally with how to increase their numbers within the local and state union structure. In Rio Grande do Sul, for example, the first of what were to become annual meetings of women in the leadership of FETAG- RS (Federação dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura no Rio Grande do Sul), took place in 1981 (Prá and Britto 1988, 29). The First State Meeting of Rural Women Workers organized by FETAG-RS and the CPT in October 1985 was attended by some 10,000 rural women (Stephen 1997, 214). FETAG-RS’s State Commis- sion of Rural Women Workers grew out of this meeting, which also selected 48 women to attend the Fourth CONTAG Congress (FETAG-RS 1998, 6–7).
Although women represented only 1 per cent of the participants at this national congress (Portella and Camurça no date), CONTAG adopted the goal of incorporating women into the union structure and recognized that women experienced specific problems of discrimination, particularly wage discrimination. Local-level unions were instructed to begin encouraging women’s participation and to train women to occupy leadership positions. They were also encouraged to elect women as delegates to departmental and national congresses (Siqueira 1991, 69–70). The need for rural women, particularly those in the family farming regime, to declare that their profession was that of rural women workers was also discussed, both as a means of raising their consciousness as well as facilitat- ing their incorporation into unions and access to social security benefits (MMTR- NE 1987, Appendix; CONTAG 1988).
One of the factors which explains the opening of CONTAG to women mem- bers at this point in time was the growth of what is known as ‘the new unionism’ and the competition between CONTAG and the recently formed and more radical CUT (Central Única dos Trabalhadores) for new members. For the first time in many years, contested elections were taking place at the local and state level,8 and
8	On the heterogeneity within the union structure affiliated with CONTAG, see Maybury-Lewis (1996). By the end of the military dictatorship, the local syndicates and state federations were differ- entiated by either being assistencialist (concerned primarily with the delivery of social services), corrupt (pelayo) or combative. It was the latter who affiliated to the CUT.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	265
women were coming to be viewed as a potential positive force for change within the traditional union structure.9 By 1987 women represented approximately 29 per cent of the membership of the unions affiliated with CONTAG.10
During this same period the CUT, at its Second National Congress in 1986, organized the National Commission on the Question of the Working Woman, to address the concerns of both urban and rural women. The impulse for this latter development also came from the Northeast, from the state of Paraíba, where the first state-level Women’s Secretariat had been created at the First State CUT Congress in 1985 (Cappellin 1989, 260). The Women’s Secretariat had been a demand of the MMTR of Brejo, along with the demand for recogni- tion of women’s land rights, specifically, that land under the agrarian reform be jointly titled to couples (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 324–5).
The demand for women’s land rights was also raised in the South in this period. In the text drafted in preparation for a rural women worker’s congress in Rio Grande do Sul in 1986, organized by the group known as ‘the Margaridas’11 (after the slain Northeastern union leader, Margarida Alves), it was proposed ‘that the property title distributed in the agrarian reform be made out in name of the couple irrespective of their legal marital status’. Moreover, ‘if the family is the basis for selection of the beneficiaries, that the rights of female household heads (widows, separated women, single mothers) to the property and benefits of the agrarian reform be recognized’ (MEMTR 1986, section 2.4).
During the term of President José Sarney, in 1985, the National Council on Women’s Rights, the CNDM (Conselho Nacional de Direitos da Mulher), had been created under the Ministry of Justice, which included representatives of civil society, including many feminists. The CNDM, working in tandem with the growing rural women’s movement, was largely responsible for the enhanced State attention to rural women’s issues in the mid-1980s (Siqueira 1991, 63; Barsted 1994). EMBRATER, the rural extension service of the Ministry of Agriculture, organized the first National Congress of Rural Women in 1986, a congress building on a series of previous State and municipal-level meetings of rural women throughout the country.12 At this congress, the demand for the
9	Interview with researcher Paola Cappellin, of the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, and former advisor to the CUT on gender issues, 1 March 1999, Amherst, MA. 10	This figure is based on a sample of 1398 local syndicates (with 4.1 million members) out of the 2913 syndicates affiliated with CONTAG. Its total membership at that time was estimated as approximately 9 million (FETAPE 1988).
11	There were three different organizations of rural women in this state in this period, the Margaridas; the women affiliated with the dominant union structure, FETAG-RS; and the Organization of Farm Women (Organização das Mulheres da Roça) which eventually would become the MMTR-RS (Carneiro 1994; Brumer 2000). Some of the members of the Margaridas eventually joined one of the two latter groups. E-mail communications to the author from Loiva Rubenich, ANMTR, 14 De- cember 2000, and Sonilda Pereira, FETAG-RS, 18 December 2000.
12	My perusal of the available reports of these meetings suggests that they were held between 1984 and 1986 and that the initial themes were quite vague, focusing on ‘the situation of women workers’ and their recognition as agriculturalists. Land rights were only addressed immediately preceding the 1986 National Congress, when the theme ‘women and the property question’ was introduced at some of the state-level meetings. Files of Maria José Carneiro, researcher at CPDA, Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro.
266	Carmen Diana Deere
distribution of agrarian reform land to female household heads and for the joint titling of agrarian reform land to couples was put forth by almost all of the regional working groups, but most forcefully by the women from the North- east region. It recommended ‘That there be equality in the right of access and ownership of land. When the agrarian reform comes that land be distributed without discrimination, to the men and women who want to work it, and that female households heads – separated and single mothers – not be excluded’ (in EMBRATER 1986, 16).
Alongside the growth of the participation of women in the rural union move- ment, the 1980s were characterized by the growth of the autonomous rural women’s movement, the MMTRs, in many states. The state-level MMTRs emerged in the mid- to late 1980s in both the South and the Northeast at ap- proximately the same time. For example, founding meetings of the autonomous rural women worker associations were held in the following years: in 1984 in Santa Catarina; in 1985 in Paraná; in 1986 in Paraíba; in 1987 in Pernambuco and Espirito Santo; and in 1989 in Rio Grande do Sul (MMTR 1994, 16, 20–1; ANMTR 1997, 5–15). These meetings were usually preceded by municipal and regional-level meetings within a given state, sometimes these having taken place over a number of years, beginning in the early 1980s.
The state-level MMTRs were often formed by women who were members of unions affiliated to CONTAG or the CUT and who felt the need to create their own space to deal with gender issues and women’s concerns. Although some women rose to leadership positions within the rural unions and in other movements, such as the MST, they often became frustrated when their gender- specific demands were considered irrelevant or less important than the class- based, economic demands which motivated these organizations.
The first national meeting of autonomous rural women was held in 1986 in Barueri, São Paulo, supported by the CUT and the MST, with the objective of creating a national organization of rural women workers. At the meeting, which was attended by women from 16 states, it was decided that such a national organization was premature, and that efforts should concentrate on creating re- gional networks (MMTR-NE 1987; MMTR 1994, 47; ANMTR 1997, 10). This meeting was a catalyst to the organization of both the MMTR-NE and the AIMTR-Sul (Articulação das Instancias das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais dos 5 Estados do Sul). A history of the founding of the MMTR-NE gives credit to the 1986 São Paulo national meeting (which six women from the Northeast at- tended) as providing the impetus for the First Meeting of the MMTR-NE at João Pessoa in 1987 (MMTR-NE 1987). This latter meeting was attended by women from eight Northeastern states and, in each of these, the MMTRs were closely tied to the rural unions at the municipal level.13 Two themes dominated
13	The close and over-lapping ties between members of the MMTR-NE and the rural unions are illustrated by the fact that of the 22 rural women workers attending the 1987 founding meeting, 20 belonged to a union; the other 14 women attending were advisors. A survey of the MMTR-NE membership carried out in that year (with 181 members responding from six states) revealed that 52 per cent were union members (MMTR-NE 1987, 9, 21–2).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	267
the discussion: the need to increase women’s participation in the unions and the demand for agrarian reform.
In the South, the AIMTR-Sul was created in 1988, formally linking women from the five Southern states.14 Its objective was to provide a forum for the discussion of what were considered women’s issues, among them, health, sexu- ality, recognition of the profession of rural women workers, and gender, and ‘to give visibility to the problematic of rural women workers (their condition, work, lack of citizenship . . . )’ (ANMTR 1997, 10). The AIMTR-Sul and its constitu- ent organizations were the ones to take the lead in national campaigns focusing on obtaining rural women’s social security rights and the recognition of the profession of rural women workers. The Movement of Women Farmers (MMA- SC) of Santa Catarina, for example, led the 1986 campaign for 100,000 signatures of rural women workers to place their rights on the constitutional agenda, deliv- ering these to Brasilia in a major caravan (ANMTR 1997, 5).15
Before the adoption of the 1988 Federal Constitution, the issue of women’s land rights had been raised in municipal-level meetings. For example, in the 25 municipal meetings held in Santa Catarina in 1986 one of the themes had been ‘the struggle for land titles in women’s names in the agrarian reform settlement projects’ (ANMTR 1997, 5). Subsequently, land rights seemed to disappear as an issue and were not taken up by the state-level association. According to Lucy Choinaski, one of the founders of the MMA-SC and the first rural woman to be elected a congressional deputy, this was because the organization was largely made up of women who were in the regime of family agriculture and their primary concerns were other ones, such as health care, social security benefits, participation in the unions, etc. In the regime of family agriculture ‘land is in men’s name . . . it is the exception for daughters to inherit a land parcel . . . There was never a debate on this issue although women have been concerned and raise the question of women’s ownership of land.’16
The demand for women’s land rights was most persistently articulated by the women in CONTAG, where it was a major issue at the First National Seminar of Rural Women Workers in Brasilia in 1988. Moreover, the fact that women were being dispossessed from their land when they were widowed – whether as tenants, wage workers or in the agrarian reform settlements – was denounced in
14	The AIMTR included the following organizations: Movimento de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Rio Grande do Sul (MMTR-RS), Movimento de Mulheres Agricultoras de Santa Catarina (MMA- SC), Comissão Estadual da Questão da Mulher Trabalhadora Rural do DETR-Paraná, Movimento Popular de Mulheres do Paraná (MPMP), Movimento de Mulheres Agricultoras de Mato Grosso do Sul, and the Movimento de Mulheres Assentadas de São Paulo.
15	Interview with Jaci Kuhn Sckeeren, member of the National Commission of the ANMTR, 23 June 1998, Brasilia. 16	Unpublished transcript made available to the author of interview by Maria Ignez Paulilo, re- searcher at the Federal University of Santa Catarina, 26 July 2000, Florianopolis, SC. The reference cited earlier to women’s land rights as a demand of rural women in this state may be due to the fact that EMBRATER explicitly introduced this theme at the seminars held here preceding the 1986 First National Congress of Rural Women. See ‘A mulher rural e suas reinvidicações’, EMBRATER-SC (no date) files of Maria José Carneiro.
268	Carmen Diana Deere
no uncertain terms (CONTAG 1988, 7). The constitutional convention was meeting at the time, and participants at the seminar lobbied vigorously for the constitutional article that would explicitly establish women’s land rights in the agrarian reform (CONTAG 1988, 24). This constitutional article, as well as a number of others dealing with women’s rights, was the result of a popular amendment to the Constitution, one resulting from a nation-wide signature campaign. It was the initiative of feminist activists and scholars who worked in tandem with the CNDM. Beginning in 1986, under the slogan ‘for the constitu- tional process to be valid it must include women’s rights’, meetings and seminars on women’s rights were held throughout the country. It was as a result of the interaction between the CNDM and the female leadership of the unions, as well as the growing movement of rural women, that women’s land rights, specific- ally, were included on the constitutional agenda as part of the general expansion of women’s rights in the 1988 Constitution.17
Besides the inclusion of women in the agrarian reform, other gains for rural women in the 1988 Constitution included the establishment of equal rights for urban and rural men and women with respect to labour legislation and social security benefits. It was stipulated that these benefits applied to permanent and temporary wage workers as well as family farmers, including unpaid family workers. These benefits include, besides the right to unemployment and disabil- ity insurance, 120 days of paid maternity leave for women. In addition, the age of retirement for rural women was set at 55 years and for rural men, at 60 years, or after 30 years of service for women and 35 years for men, conditions more favorable than for urban workers. Women who were unpaid family workers in peasant production would be eligible for retirement benefits directly and no longer only as a dependent of the male household head (CUT 1991, 10; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 124–5).
The new constitutional rights acquired by rural women in 1988 required enabling legislation to be implemented. But with the election of President Collor in 1989, the CNDM went into a period of decline (Barsted 1994, 42). Moreover, he vetoed in 1991 the implementing legislation for paid maternity leave for women in family agriculture, arguing that in the case of ‘special producers’ there was no correlation between their payment of quotas and potential benefits (Cappellin 1992, 59). Since attaining effective social security rights was an issue that united most rural women (whether temporary or permanent wage workers, landless or in the family farming regime), it is not surprising that these rights would constitute the most important arena of struggle for the rural women’s movement in subsequent years, to the detriment of the struggle for women’s land rights (Deere and León 1999).
17	Particularly important in terms of rural women’s land rights was the lobbying effort which resulted from the 1987 seminar ‘Rural Women: Their Identities in Research and in the Political Struggle’ held at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (Lavinas 1987). Interview by the author and Magdalena León with reseacher Heleithe Saffioti, 28 June 1998, São Paulo.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	269 Table 2. Beneficiaries of the agrarian reform by sex and region, 1996 (per centages)
Men	Women	No info.	Total
North	85.0	12.7	0.3	100 Northeast85.313.41.3100
Southeast Centre-west South Total
83.2 86.8 91.1 85.6 (n = 135,011)
13.8 11.5 7.9 12.6
(n = 19,905)
2.9 1.7 1.0 1.8 (n = 2841)
100 100 100 100 (n = 157,757)
Source: INCRA/CRUB/UnB (1998, 26). WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN THE AGRARIAN REFORM
According to the First Agrarian Reform Census, as of 1996 only 19,905 women were direct beneficiaries of the reform, representing 12.6 per cent of the national total of 157,757. As Table 2 also shows, given the size of Brazil, there was considerable variation in women’s participation by region, with the share of female beneficiaries being highest in the Southeast (13.8 per cent) and Northeast (13.4 per cent), and lowest in the South (7.9 per cent).
The relatively low share of female beneficiaries reflects the discrimination against women that prevailed prior to the 1988 constitutional reform and the fact that it was not eliminated by measures to establish women’s formal equality with men. The 1964 Land Statute, the governing legislation on agrarian reform until 1985, gave priority to household heads with the largest families who wanted to dedicate themselves to agricultural activities (da Luz 1996, 123). These criteria discriminated against women since, following cultural norms, if a man resides in the household he is always considered its head, a norm supported by the 1916 civil code until also modified by the 1988 constitutional reform (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 324–5). The family size criterion was biased against female- headed households since, by definition, these are smaller than male-headed house- holds given the absence of an adult male in the former. Moreover, in selecting beneficiaries, INCRA applied a point system whereby men between the ages of 18 and 60 were awarded one point, whereas women in this age group were awarded only 0.75 points, with the discrimination by sex maintained for chil- dren. This norm obviously discriminated against female-headed households as well as those households with large numbers of female children. The criteria regarding the length of experience in agricultural work discriminated against all women, since women’s agricultural work – whether as unpaid family labour or temporary wage workers – has largely been invisible and undervalued, and it has been difficult for women to prove their agricultural experience (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987; Siqueira 1991, 63; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 118–19).
The discrimination against women was such that INCRA functionaries as- sumed that women without a husband or partner were incapable of managing a
270	Carmen Diana Deere
farm unless they had a grown son, and it was not at all uncommon for women who found themselves widowed with young children to lose their right to remain in an agrarian reform settlement (Lavinas 1991, 6). Moreover, when a widow’s eldest son was named the beneficiary, she sometimes lost access to land when he married and formed his own household (Rufino and Albuquerque 1990, 367).
The main consequence of the constitutional reform establishing that women could be beneficiaries of the agrarian reform was an INCRA norm (SEASC 01 of October 1988), which provided for equal weight to be given to male and female labour in the point system utilized to select beneficiaries (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 119). The other beneficiary selection criteria, however, were not changed; thus female household heads continued to be discriminated against by the criteria favouring large families, and all women, by the criteria favouring agricultural experience. The share of female beneficiaries of the reform not only failed to increase after 1988, but actually fell slightly in the 1991–6 period, suggesting that the constitutional provisions guaranteeing women’s formal land rights had little direct impact.18
In order to further understand why women formed such a low proportion of the beneficiaries and the variations by region, I carried out interviews with the leaders of the rural social movements and INCRA officials in seven states during 2000: four North-eastern states, two characterized by high female participation in the agrarian reform (Pernambuco and Paraíba) and two with low female par- ticipation (Ceará and Rio Grande do Norte); two Southern states with low female participation (Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná); and Rio de Janeiro, characterized by the highest share of female participation in the agrarian reform of all states.19 In all states, the leaders of the social movements considered INCRA functionar- ies to play the determining role in the selection of agrarian reform beneficiaries, for it is INCRA that determines their eligibility and through a point system prioritizes those to be settled on each assentamento. In contrast, in interviews, INCRA officials stressed the role of the social movements as the key filter in determining this selection, particularly since the early 1990s when the pace of the agrarian reform has largely been determined by land occupations and the pressure of those within the encampments (acampamentos) which are subsequently formed. It is acknowledged that participation in the latter has become a precondition for beneficiary status.20
18	Women constituted 13 per cent of the beneficiaries of the agrarian reform settlements constituted before 1991; their share subsequently fell slightly, to 12.5 per cent. Calculated by the author from the 1 Censo da Reforma Agraria – 1996. 19	On the factors explaining the variation in women’s participation by state, see Deere (2001).
20	Nonetheless, since 1998 it is official INCRA policy to try ‘to break the monopoly in the determ- ination of the beneficiaries by the social movements in certain regions of the country, which impedes the exercise of the democratic right of access to the agrarian reform’ (INCRA 1998). During 2000, INCRA introduced a new modality for applying to become an agrarian reform beneficiary – by mail registration – with the forms available at all post offices throughout the country, as an attempt to weaken the role of the social movements in the agrarian reform.
Married Consensual union Sub-total
Single Separated Divorced Widowed Other Sub-total
Women
33.9 25.1 58.9
13.3 9.3 1.4 16.7 0.4 41.1
Men
63.7 22.3 86.0
9.6 2.2 0.5 1.5 0.2
14.0 100.0
(n = 124,134)
Total
59.9 22.6 82.5
10.1 3.1 0.6 3.5 0.2 17.5
100.0 (n = 142,182)
Total 100.0 (n = 18,048)
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	271
As previously noted, it is INCRA policy to bestow land rights on only one person per household, generally, the household head. Through 2000, there was no general INCRA directive on joint adjudication and titling of land to couples. As INCRA officials often state, justifying this policy, ‘the agrarian reform regis- try (cadastro) does not have space to put the name of the man and woman, there is only space for one name, that of the man’. As leaders of the social movements conclude from this, ‘thus it is INCRA itself which maintains the policy of dom- ination of women’.21 According to INCRA officials, the goal of the agrarian reform is to benefit families and by benefiting families – as represented by the household head – they are benefiting all the members within them. Moreover, they tend to assume that the families to be benefited are predominantly nuclear families, where both parents are present. These assumptions have worked to the detriment of female-headed households as well as single young people.22
The First Agrarian Reform Census sheds light on this matter. As Table 3 shows, the great majority, 58.9 per cent, of the female beneficiaries were married
Table 3. Marital status of the agrarian reform beneficiaries by sex, 1996
Source: Author’s calculations based on the 1 Censo da Reforma Agrária-1996.
21	Interviews with Nina Tonin, MST coordinator in Rio Grande do Sul, 8 November 2000, Porto Alegre, and Isabel Greem, MST-Paraná, 14 November 2000, Curitiba. Also see Rua and Abramovay (2000, 198–201). 22	These assumptions were most explicit in my interview with José Carlos de Araujo Vieira, INCRA Superintendent in Paraná, 13 November 2000, Curitiba. He was quite opposed to including single people as beneficiaries on the assentamento, irrespective of sex, saying that the goal of the agrarian reform was to ‘strengthen the family’. Among the different social movements, the MST has most strongly defended the inclusion of young, single people (who are usually the most active participants in the land occupations and encampments), particularly in the context of the collective adjudication of land. Interviews with Dulcineia Pavan, MST International Relations Office, 30 June 1998, São Paulo, and Fátima Ribeira, MST coordinator in Rio Grande do Norte, 1 October 2000, Fortaleza.
272	Carmen Diana Deere
or living in a consensual union.23 Only 41 per cent are female household heads. Among this group, widows predominate (16.7 per cent of the total), followed by single (9.3 per cent), separated (9.3 per cent) and divorced women (1.4 per cent). In contrast, the overwhelming majority of male beneficiaries are married or living in a consensual union, 82.5 per cent; only 10.1 per cent are single, with the remainder widowed, separated or divorced.
The data on marital status suggest that female household heads have been severely under-represented as beneficiaries. Nationally, women represent 12.2 per cent of rural household heads (Brasil 1994, Table 6.11), whereas they consti- tute only 5.2 per cent of the household heads on the assentamentos censused in 1996. This under-representation suggests that female household heads have been particularly discriminated against, irrespective of the 1988 constitutional provi- sions. The problem seems to be that INCRA continues to prefer to title a son (even if legally under-age) than to title a female household head, with single mothers often being asked ‘don’t you have a son who is a little older?’24 More- over, if a male beneficiary dies, INCRA continues to cede the land rights to the eldest son rather than to the widow, and if a female household head with land rights gets married, these are sometimes transferred to her spouse (Rua and Abramovay 2000, 198–9). But in addition, the low proportion of female house- hold heads among the beneficiaries suggests that the rural social movements did not champion their land rights very effectively, let alone prioritize these.
THE FAILURE TO PRESS FOR WOMEN’S LAND RIGHTS
Since its founding, the primary objective of the MST has been the struggle for agrarian reform and ‘a more just and egalitarian society’. The movement recog- nized that to accomplish this, ‘the participation of all rural workers’ was neces- sary, ‘. . . encouraging the participation of women at all levels’ (MST 1986, 44; Navarro 1996, 98). Women have been very visible in the MST-led land occupa- tions, where they are estimated to be between one-third to one-half of the par- ticipants, and they are often in the front lines in confrontations with the police. Moreover, women usually play a very active and key role in the encampments that result from these. Nonetheless, once the assentamentos are constituted, few women participate as actively and, until recently, there have been few women in their leadership or of the MST (Miele and Guimarães 1998; Rua and Abramovay
23	The main reason that married women appear on the registries as representing their family is because their husband or partner is for some reason ineligible to be a beneficiary of the reform (Rua and Abramovay 2000, 197). I only found evidence of married women demanding land rights in their own names in Pernambuco and Rio de Janeiro, usually in cases where they had been active in the land occupation while their husbands or partners had not and the latter had non-agricultural occupations (Deere 2001).
24	Interview with Wellington Gurgel, acting Superintendent of INCRA-CE, 28 September 2000, Fortaleza. A notorious case was one in Paraíba where INCRA ceded land rights to the son of a well- known CUT activist rather than to her, even though she qualified as a beneficiary and was demand- ing land rights in her own name. Interview with Genero Ieno Neto, researcher at Unitrabalho, Federal University of Paraíba, and others, 23 September 2000, João Pessoa.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	273
2000). As noted by women activists in the movement, ‘It is still observed that once the land is won, a large number of women in the assentamentos return to their own private work, on the individual plot, in the home and with the chil- dren. Because of this it is necessary that women organize themselves and parti- cipate in the struggle of the working class at all levels.’25
In its initial years, the MST gave little concern to gender issues: ‘According to the women on the assentamentos it is perceived that gender relations within the movement are considered to be of secondary importance when not considered a nuisance’ (Lechat 1996, 108). Nonetheless, a National Commission of Women of the MST was organized in the latter half of the 1980s and it lobbied for women’s groups to be created within the assentamentos and encampments; for a women’s commission to be created within each state; and for the state-level leadership as well as that within the assentamentos to support the organization of women within the movement.26
Most of these proposals were adopted as norms at the various national meet- ings so that in September 1989, when the MST published the first edition of its General Norms of the MST, it included a chapter on ‘The Articulation of Women’. Besides the objective of encouraging women’s participation at all levels, other objectives included (i) the struggle against all forms of discrimination as well as machismo; (ii) the organization of women’s groups to create the space for women to discuss their own specific problems; (iii) to encourage women’s participation in all forms of organization of the MST, including within the union movement, where rural women workers participate irrespective of their class position; and (iv) to organize a national-level women’s commission responsible for proposing policies for the movement (MST 1989a, chapter 8).
Training manuals for the 1989–1993 period stress the importance of increasing women’s participation and that to do so it was important to ‘create the condi- tions so that women and youth be able to participate in collective production and in all activities of the movement’, the first implicit reference to some of the impediments that might limit women’s more active participation.27 But through- out this period, no particular attention was given to women’s land rights. This lack of attention was due to several factors. The provisions for agrarian reform in the 1988 Constitution were considerably weaker than the legislation encom- passed in the 1985 National Agrarian Reform Plan of the New Republic (PNRA- NR), legislation which the landlord’s lobby, the UDR, successfully watered down in this intervening period. After 1988, the lobbying efforts of the MST and other progressive forces focused on attaining favourable implementing legis- lation for the limited range of expropriations allowed under the Constitution. In addition, under the Collor Government (1990–2), not one estate was expropriated
25	Comissão Nacional de Mulheres do MST, ‘Avançar na luta’, Journal Sem Terra (São Paulo), No. 72, April, 1988, 18. 26	Ibid. 27	Item 48, Part III, ‘Desafios da luta pela reforma agrária’; Item 80, ‘Perspectivas para o MST – 1989/1993’, in MST (1989b).
274	Carmen Diana Deere
for being in the social interest, and actions under the subsequent Government of Itamar Franco (1992–4) were also minimal, leading the MST to step up its land occupations (de Medeiros 1989, 166–98).
The lack of attention by the MST to women’s land rights, particularly to the joint adjudication and titling of land to couples, is also related to the fact that throughout this period a priority of the MST was the collective adjudication and titling of land, rather than its division and formal distribution to individual families: ‘The titling of land should be collective, in the name of all the assentados, independently of whether production is carried out collectively or individually, thus guaranteeing usufruct rights, but that the land cannot be alienated.’28 With the struggle for land rights defined as a collective issue, there was little room for discussion of the individual land rights of women.
Rather than being strengthened, the National Commission of Women of the MST apparently ceased to function after 1989 as women were told that if they were interested in gender issues they should also join other organizations, such as the MMTRs.29 Gender issues were seen as divisive issues for the movement, particularly at a moment (during the Collor Government) when the struggle for agrarian reform was becoming even more contentious, and in some cases, viol- ent. The primary concern was for the unity of the movement – a struggle that demanded unity from all family members.30 The fear that gender issues would be divisive to the movement is evident in a 1993 document that states explicitly that the incorporation of women into the movement should be treated as a class issue and not as a gender issue.31 According to Article 45 of the 1993 Basic Document, the movement should ‘consider issues specific to women and their participation as an integral part of the demands of the organization, treating these as class rather than gender issues’ (MST 1996, 5). But in Article 152 of this same docu- ment, it was reiterated that since it was an objective of the movement to encour- age women’s role in production and their participation in cooperatives, it was also necessary ‘to struggle against the inequality and traditionalism which exists among the peasantry’ (MST 1996, 6).
The movement went a step further in recognizing the specificity of gender subordination in its Agrarian Program of 1995, approved at the Third National Congress. A section was devoted to ‘The Situation of Women in the Country- side’, which included recognition that it was often women who suffered the most from the ‘miserable living standards’ in the countryside, including the double day. ‘In addition, there is a generalized situation of prejudice and discrimination
28	Ibid., Item 105. 29	Interview with Dulcineia Pavan, MST International Relations Office, op. cit., and confirmed in interviews with members of the national-level Gender Collective, Nina Tonin, MST-RS, 8 Novem- ber 2000, Porto Alegre, and Isabel Greem, MST-Paraná, 14 November 2000, Curitiba. 30	Interview by the author and Magdalena León with Nalu Faria and Miriam Nobre, SOF (Sempreviva Organização Feminista), 27 June 1998, São Paulo. 31	This debate over the relationship of gender and class analysis was also carried out within the union movement in the late 1980s and early 1990s, particularly the CUT, but resolved much earlier in favour of the need to integrate the analysis of gender, class and race. See Lavinas and Cappellin (1991).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	275
due to the practice of machismo in rural areas that forces an inferior position on women’ (MST 1996, 6). But the general objective regarding gender equality adopted at this congress was similar to previous statements: ‘To struggle against all forms of social discrimination and to aim for the egalitarian participation of women’ (MST 1996, 6).32
Turning to the rural unions in this period, rural women’s paid maternity leave, together with the need for recognition of the occupation of rural women workers and the right to retirement benefits, remained among the main demands of rural women at state congresses of the federations affiliated with CONTAG in the early 1990s, at the First National Meeting of Rural Women Workers of CONTAG in 1991, and at the Fifth CONTAG Congress of that same year. The need to incorporate more women into the unions as well as in the leadership also remained important issues. New issues taken up in this period, reflecting the growing feminist discourse by women within the unions, included the problems of the double day and the demand for sexual freedom (Siqueira 1991, 70–1). Among the demands made by the agrarian reform commission at the Fifth CONTAG Congress (where women now constituted 10 per cent of the del- egates), besides a strongly worded demand for the deepening of the agrarian reform, was that women be given land titles in their own names, or jointly with their spouse or partner, suggesting that women’s land rights were not being ignored all together (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 135–6).
In 1989, the CUT organized its first national meeting on the Working Women’s Question, which included both urban and rural women. The next year it organ- ized a Rural Women’s Commission linked to its National Department of Rural Workers to better address what was considered to be the low participation of rural women in its affiliated unions and the general lack of recognition of rural women as workers (CUT 1991, 23–4). Among the main demands of rural women at the Second National Meeting of Women Workers of the CUT in 1991 were the implementation of retirement benefits for rural women, a call for re- cognition of the profession of rural women workers, and that women’s names appear on agrarian reform land titles (Godinho 1995, 165), suggesting that they too continued to give importance to attaining women’s effective land rights. But for neither the CUT or CONTAG in this period were women’s land rights the foremost issue.
In partnership with the CUT’s Rural Women’s Commission, the AIMTR-Sul organized a major campaign around the 1991 population census to have rural women declare themselves as rural workers instead of as housewives or unpaid family workers in the questionnaire (Lavinas 1991, 4). This campaign was launched with a caravan of a thousand or so rural women from 15 states marching on Brasilia for International Women’s Day celebrations in March 1992. Among their other demands were that Collor’s veto of paid maternity leave for unpaid family workers be overturned. In addition, they demanded that (i) retirement
32	See www.mst.org.br/historico/historia7.html (accessed 18 April 2001).
276	Carmen Diana Deere
benefits be paid immediately to rural workers; (ii) child care centres be set up for rural women workers; (iii) priority attention be given to women’s integral health care; (iv) an end be brought to violence against women; and (v) that the consti- tutional provision for agrarian reform be regulated (Cappellin 1992, 59; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 132). The AIMTR-Sul also established an office in Brasilia to lobby for paid maternity leave and was eventually successful in getting the national congress to pass the Bill in 1993 (ANMTR 1997, 5).
In order to foster the participation of women in the unions, the CUT approved the adoption of a quota system in 1993, so that 30 per cent of national, state and regional leaders be women.33 The first leadership under the new quota system was elected at its 1994 Congress, with nine women elected among the 32 national leaders (Godinho 1996, 52). A decision was also made at this congress to fuse the Rural Department of CUT with CONTAG, if CONTAG agreed to join the CUT, a move subsequently taken. This led to the Rural Women’s Commission of the CUT being disbanded at the national level, leading to several years of chaos and a weakening in the work with rural women.34
In 1995, another national meeting was held in São Paulo to create a national-level network of rural women, the Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais (ANMTR). This meeting brought together women from 17 states and this time they succeeded in creating a loosely structured, national organization. Among the resolutions passed at this meeting was to focus on actions to secure in practice the rights won in the constitution such as paid retirement and health care, and to carry out coordinated actions under one theme on 8 March, international women’s day. Their primary activity has been a national campaign to obtain official documents for rural women under the slogan, ‘To have personal documents and those of workers is but one step in the conquest of our citizenship’ (ANMTR 1997, 26–7).35 Of an estimated 18.5 million rural women workers, only some three million currently have their profession officially recognized, a precondition for them to be eligible for social security benefits (ANMTR no date). Several MST women leaders participated in the organization of the founding meeting of the ANMTR in late 1995. They consider that there
33	A quota was considered necessary, for in 1989 women represented only 7 per cent of rural union leaders, and 60 per cent of the rural unions affiliated with the CUT had directorates which were all male. Moreover, in the national leadership there were only two women out of 32 members (Godinho 1996, 49).
34	Interview by the author and Magdalena León with Lena Lavinas, researcher at IPEA and former advisor to the CUT on gender issues, 18 June 1998, Rio de Janeiro. 35	The number of documents required for official transactions in Brazil is no small matter. Neces- sary personal documents include a birth certificate; a marriage certificate; an identity card; a voter registration card; and an employment card (carteira do trabalho). A birth certificate is required to obtain any of the other personal documents. In addition, in order to have one’s profession registered and thus to be eligible for social security benefits, at least one of the following is required: a union card; a land title (or INCRA certification that one’s name is on the registry of an assentamento); a rental con- tract for land; and registration in the sales declaration form of peasant producers or on the income tax registration form. ANMTR’s campaign materials stress the importance of women having their name on land titles as both a means and an end of citizenship (ANMTR 1997, 6–20; ANMTR no date).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	277
was a qualitative leap forward within the MST with respect to the discussion of gender issues after this meeting.36 They organized the first national meeting of MST women militants shortly thereafter, leading to the founding of the Na- tional Collective of Women of the MST in May 1996. The Collective soon published a pamphlet, ‘The Question of Women in the MST’, with the sub-title, ‘Participating without fear of being a woman’. This document clearly points to the gap in MST theory and practice, highlighting how women were not suffi- ciently represented in the leadership. Moreover, although a basic principle of the movement since 1989 had been to end the discrimination against women and to promote their participation, it concludes that this had not been achieved in prac- tice (MST 1996, 3–5).
In this publication, women’s land rights are directly addressed for the first time. Among the proposed actions is that the organization ‘guarantee that women get land titles’ and that in the associations and cooperatives on the assentamentos it be guaranteed that women participate on equal terms with men (MST 1996, 7). It was stressed that a major campaign was necessary if women’s names were to be secured, along with their husbands or partners, in the assentamento registry and on land titles. Moreover, it was recognized that a pre-condition for women to be agrarian reform beneficiaries was that they have the required personal documents. Hence, they recommended that the movement strongly support and participate in the documentation campaign being organized at that time by the ANMTR (MST 1996, 9–10). But up to this point (1996, when the first agrarian reform census was undertaken), no other efforts had been taken by the MST to encourage women’s participation as direct beneficiaries of the agrarian reform.
INCREASING THE PACE OF THE REFORM AND OF FEMALE BENEFICIARIES
The pace of the Brazilian agrarian reform stepped up in the mid-1990s, largely as a result of the actions of the landless movement. By mid-1999 there were 3958 assentamentos nationally, with 475,801 beneficiary families holding almost 23 mil- lion hectares of land.37 Compared with the 1996 First Agrarian Reform Census figures, the number of assentamentos had increased by 2533 and beneficiary fami- lies by 316,023. While the pace of the agrarian reform under the Government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso compares favourably with previous administrations, the land area in agrarian reform settlements constitutes only around 6 per cent of the land reported in farms in the 1985 agricultural census, and the number of families that benefited equivalent to only between 5 and 10 per cent of the number of landless families in the mid-1980s. The majority of the assentamentos resulted
36	Interview with Itelvina Maria Masioli, member of the MST National Directorate from Mato Grosso and one of two MST representatives in the national commission of the ANMTR, at a national seminar of the ANMTR, 23 June 1998, Brasilia. 37	http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec/assentam/assent4.html (downloaded 18 November 2000) which, in turn, is drawn from ‘Banco de Dados da Luta pela Terra’, UNESP/MST, as of June 1999.
278	Carmen Diana Deere
from land take-overs led by the MST, but in this period many of the unions affiliated with CONTAG also engaged in land occupations, as did groups sup- ported by the CPT in the Northeast.38
Preliminary data for eight states suggest that the increased pace of the agrarian reform has been accompanied by an increase in the share of women beneficiaries. Between 1996 and 2000, the number of agrarian reform beneficiaries more than doubled in five of the eight states, while substantial increases were reported in the other three. The share of female beneficiaries increased significantly in Rio de Janeiro (to 23 per cent) and substantially in Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte and Santa Catarina (states which had been at the low end of the spectrum in 1996) and Paraíba. The share of women remained about the same in Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Sul, and actually decreased in Paraná, which in both periods reported the lowest share of female beneficiaries. Before commenting on these state-level trends, it is relevant to first consider the changes that have taken place in the gender discourse of the MST.
Recall that it was only in 1996, when the National Women’s Collective was constituted, that women’s land rights were addressed by the MST. In 1999, this forum was reconstituted as the National Gender Collective, with an equal number of men and women as members, and the plan was for similar structures to be created at the state and sub-regional levels. According to one of its members, the mandate of the women’s collective had never been very clear and what had become apparent was the need for a ‘cultural revolution’ in the relations between men and women: ‘It has to be a problem of both men and women and in all of its dimensions.’39
Several factors explain the greater opening to gender issues by the MST at this time. For one, there was growing recognition within the leadership of the tend- ency for women to withdraw from active participation once the assentamentos were constituted. The exclusion of most women from land rights has meant their exclusion from participation in the associations and cooperatives that make the crucial decisions governing production plans and infrastructure and social investments, etc., on the assentamentos. As explained by one MST leader:
38
The fact women’s names are not on the land registry is a major problem . . . for she is not the landowner, and then, for example, what happens when technical assistance is to be given? The technician arrives and con- vokes the owners to a meeting. And who is the owner officially? It’s the husband. So only he goes to the meeting to receive technical assistance. Only he goes to discuss the use of resources . . . And that’s how women are excluded during all the key moments . . .40
As of August 2001, there were 1490 MST-led assentamentos with 108,849 families. Between 1990 and late 1999, some 368,325 families had participated in MST-led occupations and been registered on their encampments. In August 2001, there were 75,730 families residing in 585 MST encampments awaiting INCRA to distribute land to them. Drawn from http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec.html (downloaded 7 December 2001). 39	Interview with Marina dos Santos, coordinator of MST-RJ, 28 August 2000. 40	Interview with Isabel Greem, MST-PR, op. cit.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	279
It is increasingly recognized that this exclusion is not only prejudicial to wom- en’s personal development, but also to the well-being of the assentamento and of the movement. In some cases, the non-participation of women has been associ- ated with a general apathy within the assentamento for collective endeavours, in turn, related to the general lack of participatory structures. In other cases, it became apparent that the exclusion of women from the land registry has gener- ated practical problems, such as when, due to the absence of the husband for whatever reason, women were unable to get credit for production purposes.
Also, the problem of separations among couples has been gaining attention. The usual case is for the person with land rights, the husband, to remain on the land. The wife often has no choice but to leave with the children, for ‘in separa- tion, the women loses all rights’. Sometimes she has to start the process all over, going to another encampment in hopes of obtaining land even though she has already spent years in the struggle. While sometimes the man is willing to leave so that his wife and children can remain in their home, this presents difficulties; since the land is in his name, officially, he cannot again be an agrarian reform beneficiary.41
One of the first activities of the Gender Collective was the publication of a training pamphlet consisting of eight topics for sessions designed to reflect on gender relations (MST 2000). One of the topics is ‘Women and Agrarian Re- form’, and includes the following point with respect to women’s land rights:42 ‘In the struggle for land, the occupation, the encampment, mobilizations, the whole family participates, thus the conquest of land is a conquest of the whole family. There is nothing more just that when INCRA comes to do the land registry, that the name of both be registered . . .’ (MST 2000, 57–8). This point implies that the joint adjudication of land to couples is now MST policy and was so confirmed by women in the MST leadership.43 Nonetheless, this demand still does not form part of the MST’s public discourse.
The ambigious position of the MST with respect to women’s land rights was evident at the March 2000 mobilization of rural women workers jointly coord- inated by the ANMTR and the MST. During 13–17 March, some 3000 rural women from 24 states camped out in Brasilia, in what was termed ‘the first encampment of rural women’. Among the demands was the need to deepen the agrarian reform, but there was nothing concerning women’s land rights.44 This ambiguity was also apparent in the conclusions presented at the MST’s Fourth National Congress in Brasilia in August 2000. Among the 12 main policies
41	Group interview by the author and Emma Siliprandi with women militants in the MST Regional Sarandi, 9 November 2000, Pontão, RS, and interview with Isabel Greem, MST-PR, op. cit. Also see Rua and Abramovay (2000, 201–3). 42	This section of the pamphlet is drawn from the ‘Political Directives of the MST on the Participa- tion of Women’, which was approved by the National Coordination of the MST in January 1999; e-mail to the author from Gema Galgani, gender advisor to the MST-Ceará, 8 May 2001.
43	Interviews with Fátima Ribeira, MST-RN, op. cit., and Nina Tonin, MST-RGS, op. cit. 44	Boletím Semanal da Secretaria Agrária Nacional do PT, 18–24 março 2000, ano III, No. 145, Anexo 3, in www.pt.org.br/san/3milmulheres.htm
280	Carmen Diana Deere
reaffirmed at the congress was ‘to redeem and implement the gender question in our policies and in all activities of the MST and in society’.45 But nothing specific was said about women’s land rights. Nonetheless, one of the important recent changes within the MST is that women now constitute nine out of the 21 mem- bers of its National Directorate.46
What became apparent in my interviews is that the internalization of gender concerns is taking place within the MST at different paces in different states. In certain states, there is a notable change in the gender discourse taking place at the base, often associated with an increase in the number of women in leadership positions on the assentamentos or within the MST’s sub-regional or state leader- ship. This evolving process may account, in part, for the increase in the share of female agrarian reform beneficiaries in states such as Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, Santa Catarina and Rio de Janeiro. I do not think it is coincidental that women are the state coordinators of the MST in these states; moreover, in Ceará, women now constitute the majority of the MST state leadership. Also Ceará and Rio Grande do Sul are among the leaders in implementing some of the new policies outlined in MST (2000). The retrograde in my case studies is the state of Paraná, where the share of women agrarian reform beneficiaries has actually fallen since 1996, from 7.2 per cent to 6.8 per cent, in the period when the total number of beneficiaries more than tripled. The MST in this state is also a laggard with respect to gender issues. Only in October 2000 did the state directorate (includ- ing only two women out of 18) take up the discussion of gender issues and the state gender collective has yet to be created. Besides the lack of attention by the MST to women’s land rights, the data on women’s participation in the agrarian reform may also reflect the very conservative nature of this state, characterized by continued landlord dominance and much weaker social movements as com- pared with other Southern states.
Turning to CONTAG, not until 1997 (three years after it joined the CUT and the Rural Women’s Commission of the CUT was disbanded nationally) did it organize a national commission on women. By then, there were on the order of two million rural women affiliated to rural unions (Abramovay and da Silva 2000, 355). That same year CONTAG held the First National Plenary of Rural Women Workers, where the main focus of discussion was whether a 30 per cent quota for women should be mandated in union elections, and securing rural women’s social security benefits. Nonetheless, a demand of the meeting with respect to the agrarian reform was that women be included in the land registry on the assentamentos (CONTAG 1997, 14). At its Seventh Congress in 1998, the union adopted the 30 per cent female quota and created the position of Coordinator of the National Commission of Women as part of its Executive Directorate. All
45	‘Linhas politicas reafirmadas no IV Congresso Nacional do MST’, in www.mst.org.br/historico/ congresso (downloaded 18 April 2001). 46	Interview with Vilanisi Oliveira da Silva, MST Coordinator in Ceará, 27 September 2000, Fortaleza. Also see ‘Entrevista-Fátima Ribeiro’, Jornal do Commercio (Recife), 19 August 2001, p. 5.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	281
told, 47 specific actions relevant to rural women were approved, including that in the land registry of the assentamentos the name of each member of a couple be included (CONTAG et al. 1998, 124).
The year 2000 yielded some progress in terms of advancing women’s land rights. As part of the national coordination for the World March of Women,47 CONTAG launched events in Brazil with the celebration of International Women’s Day on 8 March. More than 36,000 women were reported to have participated in local events throughout the country and set the stage for the planned march on Brasilia, the Marcha das Margaridas, on 10 August (the anni- versary of the assassination of North-eastern union leader Margarida Alves). The slogan of the march was ‘Against hunger, poverty and violence’. In the flyers and pamphlets distributed prior to the march, a recurring theme was ‘the valor- ization of the participation of women in the agrarian reform’, but without land rights being made explicit.48 In the ‘Demands of the Marcha das Margaridas’, prepared for the 10 August event by the coordinating committee, nonetheless, women’s land rights did figure explicitly.49 The first among nine major categor- ies of demands was for state support of a national documentation campaign aimed at rural women. A second was access by rural women workers ‘to the public policies of agrarian reform’, specifically, ‘That a norm be issued so that in the documentation of the assentamento the parcel be adjudicated in the name of the couple or in the name of the woman when she was single’ (CONTAG et al. 2000, 6).
With an estimated 15,000–20,000 rural women converging on Brasilia, the coordinating committee was received by President Fernando Henrique Cardoso and INCRA President Orlando Muniz on 9 August, to whom they presented their list of 81 specific demands. It was reported in the press that ‘According to Muniz, the institute is going to change its titling of rural properties so that these appear in the name of the couple and not just the man, correcting the distortion denounced by rural women workers . . . INCRA is going to study the other demands.’50
47	The 2000 World March of Women resulted from a proposal from the women’s movement in Quebec, Canada, to organize women world-wide between 8 March and 17 October (International Day in the Struggle against Poverty), culminating with a delegation presenting its demands before the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and the United Nations.
48	See the pamphlet distributed by CONTAG, Boletim Informativo (no date) ‘Marcha Das Margaridas: Contra a fome, a pobreza e a violencia – dia 10 de Agosto’. 49	The Coordinating Committee for the march, besides CONTAG and its affiliated state federa- tions and municipal-level unions, included the CUT, MMTR-NE, Movimento Nacional de Quebradeiras de Coco, Conselho Nacional de Seringueiros, Movimento de Luta pela Terra, União Brasileira de Mulheres and the NGOs Sempre Viva Organização Feminista (SOF), Associação Agroecologica Tijupa, FASE, and ESPLAR. Notably absent was the MST as well as the ANMTR. Tensions between CONTAG and the MST were high at this point over disagreement on the degree to which they should cooperate with government programmes, such as the proposed Land Bank. The ANMTR (in contrast to one of its constituent organizations, the MMTR-NE) usually follows the lead of the MST on such political questions.
50	Pagina Agrária (Boletim Semanal da Secretaria Agrária Nacional do PT) # 165, 12–18 August 2000, in www.pt.org.br/san
282	Carmen Diana Deere
The expedition of Resolution No. 6 of 22 February 2001 by the National Council on Sustainable Rural Development (CNDRS, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Rural Sustentavel) of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (MDA, Ministerio do Desenvolvimento Agrário) was the outcome of the nego- tiating process between the coordinating committee of the march and the inter- ministerial group charged with following up on their demands. According to the Ministry, this resolution provides for a ‘gender perspective in all the administra- tive procedures of the MDA’, and there are to be changes in ‘the selection norms to facilitate the access of women to the benefits of the agrarian reform’.51
Subsequently, the ‘Affirmative Action Program to Promote the Equality of Opportunities and Treatment of Men and Women’ was institutionalized within the Ministry.52 The new office was charged with revamping all criteria and norms to facilitate rural women’s access to land and to titles, credit, training, technical assistance and social security benefits. This objective was made more concrete by another directive, which established a target for 2001 of 30 per cent female representation in the distribution of credits within the family agriculture support programme, PRONAF (Programa Nacional de Fortalecimiento da Agricultura Familiar) and the Land Bank (Fundo do Terras e da Reforma Agrária) as well as in PRONAF training and extension programmes.53 In addition, a goal of the Ministry became to progressively attain 30 per cent female representation in its administrative structure.54
With respect to INCRA, one of the first accomplishments of the Affirmative Action office was to redesign almost all of the forms utilized in the agrarian reform beneficiary selection process so that the name of both spouses or partners appear on the first page of the form as co-applicants or beneficiaries. (Formerly, the names of wives and companions appeared on the second page, heading the list of the dependents of the head of household.) In August 2001, I found that only one form remained to be changed, a crucially important one, the official ‘List of Beneficiaries’ on each assentamento. Following traditional practice, this listing still included only one person per household. During my visit to MDA/ INCRA, steps were put in motion to assure that the name of the couple appear in this crucial record of beneficiaries.55
While a number of gender-progressive measures were thus adopted during 2001, it is worth noting that no specific mention has been made of female house- hold heads. In order to end the discrimination to which these have traditionally been subject, other Latin American countries have found it necessary to employ
51	Note that the resolution does not explicitly establish joint adjudication and titling of land, but rather focuses on nondiscrimination against women. It does provide for women to be considered as rural workers or agriculturalists in the land registry, rather than the traditional designation of house- wives. See Diario Oficial da Uniõ, 5 March 2001, and www.desenvolvimentoagrario.gov.br/mulher/ noticias (accessed 10 March 2001).
52	MDA, Portaria No. 33, 8 March 2001 (photocopy). 53	MDA, Portaria No. 121, 22 May 2001 (photocopy). 54	MDA, Portaria No. 120, 22 May 2001 (photocopy). 55	Interview with Lenita Nonan, Special Advisor to the Minister and Coordinator of the Affirmat- ive Action Program, and MDA/INCRA staff, 8 August 2001, Brasilia.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	283
positive action or reverse discrimination, making these an explicit priority in State programmes involved in the redistribution of assets. This has usually been accomplished by assigning them more points in beneficiary selection criteria, justified on the grounds that this favoured treatment is necessary to compensate for the discrimination to which they were previously subject (Deere and León 2001, chapter 6). Given the fact that the majority of female beneficiaries of Brazil’s agrarian reform up through 1996 were wives or partners, rather than female household heads, the lack of specific attention to female household heads remains a lacunae in its policies to end gender discrimination.
Nonetheless, Brazil is the pioneer among Latin American countries in assign- ing rural women a target quota of 30 per cent in the credit being made available for the purchase of land under the market-assisted agrarian reform. The Land Bank is the subject of intense controversy, seen by its critics as a means of under- mining the federal government’s responsibility for agrarian reform.56 It is ques- tionable whether a programme that requires credit-worthiness as a pre-condition for participation and that expects farmers to be able to repay their mortgages on near commercial terms under neoliberal policies is the best way to guarantee gender equity in the acquisition of land. But this topic awaits further research.
CONCLUSION
This review of the issue of gender and land rights within the Brazilian rural social movements leads to the following conclusions. Most of the credit for raising the issue of women’s access to land within the agrarian reform rests with women within the leadership of the rural unions, both CONTAG and CUT. Their efforts, combined with the organizational activity of rural women within the local, state and regional-level MMTRs, and those of the state (at the prodding of the CNDR), largely explain why women’s land rights became an issue in the period preceding the constitutional reform. That they were successful in obtain- ing women’s formal land rights in the 1988 Constitution is largely due to the coalition of women within the State and political parties working in concert with a unified urban and rural women’s movement in support of attaining an expan- sion of women’s rights in the Constitution. Women’s formal land rights in the agrarian reform were achieved as a by-product of the effort to end discrimination against women in all its dimensions.
The achievement of formal equality in land rights, nonetheless, did not lead to increases in the share of female beneficiaries in the agrarian reform. INCRA did modify its most explicitly discriminatory practice, the assignment of fewer points to women than men in the beneficiary selection process. Other criteria, however, continued to discriminate against female household heads. Moreover, although joint adjudication and titling was now a legal possibility, the fact that it was an option rather than mandatory meant that it was simply not implemented.
56	‘Cédula da Terra: mais uma mentira do governo’, Jornal Sem Terra, December 1998, 10–11; also see ‘Artigos reforma agrária’, http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec.htm (accessed 18 November 2000).
284	Carmen Diana Deere
I have argued that the relatively low share of female agrarian reform benefici- aries in the mid-1990s also reflects the fact that attaining women’s effective land rights was not a top priority of any of the rural social movements. While women’s participation in rural unions continued to grow over this period, and women’s land rights were on the agenda at most national meetings and congresses, land rights were one issue among many. The priorities of the autonomous rural women’s movement were perhaps even more varied and diffuse than that of the unions. CONTAG, CUT and the MMTRs all gave greater attention to the pressing issue of the recognition of rural women’s profession in the context of their attaining social security benefits, than to women’s land rights. This is un- derstandable given the fact that this was the issue that united all rural women, independent of their class position, uniting the heterogenous membership of the unions and autonomous women’s movement. But it also created a vacuum in terms of the effective championing of women’s land rights since, throughout this period, the main social movement determining the pace and content of the agrarian reform was the MST. Of all the rural social movements, as I have shown, it had the most muted discourse on gender, one that essentially consid- ered class and gender issues to be incompatible. Taken together, these factors largely explain why women formed such a relatively low proportion of the beneficiaries of agrarian reform in the mid-1990s.
The expansion of the agrarian reform in the second half of the 1990s – a result associated with the territorial consolidation of the MST as a national organiza- tion, the radicalization of the unions on the agrarian reform issue and a surge in the number of land occupations – is associated with an increase in the share of female beneficiaries in certain states. I have suggested that this trend is partly attributable to the gradual opening within the MST to gender concerns, which itself reflects the slow, but incremental participation of women within the MST leadership at all levels, and the pressing need to consolidate the assentamentos.
As noted in the Introduction, recognition of the importance of women’s land rights generally takes place for two reasons, the productionist and the empower- ment arguments. The opening of the MST to gender concerns in the late 1990s is related to growing acceptance of the productionist argument; that is, that the failure to recognize women’s land rights is prejudicial to the development and consolidation of the assentamentos and thus the movement. It is now recognized that joint adjudication and titling to couples is a precondition for women’s par- ticipation in assentamento assemblies, associations and cooperatives, and that their participation in these leads to better results, both for the community and for women. There is also growing awareness that land rights strengthen women’s bargaining position and thus their ability to defend and pursue their own pract- ical and strategic gender interests. Given the MST’s commitment to social and gender equality, there is thus growing acceptance of the empowerment argu- ment: that is, that gender relations must change which, in turn, requires increas- ing women’s bargaining power within the household and community as complementary and interactive measures. But this is a much slower process and one that has yet to reach fruition.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	285
REFERENCES
Abramovay, Miriam and Rocicleide da Silva, 2000. ‘As Relações de Gênero na Confederação Nacional de Trabalhadores Rurais (CONTAG)’. In Trabalho e Gênero: Mudanças, Permanencias e Sesafios, ed. Maria Isabel Baltar da Rocha, 347–75. São Paulo: editora 34.
Agarwal, Bina, 1994. A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Albuquerque, Ligia and Isaura Rufino, 1987. ‘Elementos que Dificultam a Participação da Mulher no Processo da Reforma Agrária’. In Anais do Seminario Mulheres Rurais: Identidades e na Luta Política, ed. Lela Lavinas, 320–39. Rio de Janeiro: IPPUR/UFRJ.
Alvarez, Sonia, 1990. Engendering Democracy in Brazil: Women’s Movements in Transition Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
ANMTR, 1997. ‘Primer Encontro Nacional 1995’. Mimeo. Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul: Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
ANMTR, no date. ‘Proposta de Implementacão da Campanha da Documentação a Nível Nacional, Regional, e Municipal’. Internal memo. Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul: Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
Barsted, Leila de Andrade Linhares, 1994. ‘Em Busca do Tempo Perdido: Mulher e Políticas Publicas no Brasil 1983–1993’. Revista Estudos Feministas (CIEC/Escola De Comunicação UFRJ), Special Number, October: 38–53.
Brasil, 1990. Censos Economicos de 1985, Censo Agropecuarino. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE. Brasil, 1994. Censo Demográfico 1991. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE. Brumer, Anita, 2000. ‘Gênero e Agricultura: a Situação da Mulher na Agricultura do
RGS’. Paper presented to the XXII International Congress of the Latin American
Studies Association, 16–18 March, Miami. Cappellin, Paola, 1989. ‘Silenciosas e Combativas: as Contribuições das Mulheres na
Estrutura Sindical do Nordeste, 1976/1986’. In Rebeldia e Submissão: Estudos sobre a Condição Feminina, eds Albertina de Oliveira Costa and Cristina Buschini, 225–98. São Paulo: Ed. Vertice and Fundação Carlos Chagas.
Cappellin, Paola, 1992. ‘Mulheres Invisiveis’. Teoria & Debate, 19: 59–63. Cappellin, Paola, 1997. ‘Os Movimentos de Trabalhadoras e a Sociedade Brasileira’. In História das Mulheres no Brasil, ed. Maria Del Priore, 640–66. São Paulo: Ed. Contexto
e Editora UNESP. Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brasilia:
Presidência da República, Secretaria de Comunicação Social. Carneiro, Maria José, 1994. ‘Mulheres no Campo: Notas sobre sua Participação Política e
a Condição Social do Gênero’. Estudos, Sociedade e Agricultura, 2: 11–22. CFEMEA, 1996. Guia dos Direitos da Mulher. Rio de Janeiro: Rosa dos Tempos, 2nd edn. CONTAG, 1988. Primer Seminario Nacional da Trabalhadora Rural, Brasilia, dias 27, 28 e 29
de julho de 1988. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura. CONTAG, 1997. ‘Plenaria Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, 19–22 março 1997, Relatorio Preliminar’. Memo. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores
na Agricultura. CONTAG, FETAGs, STRs, 1998. Anais: 7 Congreso Nacional de Trabalhadores e
Trabalhadoras Rurais, 30 março-1 avril 1999. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos
Trabalhadores na Agricultura. CONTAG, FETAGs, STRs, CUT, MMTR-NE, MNQC, CNS, MLT, UBM, SOF,
TIJUPÁ, FASE, ESPLAR, 2000. ‘Pauta de Reivindicações da Marcha das Margaridas, Mobilização das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais em adesão a Marcha Mundial de
286	Carmen Diana Deere
Mulheres 2000’. Memo, 10 August. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores
na Agricultura. CUT (Central Única dos Trabalhadores), 1991. Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais: Participação
e Luta Sindical. São Paulo: Departamento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Rurais, Comissão
Nacional da Questão da Mulher Trabalhadora. da Luz, Valdemar, P., 1996. Curso de Direito Agrario, Contem o Estatuto da Terra. Porto
Alegre: Sagra-DC Luzzatto, Eds, 2nd edn. Deere, Carmen Diana, 2001. ‘Gender, Land Rights and Rural Social Movements: Re-
gional Differences in the Brazilian Agrarian Reform’. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Congress of the Latin American Studies Association, 6–8 September 2001, Miami. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 1998. ‘Mujeres, Derechos a la Tierra y
Contrareformas en América Latina’. Debate Agrario (Lima), 27: 129–54. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 1999. ‘Towards a Gendered Analysis of the Brazilian Agrarian Reform’. Latin American Studies Consortium of New England,
Occasional Papers No. 16, April. University of Connecticut. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 2001. Empowering Women: Land and Property
Rights in Latin America. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh. EMBRATER, 1986. ‘I Congresso Nacional de Mulheres Rurais, Brasilia, DF, 25 al 28 de novembro de 1986, Conclusões’. Memo. Brasilia: Ministerio de Agricultura, Serviço
de Extensão Rural. Fernandes, Bernardo Macano, 1996. MST: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Ed.
Hucitec. FETAG-RS (Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas do Rio Grande do Sul), 1998. Revista
da Trabalhadora Rural: FETAG/RS (Porto Alegre), Ano 1, no. 1. FETAPE, 1986. ‘Relatorio, Quarto Encontro de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Sertão- PE, em preparação ao Primer Encontro Estadual’. Mimeo. November. Serra Talhada:
Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de Pernambuco. FETAPE, 1988. ‘Relatorio, Quinto Encontro de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Sertão
Central’. Mimeo. December. Serra Talhada: Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de
Pernambuco. Godinho Delgado, Maria Berenice, 1995. ‘A Organização das Mulheres na Central Única
dos Trabalhadores: a Comissão Nacional sobre a Mulher Trabalhadora’. Master’s the-
sis, Pontificia Universidade Catolica de São Paulo. Godinho, Delgado, Maria Berenice, 1996. ‘Mais Mulheres na Direção da CUT’. Textos
para Debate Internacional (CUT), 49–58. Hall, Anthony L., 1990. ‘Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil’. In Agrarian Reform and
Grass Roots Development: Ten Case Studies, eds Roy Prosterman, Mary Temple and
Timothy Hanstad, 205–34. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. Hammond, John, 1999. ‘Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’
Movement’. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18 (4): 468–89. INCRA/CRUB/UnB (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária), 1998. Primer
Censo da Reforma Agraria do Brasil. Brasilia: Ministério Extraordinario de Política
Fundiaria. INCRA, Gabinete do Ministro Extraordinario da Política Fundiaria, 1998. ‘Cadastramento
e Seleção Nacional’. Mimeo. June. Brasilia. Lavinas, Lena, ed., 1987. Anais do Seminario Mulheres Rurais: Identidades e na Luta Política.
Rio de Janeiro: IPPUR/UFRJ. Lavinas, Lena, 1991. ‘Produtoras Rurais: a Novidade dos Anos 90’. Reforma Agraria
(Campinas, BZ), May/June: 4–9.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	287
Lavinas, Lena and Paola Cappellin, 1991. ‘Gênero e Classe: Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais’. Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais (Revista da CUT, Departamento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Rurais), 28–41.
Lechat, Noelle Marie Paule, 1996. ‘Relações de Gênero em Assentamentos do MST (RS): a Participação da Mulher na Produção e Reprodução em Unidades Familiares e Coletivas’. In Mulher, Família e Desenvolvimento Rural, eds Clio Presvelou, F. Rodrigues Almeida and J. Anécio Almeida, 93–116. Santa Maria: Universidade Federal de Santa Maria.
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn, 1996. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
de Medeiros, Leonilde Servolo, 1989. História dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE.
MEMTR, 1986. ‘Primeiro Congresso Estadual das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Teses, Textos Básicos para a Preparação do Congresso’. Mimeo. Porto Alegre: Movimento Estadual das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
Miele, Neide and Flávia Maia Guimarães, 1998. ‘As Mulheres nos Assentamentos Rurais: O Antes e o Depois’. In Qualidade de Vida e Reforma Agrária na Paraíba, eds Genaro Ieno Neto and Thomas Bamat, 205–50. Joáo Pessoa: UNITRABALHO-UFPB.
Minc, Carlos, 1985. A Reconquista da Terra: Estatuto da Terra, Lutas no Campo e Reforma Agrária. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Ed.
MMTR (Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais), 1994. Uma Historia de Mulheres: Uma Historia da Organização do MMTR do Sertão Central de Pernambuco no Interior do Movimento Sindical. Serra Tablada, PE: MMTR-OXFAM.
MMTR-NE, 1987. ‘Primer Encontro das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Nordeste, João Pessoa 4 a 7 de maio de 1987’. Mimeo.
MST, 1986. Construindo o Caminho. São Paulo: Secretaria Nacional do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1989a. Normas Gerais do MST. São Paulo: Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1989b. Caderno de Formação, No. 17. São Paulo: Secretaria Nacional do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1996. A Questão da Mulher no MST. São Paulo: Coletivo Nacional de Mulheres do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 2000. Mulher Sem Terra. São Paulo: ANCA (Associação Nacional de Cooperação Agrícola) and INCRA.
Navarro, Zander, 1996. ‘Democracia, Cidadania e Representação: os Movimentos Sociais Rurais no Estado do Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil, 1978–1990’. In Política, Protesto e Cidadania no Campo: As Lutas Sociais dos Colonos e dos Trabalhadores Rurais no Rio Grande do Sul, ed. Zander Navarro, 62–105. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade UFRGS.
Portella, Ana Paula and Silvia Camurça, no date. ‘Comentarios sobre a Trajetoria das Mulheres no Sindicalismo Rural’. Texto de Apoio 5, Seminario de Sensibilização, Projeto INCRA/FAO-TCP/BR/8922A, Brasilia.
Prá, Jussara Reis and Maria Noemi Castilhos Brito, 1988. ‘Movimento de Mulheres no Sul do Brasil: 1975 a 1987’. Cadernos de Estudos, No. 1, Programa de Pos-Graduação em Antropologia Social. Porto Alegre: UFRGS.
Rua, Maria das Gracas and Miriam Abramovay, 2000. Companheiras de Luta ou ‘Coordenadoras de Panelas’? Brasilia: Edição UNESCO Brasil.
Rufino, Isaura and Ligia Albuquerque, 1990. ‘Posição da Mulher no Processo de Reforma Agrária’. In Política Fundiaria no Nordeste: Caminhos e Descaminhos, ed. Dirçeo Pessoa, 361–84. Recife: Fundação Joaquim Nabuco and Ed. Massangana.
288	Carmen Diana Deere
Siqueira, Deis Elucy, 1991. ‘A Organização das Trabalhadoras Rurais: o Cruzamento de Gênero e de Classe Social’. In Technologia Agropecuaria e a Organização dos Trabalhadores Rurais, eds D.E. Siqueira, João G.L.C. Teixeira and Maria Stela Grosso Porto, 57–90. Brasilia: UNB.
Stedile, João Pedre and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Ed. Fundação Perseu Abramo.
Stephen, Lynn, 1997. Women and Social Movements in Latin America: Power from Below. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Suárez, Mireya and Marlene Libardoni, 1992. Mulheres e Desenvolvimento Agricola no Brasil: Uma Perspectiva de Gênero. Brasilia: IICA, Escritorio no Brasil.
Thiesenhusen, William C. and Jolyne Melmed-Sanjak, 1990. ‘Brazil’s Agrarian Structure: Changes from 1970 through 1980’. World Development, 18 (3): 393–415.

2005
Sociology
Estudos Sociedade e Agricultura
The Landless Rural Movement and the Settlements in the West of Paraná: Agreements and Disagreements over the Struggle for Land.
Eliane Brenneisen

The formation of the MST or Landless Rural Movement occurred in 1984, in the city of Cascavel, in the west of Paraná State, when regional movements fighting for land joined together under a single acronym, thus completing 20 years of formal existence in the month of January 2004. During this time, the MST has concentrated on two basic goals: the conquest of land and the maintenance of this conquest in land-reformed areas. Regarding this latter task, the direction of the MST has looked to develop models of social and productive organization within the agrarian reform settlements under MST orientation, which also concerns their political goals.
Based on case studies, this article aims at analyzing the organizational processes implemented in three settlements established at different times in western Paraná between 1991 and 2001. We aim at showing that such processes reflect the changes undergone by the MST movement and the organizational models (ideologically based on the collective organization of production), which the MST tried to implement in the region with the following variants: communitarian (in the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement), cooperative (in the Verdum settlement) and the so called semi-collective (in the Sepé-Tiaraju settlement).1
With a view to putting the argument of the present text into context, we initially present a brief summary of the three case studies. Later, we will characterize what could be called two conflicting projects: the first one as conceived by the MST, and the second one reflecting the expectations of its grassroots. In this article, we will attempt to highlight the way in which peasants experienced the organizational processes proposed or developed by the MST leadership, particularly in the settlements studied.
Collective organization experiments
Sávio-Dois Vizinhos Settlement: a communitarian organization case
In October 1985, the MST was already a nationwide movement. Then, forty-one families, which remained from a regional movement named Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra do Oeste do Paraná (Mastro)- Western Paraná Landless Workers Movement, founded in 1981, settled in a part of the Mineira farm, an area later dispossessed for agrarian reform. 2	The settlement was named Sávio-Dois Vizinhos.
* Eliane Brenneisen is a teacher of sociology at the Unioeste - Unive rsity of Western Paraná.
1
This settlement, gave great hope to the MST leadership, for being the only settlement located in the western region with peasants from Mastro. According to statements from leaders, during the period prior to the settlement, when the peasants were encamping, they did not have a consistent project for communitarian organization, but only a proposal which was not fully elaborated and concerned an alternative way of organizing production based on solidarity and communitarian ideas. To this respect, one of the regional leaderships interviewed comments: 3	"the first initiative was to fight for the land. A son of the landless wanted the land, a small piece of property. But they did not yet have a greater vision on how it was going to be (...) In terms of production, there were some people who spoke about collective work and association, but they did not have any clear ideas or experience. They spoke a lot, but didn’t have any basic proposal to put forward." Another leader, who was a member of the movement’s State coordination, talks about the initial concern about attempts at organizational alternatives to make production possible in the early settlements: "We realized that just the land wasn’t enough. We lacked credit, fair prices and a fair agricultural policy. We needed to keep on fighting, because capitalism was still there. While it still exists you have to live with it and for us to keep on surviving we needed to organize ourselves within it. In the settlements, we realized that the land only was not enough.”
The still fledgling proposal of communitarian work contained in this leader’s speech did not limit itself to economics, but also had a political dimension. Another statement clearly expressing the leaders’ expectations includes the role of the rural labor union in the fight for land: "The union was important in putting forward proposals for the settlements. We wanted to create associations, touch on the question of production, and even political education. "
As many subjects for discussion were in the air, some proposals were taken to the settlers, such as the establishment of a communitarian project based on collective ownership of the land and even the formation of an agri-village, both of which were rejected. Meanwhile, the situation became more complicated, when an attempt to implement a model based on community links was proposed by the State, which implied the compulsory formation of associations for the collective purchase of machinery, tractors, ploughs, tools, etc.4 This proposal was put forward before the settlers were sufficiently organized, or they had defined and accepted any organizational project.
The approval of this proposal, by mediators, MST leaders and the settlers themselves, was conditional on the partial release of funds from the Programa Especial de Crédito para a Reforma Agrária (Procera) - Special Credit Program for Agrarian Reform. If, on the one hand the State’s initiative via the Secretary of Agriculture, was reasonable from the economic point of view and regarding the rational use of resources, on the other hand, the fact that it occurred so quickly overlooked other important issues especially cultural ones.
2
According to some mediators, the imposing vertical role of the State, together with the rapid acceptance of the proposals by some leaders, would undoubtedly bring negative consequences, if not upon introduction, then later during the project’s development. The secretary of the CPT during that time, reverend Werner Fuchs, declares: "At the time there were government specialists, linked to the left-wing, who, sitting at their desks, imagined that the MST wanted a collective project; then came the proposal. We did not accept the proposal	immediately, so at the time the CPT seemed quite reactionary to these people (...). The leaders and unions accepted the idea very quickly, foreseeing the release of funds, advice and technical assistance."
In the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement, after the acceptance of the Secretary of Agriculture’s proposals, the Procera funds were released for the purchase of communal tractors. According to mediators, a modus operandi was started which would set a pattern for the other settlements.The settlers also received the support of a technician from the Empresa de Assistência Técnica e Extensão Rural (Emater) - Company for Technical Assistance and Rural Extension - who aimed at developing an educational project associating technical guidance to the political organization of the settlers. Even so, the project was short lived.
Regarding the association for purchasing machinery, the motives for undoing the project were the misuse of the tractor, the need for repairs and lack of funds for it, plus misunderstandings between settlers regarding procedures to be adopted.
Besides the experience of that association, some settlers, nine in all, who at first favored the proposed collectivist project, agreed on the attempt to implement it, so that it would become a successful example. Little by little, this would attract other settlers to join. However, this experiment was also short lived mainly because of the distance among the lots involved, according to farmers.
In 1987, similar circumstances took place in another settlement called Vitória, located in the west of the state. Some farmers aiming to put into practice what had been discussed at the encampment began to organize an association. They intended to gradually consolidate a larger organization beginning with a partially collective model. The association included nine peasant families, however, lack of economic resources, together with such factors as the different amount of agricultural work allocated to the settlers, made the continuation of the project difficult. Gradually the farmers abandoned the association, causing its closure after two years in operation.5
Frustrated attempts occurred not only here, but in other settlements in the State, led leaders to conclude that having partitioned the land, this would make the implementation of these forms of communitarian organization practically impossible. During the following years, they concluded that a specific organization for rural settlements on a nationwide scale would be needed. To allow for this, a national MST plan for the period 1989-1993 was drawn up, which outlined the future direction of the movement and developed the parameters for cooperativism within the movement, with an emphasis on the creation of Cooperativas de Produção Agropecuária (CPAs) - Farming Production Cooperatives .6 The CPA model prioritized by the MST in those years included the collective organization of the settlers in the widest of terms. The land, machinery and facilities were all for collective use and belonged to the cooperative. Work was also organized collectively, and was evenly divided among settlers, based on number of hours worked. Similar experiences developed in the south of the country as pilot projects to be extended to other settlements.
3
Among such cases we find the Verdum settlement in the State of Paraná, founded at the beginning of the 90s, which was the second cooperative to follow this model, as we will see.
Cooperativism in the MST: emphasis on collective productive formats
The current Verdum settlement originated from the occupation in 1989 of an unproductive farm in the municipality of Lindoeste. State Justice then issued a repossession order, which was carried out in the month of January the following year. The MST leaders in Paraná, aware that the farm was unproductive, insisted on its dispossession. In June 1990, they decided to transfer a group of 20 families from the occupied Papagaios farm in the municipality of Inácio Martins, in south-central Paraná to reoccupy the Verdum farm with the intention of installing a CPA there.7	After inspection procedures carried out by Incra, the farm was considered unproductive. However, the proprietor, once more claimed for repossession. Only after the case was judged, could Incra continue with the process of settling families there. The twenty farmers who originally headed for the Verdum farm left behind their previous settlement, conscious that they were committed to organizing a CPA, even before the definitive dispossession of the area. Later, another family joined the group, making a total of twenty-one families. After
entering the area, they put up provisory tents around the main farmhouse to shelter the families and dedicated themselves to the initial tasks of organizing the cooperative, formed on August 16th , 1990, under the name Cooperativa de Produção Agropecuária Camponesa Ltda. (Coprac) - Farm Production Cooperative Ltd. Internal rules and regulations were elaborated - and the first directorship was chosen, with one of the settlers as its president. An agri-village was founded and each family was given a small lot for housing construction. Gradually, wooden houses substituted the canvas tents.
During the first years, there was still no clear definition regarding distribution of tasks among farmers, who were happy with their new form of social organization and work, and lived in relative harmony. However, during the first years of the CPA, leaders of the cooperative and the MST considered that there were still many obstacles to overcome, making it necessary to form an “organizational field workshop” (“laboratório organizacional de campo”).8	With the organization of the workshop, it was intended to teach the farmers business and to unite all the members of the cooperative under a common purpose. In short, it was hoped to modify the group’s peasant culture eliminating "traditional peasant ways", which made it difficult to organize production on the basis of collective ownership of the land. It was also intended to achieve group unity and discipline, factors considered essential for this organizational model. 9
A "primary structure " formed of six people with considerable knowledge (e.g. of the social composition of the group) was created, They would control the workshop, preventing anomalies, controlling factions and trends, with a view to guaranteeing the harmony of the group. This group was also responsible for running the settlement and carrying out daily evaluations, by means of reports called "Daily Chronicles". The group also produced weekly reports, named “Information and Critical Balance”.
The workshop lasted for 33 days and came to an end on June 20th, 1992. After this period, and without anyone in charge of its organization, the group had to continue with the work already started and carry on with their plans. Aimed at getting the cooperative running and
4
distributing the available manpower, a system was drafted, which defined work sectors, where men, women and teenagers over thirteen years of age would take part. Lighter activities and chores, such as taking care of the communal canteen, the day-care center, healthcare and clothes-making, were destined to the women; sectors such as horticulture and cattle farming, to both genders; those that demanded greater energy, such as heavy farm labor were only carried out by the men; finally, the administrative sector became the responsibility of the elected Coprac directorship. It was not the custom to operate a rotation system of settlers in the different work sectors. Each sector had a coordinator who gathered together the group to plan activities and from these meetings they established the monthly ordinary meeting’s agenda.
A communal canteen under the responsibility of three or four women was organized, depending on the number of meals to be served. At fixed times, the families would leave their jobs and head for the canteen where lunch was served. Other meals took place in the families’ houses.
Since the cooperative’s beginning, the division of its produce was calculated on a basis of number of hours worked by men, women and teenagers over thirteen. Hence, after the sale of all produce from the commune, overheads were reduced, and the surplus was then distributed according to the number of hours worked.
After the workshop had set disciplinary objectives, the same standards were maintained regarding conduct, the carrying out of planned activities and fulfillment of work schedules. The statement by the former president of the cooperative describes the aforementioned: "the workshop was a start, then it continued. Every day at seven in the morning, come rain or shine, we were all ready in the canteen. We got together in the canteen then later we left for our sectors. We would sing the movement’s anthem and everyone would present him/herself to the coordinator of each sector, who announced the work plan and from there we would set off to work. "
In those days all efforts were made for the organization’s success, especially as a model for other settlements and for the society in general. Difficulties of a diverse nature started to arise, however, portraying inherent contradictions within the organizational form adopted, something that we will look at hereafter.
At that time, the president of the cooperative moved to another settlement in the center of the state, with the commitment to forming a new CPA there, then the vice-president assumed the direction of Coprac. After this change, many problems amounted in the following months. According to the new president, more problems arose, which had to be dealt with during his leadership, such as the low farming income and the lack of State resources, at a time when the case for dispossession of the farm was still going through the law courts.
In 1996, a first group of settlers – most of them farm laborers – split from the cooperative against the will of their leaders, the movement’s State leadership, and Incra specialists. Each family drew up a separate area of land for plantation and housing, far from the cooperative’s headquarters.
According to statements gathered, both the direction of the MST and	specialists from Incra wanted to make the separatist group leave the estate and go to other settlements being set up in the region, however, the farmers refused any type of deal.
5
In order to maintain the enterprise and according to settlers, the MST’s state direction supported by Incra opted to substitute the old CP A leadership, which was already at the end of its mandate, for a group	of seven peasant families from other settlements situated in south-western Paraná. The measures taken by this group, such as ending with the various work sectors and forming a single farming sector, led to greater controversy and confrontations, not only restricted to the grassroots of the movement, but which also reached part of the previous leadership, who opposed the ideas of the new group in charge. They disagreed, therefore, on the way this group directed the cooperative and on decisions adopted without prior consultation, such as the sale of two tractors for payment of cooperative debts.
As conflicts built up, another group of farmers abandoned the cooperative (its former- president belonged to this group). This fact made the whole project unfeasible and the CPA was dissolved.
Faced with the facts, both the movement’s direction and Incra, were obliged to accept the division of lots after the land was finally dispossessed. However, transferring the seven peasant families so as to direct the cooperative had created a new problem. At that time, the number of people settling the estate exceeded the number of families the land could bear. Furthermore, the previous figure of 21 families was already considered too high. According to Incra’s assessment, the area of circa 963 acres was suitable for only 16 families.
Settlers who, supported by specialists from Incra and the MST, were later transferred to the location, deemed themselves with the right to own land; those who had settled since the beginning, even more so. Due to this stalemate, one of the meetings at the settlement was attended by State leaders of the MST and members of the Central Cooperativa dos Assentados (CCA) - Central Cooperative of Settlers, whose headquarters is in the State capital.
The leaders had avoided visiting the settlements for some time due to successive confrontations taking place then, as one of the former-leaders of the movement puts it: "They had stopped coming, because when they came here it was just a lot of fighting. Because there’s one thing, this movement teaches, it was the best schooling for me, I used to be shy to even speak, nowadays I’ll talk to anyone. If I’m right, I’ll fight, we developed... we learned that if you are right, you have to battle on...he who owes not, fears not. "
Even with those leaders present (who insisted that the settlers left the area), no agreement was made. Faced with the settlers’ resistance, it was decided to carry out a selection of those who should remain in the area; the remainder would be transferred	to other settlements being set up in the region. Those who had been transferred later remained and part of the original settlers had to leave their lots, and was sent to other settlements.
Sepé Tiaraju settlement: a semi-collective experiment
The Boi Preto farm (nowadays Sepé Tiaraju settlement) used to belong to the company J. Malucelli Florestal Ltd., owned by Jose Malucelli who, from 1970-80, used the location for reforestation and timber processing. At the end of the 1980s, he abandoned these activities and the farm itself. After an inspection carried out by Incra showing the farm to be unproductive, the MST, aiming to put pressure on the State and to speed up the process of dispossession and settlement of the landless families there, decided to occupy the estate.
6
The occupation of the farm occurred on January 3rd, 1998, and initially included only eight families. Other families joined the settlement during the months to follow, reaching a total of 17, precisely the number of families the area of 1,067.5 acres could support. On May 26th, 1998, Incra emitted a decree dispossessing the area for agrarian reform. Meanwhile, the company put in a claim for repossession, and won the case in the State Court of Justice. The settled families left the area on February 16th, 2000.
If, on the one hand, the eviction of the settlers took place by means of a legal procedure, on the other hand, it was absolutely unnecessary. While State Court ruled for repossession of the farm, another lawsuit moved by Incra was going through federal justice. Only one month after eviction, this case ruled definitive dispossession of the farm, which allowed the peasants to return to the farm.10 During this period they had camped at the headquarters of the cold store of the Cooperativa de Comercialização e Reforma Agrária do Oeste do Paraná (Coara) - Cooperative of Comercialization and Agrarian Reform of Western Paraná,
Unlike what happened at other land occupations, the MST rigidly controlled the number of families settling the Boi Preto farm and demanding land for the agrarian reform. The peasants were screened, and for this reason only a small number of farmers joined the occupation in the beginning. These procedures were not unusual, however, as similar screenings could be observed throughout the 1990s at other occupations. In the case of the previously mentioned Verdum settlement, the settlement project was not laid out a priori, nor did it depend on choice, as only those who agreed to the defined model were led to the location. Selective procedures were directly related to the intension of the MST leadership to establish an organizational model founded on collective ownership of the land, with an emphasis on the formation of CPAs throughout western Paraná, as already seen. However, due to the failure of this type of experience in	several other settlements, internal arguments regarding the proposed model arose.11	When these debates and reevaluations were in progress, and still without any clear outlines, the State and regional leaderships, in an effort to balance the situation, decided to implement semi-collective organizational models at the settlements in western Paraná State. That is, part of the undivided land was destined to the collective organization, while other areas were assigned to the families, as we can see in the following statement by one of the leaders interviewed who favors the choice of a semi-collective model:
‘From 92 up to 95 we made great progress with the CPAs. This was one of the strong points of the movement. From then up to now, we’ve faced problems. We had a socialist experience within the CP As, but our country was still capitalist! Even so, we believe that cooperation is the best solution, but we learned a lot from our mistakes back then and started to change. The proposal for a part collective / part individual model offers an alternative for both individual and collective production.
The occupation of the Boi Preto farm occurred at a time when arguments and reevaluations were going on. This led to proposals for a break in the collectivization process until we could construct the "subjective conditions" needed for developing the organizational model for rural settlements sustained by the direction of the MST.’ 12
After the organizational structure for future settlements had been established, families who were to join the project were screened thoroughly.13 The person responsible for the
7
selective procedure was a member from the MST’s regional coordination, who also took part in the project. When the inclusion procedures had been concluded, families on arrival began putting up their canvas tents, side by side, near the old farmhouse, where an old wooden house still remained, the only facility left by the proprietor. It was in this house where meetings, assemblies and religious celebrations were held during the time of occupation. At that time, the settlers’ established social rules, through distribution of tasks and the organization of the coordinating commission, which in the beginning was composed of four representatives.
When the peasant families joined the occupation, the existing project, was a semi-collective organization, as we have seen. Although the defined model of the settlement was alien to the lifestyles and cultural history of some families, it would at least allow them to possess part of the land for rebuilding their lives as they wished. This way they could preserve part of the land for themselves, where they could build their homes, raise their children and plant and grow whatever they pleased. However, in those initial months, both regional and State leaders, made new evaluations reconsidering the initial proposal. After that they concluded that the whole area should be used for the organization of a CPA without dividing up the land. All housing would be situated in one area as an agri-village. Work would be organized according to the technical division of labor, and remuneration would be based on the number of hours worked. Once the proposal was thus redefined, three local leaders were appointed to “negotiate it” with the settlers. However, a faction of the families opposing the new ideas expressed their dissatisfaction in meetings and assemblies then held. Furthermore, they felt cheated. They believed that the leaders already had this intention from the very beginning and the semi-collective proposal was only used so that the settlers would eventually adjust to what the leaders wanted. Even faced with this resistance, the leaders continued to insist upon the new collective model.
Believing that their desires were not being met, two families, sons and daughters of settlers, who had occupied the area since the beginning, broke away from the leaders and abandoned the group, outlining a plot of land for themselves and their families, for work and housing, at one of the limits of the settlement. In the impasse, leaders of the MST started to put pressure on the two families to leave the place. The other families (four in total) in opposition to the new proposals also started to suffer pressure. According to statements by settlers, the MST leaders and Incra only allowed families who agreed to their new proposed model to remain settled in the area.
After all the quarrels and confrontations at the settlement, local leaders faced with conflict and no longer able to contain the settlers’ spirits, requested the presence of an MST state coordinator, who seeing that it was impossible to implement what they intended, mediated the conflict, re-dividing the settlement. Having done this, 60% of the area would now be divided among all the settlers, allowing each family to have its own individual lot to build housing, and 40% would be allocated to the collective organization, where they could form groups to produce whatever they chose. The two settlers who had broken relationships with the local leaders remained in their individual lots. It is important to remember once more, that after all these difficulties and divisions, eviction from the area still occurred. On returning to the area, after the final dispossession of the farm, the previously outlined definitions of the organizational model were maintained.
The MST rural settlement project and the settlers’ expectations
8
The three case studies presented here represent the never-ending search for models to organize production carried out by the MST since the first settlements. As already mentioned, the changes, which occurred in these settlements, regarding organizational choices, are related to the changes that the movement underwent throughout the years. Hence, the movement itself and the policies defined for the rural settlements are two aspects of the same process.
As to the MST’s background, its first phase was completed in 1984, when it consolidated its organization nationwide. During the following years the level of involvement of mediators was outlined (CPT and unions) and the organizational structure was defined. The extent of involvement of mediators,13	which was defined during the second phase (even though a relationship between them still existed, and developed more intensely in the case of the CPT), 14 relates to the definition of the movement’s policies at the time, and the Leninist conceptions of their leadership. Documents published at the time show this, including the previously quoted text by Clodomir Dos Santos Morais. Such documents were regarded during the 90s as references for the structuring of CPAs and organizational field workshops. Due to such developments, the leadership of the MST then gave priority to forming cadres to integrate a leading vanguard.
In this context the strategic creation of an own organizational structure for rural settlements took shape, as Zander Navarro demonstrates (1994) in his pioneer study on the first cooperative implemented following these patterns in the state of Rio Grande do Sul. The cooperativist system with an emphasis on a collective format would therefore play a double role: making the settlements economically viable and at the same time, meeting political objectives. That is, cooperativism would serve as an economic anchor to continue the struggle, by means of preparing, deploying and maintaining cadres (cf. MST, 1994: 41).
Since the first settlements, as in the case of Sávio Dois-Vizinhos, the leaders interviewed tell of their efforts to work in a an economic and political fashion, as shown when trying to organize settlements on the basis of the collective ownership of land. The failure of the first experiments led to an own organizational structure of the rural settlements, which would not follow economic logic alone. It concerned above all a political choice, which related to a socialist utopia and theoretical references that oriented the MST, 15 as Ilse Scherer-Warren (1997) points out.
Even with a specific plan and a technical-organizational apparatus, the majority of these experimental models put into practice during the 1990s also produced unsatisfactory results, as in the case of the Verdum settlement. Thus, the MST leadership opted for a break in the collectivization process, at least regarding the formats, which were formerly sustained. In the discussions and reevaluations that took place, they began to favor the creation of less radical models, but once again without clearly outlined formats, as happened in the Sepé Tiaraju settlement.
In texts published for internal discussion by the MST on the CPA crisis and in interviews by leaders of the movement, such as the one given by João Pedro Stédile to the geographer Bernardo Mançano Fernandes,16 one can see that these leaders blamed the breakdown in the organization of the settlements on the many difficulties regarding the implementation of
9
proposed objectives. According to the leaders the root of the problem did not lie in the type of organizational model chosen, but as Stédile puts it, it lay in the fact that these experiments occurred in places where "subjective conditions were not sufficient", or even, as Ademar Bogo another MST leader said, in the "internal and external difficulties that affected this process". Texts published by the MST show that these ideas had been inspired by the Chinese revolutionary experience, and the need for a cultural revolution within the rural settlements was sustained.
Despite the concepts used, which hypothetically emphasize cultural factors, the so-called cultural revolution was not a change in acknowledging the cultural particularities of the peasantry and the historical and cultural diversity of the country (Bogo, 1999). Rather, it is a way of utilizing new mechanisms to discipline men, women and children within a cause that would respond to their desires, dreams and expectations.17
To understand who the subjects of the developed projects are and what expectations they have – aspects not taken into account by the MST leaders or by other mediators when they opt for the organizational models shown here – it is necessary to consider the enormous historical and cultural diversity of the country to begin with. In southern Brazil, and particularly in western Paraná State, where the aforementioned settlements took place, we need to consider the characteristics of the colonization per se. The migrants who headed for this region in the 1940s and ’50s, mainly descendants of Italians and Germans, did so in order to guarantee the production method they were accustomed to in their state of origin: Rio Grande do Sul. The productive organization they aimed to reproduce in western Paraná, as many of them succeeded in doing for a period, has the family as the basic unit of economic production. Its main objective, as we know, is family subsistence, with any surplus production being traded. Mutual aid and cooperative relations are only established when necessary, due to certain phases in the productive process. These relations are spontaneous and do not require any formal agreements, and are established because of friendship, kinship and proximity. In other words, such associations are substantially different from those supported by the MST for organizing rural settlements.
Besides the previously mentioned particularity, there is a second aspect to be considered. The grassroots of the MST are a social segment, which over the last years experienced successive losses and migration, particularly due to the so called "agricultural modernization", which in certain locations was caused by dispossessions for the construction of hydroelectric power stations, such as Itaipu. This concerns people who, in general, have not been incorporated to the modernization processes and due to lack of economic opportunity, suffer continuous displacement in search for ways of survival.
A third aspect concerns the fact that, even joined together under the landless banner, these groups are not homogeneous regarding labor categories – they are former-proprietors, wage-earners, lessees and migrant workers - as well as concerning their backgrounds and life-styles and the ways they subjectively experienced the losses suffered and the migrations forced upon them.
If during the time of encampment these differences were not noticeable and there was apparently a degree of homogenization due to the fact that all settlers were marginalized, such differences later became obvious as the settlement developed, where the peasants tried to reconstruct their lives, and establish a permanent situation instead of the previous transitory one, as Martins (2003) observed. Once the settlements took shape, new groups were gradually formed due to	relations established during the encampment phase or even
10
before joining the struggle for the land. In the three case studies we can observe the formation of groups because of growing conflicts derived from attempts to implement organizations based on collective models. Two basic distinct groups appeared: on one side, the group linked to the MST and on the other, the group which opposed them and resisted their proposals, most of which had been previously defined, as mentioned.
A fourth troubling aspect to be considered regarding the MST grassroots’ expectations concerns the true meaning that the conquest of land held. What really mobilizes the peasants, making them put up with all kinds of difficulties, dwelling in canvas tents in extremely precarious conditions, is the conquest of the land as a means of livelihood. Statements gathered from farmers at the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement illustrate this point: "The land is everything for me. I get my daily bread from it, so do my family and my herds." "The land is wealth, it represents life". "I was brought up on the land, so it represents everything to me". "For me the land is a symbol of life, we have the land to produce, it sustains life".
We can see the existence of two projects in open conflict: the political-economic project of the MST vis-à-vis the grassroots’ project of life and work. The expectations of the grassroots diverge from the expectations of the leaders, both in regard to what they expect from the conquest of the land, and in relation to the social and productive organization in the settlements.
The ideal communitarian organization at the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement was initially inspired on the teachings of the church and elaborated by the church cadres 18. Based on solidarity ideals, however, it was limited and difficult to apply to the concrete historic and cultural reality. In fact, the leaders of the MST were too strict and insisted that the settlers should adjust to the proposals presented. The main reasons for settlers rejecting the proposals for collective production were the differences existing among themselves and the right of each individual to decide what to plant. In other words, what in fact was at stake for the settlers was the freedom to organize production at their individual lots. Other settlers, besides pointing out the differences between themselves in relation to their way of thinking and their economic backgrounds, also stressed the differences in volume of work that each individual member would carry out in the event of a totally collective organization. As in the first settlements, these experiences were based upon a cohesion that really did not exist. The MST leadership, aiming to equate the difficulties they faced, opted for developing more consistent organizational models as in the case of the Verdum settlement.
It is necessary, however, to highlight that there is a substantial difference between the comunitarianism initially proposed, which was based on a totality founding communitarian practice as Jose de Souza Martins observes (2003: 105), and the collectivism defined later. Moreover, the choice made in order to achieve the social cohesion of the group proved to be the wrong procedure to transform the social relations in the countryside, for it aimed at converting country peasants into proletarians by introducing the division of work and the specialization of functions. In a nutshell, the MST leaders intended to adjust the peasants to the collectivist model by means of disciplinary measures. Foucault’s analysis (1979, 1987 and 1988) of the relationship between power and the diverse disciplinary mechanisms (time control, surveillance, standardization of gestures and attitudes) with a view to achieving obedience and subservience, even though we recognize the specific details of his analysis, are fruitful in understanding the relations established between the MST direction and its
11
grassroots, when attempting to put into practice models to organize production at the rural settlements.
At the Verdum settlement, this attempt to establish the collectivist organizational model with its related methods of control also ended in total failure due to the gradual opposition of settlers to such a model and to the organization of daily life, which was alien to their desires and expectations. Rather, they are conditioned by their own cultural	backgrounds, traditional family values and organization of work.
The failure of this project was mainly due to disagreements in relation to the division of work and the almost total absence of rotation of tasks. The coordinator of the farming team, which carried out the heaviest work from sunrise to sunset, had constantly worked the land since the beginning of the project, as there was no rotation of tasks. He felt he had been treated unfairly and represented the unsatisfied workers of the farming team in opposition to the decisions of the cooperative leaders. The disagreements in relation to procedures adopted by the Coprac administration and the conflicts between the farming team and the cooperative leaders increased as time passed. The first complaint made by the farming team regarded the volume of work carried out by each member of the settlement, not only concerning the volume of work done on the same task, but also in relation to energy spent on the tasks involved in the different work sectors. It is worth noting, while some members carried out the "lighter" activities, others were occupied with the "heaviest " ones. The farming team believed that all the work in the farming sector generated income, whereas this was not the case with most of the work carried out in other sectors. The feeling of injustice related to work representation, is shown in the statement by the coordinator of the farming team: "The farming activities ended up paying for everything. The infrastructure, health and service sectors never made a profit and there were a lot of people working there. And some guys there were lagging. They were getting the same pay anyway, so why should they work? Those who worked the land were the people supporting everything and they were also the most discriminated against." The farming team understood that the leaders, responsible for the administration of the cooperative, were not producing any income, as they did not work, at least in accordance with their conception of work, that is, work carried out from sunrise to sunset and using a hoe. For them, the people who worked selling the harvest, or negotiated with INCRA, financial institutions, development agencies (agencias de fomento) and other public bodies, worked less not in terms of working hours, but of physical energy exerted. Therefore, they should not get the same wage as the others, as we can see from the words of one of the members from the farming team: "The people who worked in commerce and took care of accounting earned the same as those who worked the land. So they started rebelling. "
The farming team believed that those working in the administrative sector (cooperative leaders) were not necessarily working for the service of the cooperative when they were not present at the settlement. Often work was carried out far from their eyes, therefore they neither saw nor knew that work was being done (even because they were not informed about these activities).
Besides the aforementioned interrelated aspects, another factor can be added: the fact that the farmers from the farming sector felt inferior compared to the rest. In meetings and discussions held, they considered themselves discriminated against by the settlement leaders and other MST organizers. On these occasions even though they had the right of
12
opinion and could express their dissatisfaction, they were put down and felt discriminated against by the leaders, who were more experienced, as can be seen in this statement from one of the interviewed workers: "The ones who really worked got no value. The farming team did most of the work, earned the income, but was also the most discriminated against. In discussions in the general assembly there are those who get discriminated against. Like it or not, the blacks are the most discriminated, those that suffer are the most discriminated against...". Through time, those farmers gradually learned how to use their voice and to resist what they considered a breach of their civil rights. This resistance was based on the peasants’ conception of work, that is, concrete work producing visible and tangible goods, making it possible for the workers to follow all the stages of the work process, plowing the fields, planting, harvesting and selling the produce. Actually, this particular resistance was based on the values of moral economy, as Thompson (1993) says, even considering the specific characteristics of the studied case. Settlers split from the projects in which they took part or were compelled to join because the organizational pattern of those projects opposed their cultural traditions.
Besides the reasons for the confrontations mentioned here, in the case of the Verdum settlement there were two other reasons determining the settlers’ opposition. One of them was the attempt by MST leaders and Incra to settle confrontations by means of dismissing the old direction and the transference of another seven families to the settlement, with the objective of managing the cooperative. This provoked new conflicts, no longer between the direction and the farming team, but between the old direction and the farming team on one side against the new direction on the other. The second reason	for confrontation was the almost total lack of financial results (surplus) from productive activities developed by the cooperative. The peasants involved in farming activities judged that the lack of surplus was caused by the fact that only a few settlers worked in income generating activities. They also started mistrusting those responsible for administrating the settlement as to the final destination of the cooperative’s revenues. They claimed that in the beginning when almost everyone carried out farming activities, these problems did not happen. Only after the implementation of the "workshop" and the division of work within it, did problems start to arise. In fact, conflicts surfaced more frequently after the reorganization that followed the "workshop", when the project was redesigned.
At the Sepé Tiaraju settlement, resistance to the formation of a CPA was based on the same motives. Several farmers suspected that some settlers were being allowed to do less work than others, and were concerned about being deceived by those in charge of the cooperative’s administration. There was even mistrust of losing the autonomy required by an organizational model thus defined. One of those interviewed, mistrustful that things would remain as proposed, said: "One could cheat the other. You could work and work and at the end of the day, have no say! We were afraid that one day things would go wrong and we’d want to leave and have no rights. If each one’s got his own, he’s got command on his own thing, right?"
Another settler speaking on the subject of organizational and productive redefinition of the settlements, said: "Each was to live on 2.5 acres of land, 2.5 acres of land was for each house, from there on, the collective was a mess. Everything was collective and every person was supposed to have a job of work. Then we started to notice that it was no use, because some worked and others didn’t. There were some who wanted to get others to do the work. Then we had a big split. We saw that it wouldn’t work."	Besides the lack of
13
individual autonomy inherent to this type of organization and mistrust regarding the volume of work being executed, other matters were raised by farmers, such as the subordination of manual work, essential to the division of work under the proposed terms.
At the Sepé Tiaraju settlement there was yet another reason given for opposing the organizational model, relating to values and moral obligations of the peasantry and their inheritance rights. They argued that in a model based on collective ownership of the land there was no guarantee that in future their children would have an assured right of inheritance, as shown the following statement: "You see, as we get old, when we die, it’s left to the children. In a collective system, it’s complicated. The children will have to do the same as their fathers did."
At the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement, similar reasons led the farmers to fight for the land: the desire to own the land so that in future, their children would have a means of support. The following statements show such concerns: "The land is fruitful, I got the land by fighting for it and I’m gonna leave it for my children, and they’re gonna pass it on to my grandsons." "The land is new life for me and I’m gonna leave it for my children to work it."
These case studies show that the associative cooperative models proposed by the MST, still aimed at forming agri-villages. The leaders’ justification for organizing the housing in such a format was due to the fact that this type of spatial organization would facilitate the placement of each family and the dispatching of produce. At the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement, one of the farmers justified his refusal of the proposal as follows: " We would not accept this idea of making rows of houses. The people were even afraid of being made to build the agri-village. From my point of view, I think that it’s just the same thing as us living in a new small town. It becomes the same thing. Then you want to breed chickens, but you’re not allowed to, eh? " This statement shows that the refusal tended to defend and preserve the families’ private lots, where housing, livestock, the vegetable garden and the land are inseparable. Such refusal was also based on the division of work in the countryside, where tasks in the yard are traditionally performed by women. The organization of an agri-village, thus represents the impossibility of reproducing the peasants’ ideal model of life and production. Another reason for resisting the proposal of an agri-village, is the refusal to become urban, the city life for the farmer is an inferior way of life with no natural qualities and restricted individual freedom. In the two other settlements studied, the same reasons are reiterated because of the organization of work and family life in the countryside, where there is practically no separation between productive and reproductive activities, or between work and the home. Such an organization would allow the peasants to perform productive activities and look after their children simultaneously. In the environment of an agri-village, besides the lack of privacy and autonomy concerning growing and breeding their own livelihood, the housing model does not allow the education of children as the parents would wish for, accompanying them at all times of the day during all of their lives.
Despite the grassroots of the movement having rejected proposals regarding the proposed collective organization, the formation of agri-villages was insisted upon, as occurred very recently at the Sepé Tiaraju settlement.
Acknowledging the fact that the proposed format is an extremely rational organization, however not unique, and that architecture is a basic component of power relations (cf. Foucault, 1987), we suppose that some other veiled reasons explain the obstinate attitude on the part of the MST leadership, for example, greater control over the base of the
14
movement and easier surveillance through the organization of space, so as to meet the movement’s political goals.
Another remarkable aspect outlined in the three case studies is the role of the State and its agents in this process. It would not be possible to fully explore such contradictory aspects within the limits of this article, but a brief mention is necessary in an attempt to clarify details of the sort of symbiosis established between the MST and the government and its agencies, which is not always easy to understand. Since the first experiments at creating associations or communitarian organizations, such as the Sávio-Dois Vizinhos settlement, government action was observed in the process. On this occasion there was a case of mistaken intervention by the government. When supposedly settling a claim by the MST, it was decided to create a communitarian organization dedicated to purchasing machinery, linking the release of resources with the acceptance of proposals. In the other two case studies, we observed interference by government agents on behalf of the federal agency responsible for agrarian reform policies, that is, Incra, even though on both occasions this agency should not officially intervene in the settlements, unless for the only reason of inspecting and dispossessing areas for agrarian reform purposes, as at that time they were dealing with land occupations, where dispossession procedures of both estates were still under way. Besides, it is not the business of this agency to define the internal organization of settlements, as was being proposed or developed in these cases. According to statements by the settlers, Incra agents exerted pressure on the Verdum settlers so that they would remain in the CP A. Moreover, they mediated the arrival of peasants coming from other settlements in the south-west region in order to take over the management of Coprac, substituting the former dismissed directorship. Statements from the Sepé Tiaraju settlement give similar accounts of procedures by Incra agents, as shown here: " Incra came and put pressure on us(...) anybody who didn’t want the collective had 24 hours to vacate the area (...) they leaned towards the gang of the movement. Then they came and put us all up against the wall (...)".
These facts leave no doubt regarding Incra agents collaborating with the MST leadership, in favor of the defined organizational models for the settlements. However, it remains unclear what motives led the agents to adopt such a stand. Whether they were moved by ideological conviction or believed in the economic supremacy of collectivism, or due to both these factors, or even because of their inability and impotence, thus compromising interests and preventing direct confrontation with the MST leadership, whatever the reason such collaboration remains unclear.
The selection process for settlements in the west of Paraná State also shows sectors of the agency to be ineffective. In principle, Incra is responsible for the selection of potential members of the agrarian reform procedures based on technical criteria defined by the State 20. However, this is not what happened in the region. At the Verdum settlement, responsibility for the selection of those who would occupy the area – selection by agreeing to the organizational model previously defined for the area - lay with the MST. Incra only ratified the decisions of the movement when the area was effectively dispossessed for agrarian reform purposes. As we have already seen, at the Sepé Tiaraju settlement, similar procedures had also been adopted. The peasants who had initially occupied that farm and later settled there had been screened by the MST. Five single peasants had been selected for the settlement, three of whom were sons of a peasant settled nearby, who was also the president of Coara in his second consecutive term of office. There is no doubt as to these
15
peasants legitimate claims for land, however, the same cannot be said about the adopted priority criteria regarding their selection for agrarian reform procedures, especially if we consider that at the time there were at least 9,000 families camped in Paraná state, according to MST’s own statistics. Besides the selection mechanisms used, another questionable aspect was favoring certain groups of settlers. These procedures are far from being democratic; they rather resemble relationships strongly marked by cronysm, benefiting relatives and protégés.
It is well known that the authoritarianism which permeates Brazilian society until today has its roots in so-called "mandonismo" - the power to order - another characteristic of national politics, which, as already demonstrated by Jose Murilo de Carvalho (1997), is distinct from so-called coronelismo (derived from northern and northeastern Brazil where in the past the Coronels had absolute rule in determined regions) and from clientelismo – cronysm, a system which benefits relatives and protégés. However, such mandonismo operated alongside clientelístic mechanisms. The author shows that both mandonismo and clientelismo tend to disappear when citizens conquer their civil rights. Although mandonismo tends to disappear and in historical terms is agonizing, it is also true that vestiges of an authoritarian and personalized political culture still linger among us, even among those who struggle or are supposed to struggle through their political organizations in order to overcome these anti-democratic mechanisms.
The difficult construction of democratic social relationships – conclusion
Jose de Souza Martins has already pointed out the many interpretative reductionisms (not only as regards rural settlements), which have oriented the MST’s actions, and also those who mediate the fight for land. The author has already highlighted what he calls a trend towards anomie - the absence of laws - within social movements and organizations. Referring to disagreements and incompatibilities among the hopes of the agents of the struggle and the expectations of those who need such struggle, Martins sustained:
Social problems in the countryside contradict any reply or solution within a far from well- defined social reform, which is the agrarian reform. Up to now the radical middle class activists have regarded the rural workers’ conflicts in the countryside as part of the agrarian issue, proposing the agrarian reform as the solution to those conflicts. However, long winded arguments and discussions have not yet defined what such an agrarian reform actually consists of. Such paradox derives from the fact that this claim is mediated by the interests and conceptions of a social group different from the social strata on behalf of which the claim is made and the pressure exerted. This serious incompatibility is the basis of what I call a trend towards anomie in the case of social movements in the countryside (Martins 2000b: 270-71).
With regard to the discourse of the MST national leadership and of those sectors linked to the middle classes who mediate the struggle for the land, it is possible to discover reevaluations resulting from the opposition of the settlers, as previously detailed. However, they are extremely partial reevaluations, hence, as we have observed in the documents studied, it is not the organizational model that has been put into question. The political- ideological references that inspire the activism of leaders and mediators of the movement have not been put to question either. As Zander Navarro (2002) shows in an analysis of the way the MST is structured, particularly regarding the sectors that resist democratic practices, this is the basic reason behind the mistakes experienced by the settlers.
16
There is no doubt as to the importance of the MST’s emergence in the Brazilian political scenario, above all for placing the issue of agrarian reform on the national political agenda. The movement has also played an important role as mediator, offering a future hope to thousands of marginalized rural workers, who otherwise would lack any future perspectives. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning the significant economic and political changes that took place in the municipalities and regions where the rural settlements took place. However, we need to avoid idealized approaches and point out the many mistakes made, especially when MST leaders and mediators stubbornly force collectivist organizational models upon rural settlements. The case studies presented herein show the failure of many such attempts vis-à-vis the insurgencies that took place in those settlements. The facts related here are not irrelevant. They show, above all, how difficult the task of building democratic social relations can be, even among those who act on behalf of a just and legitimate cause, such as the struggle for land.
Notes:
1	The collection of data, by means of previously elaborated interviews, occurred in the years 1991-1992, 1998-1999 and 2001 respectively. For a complete detailed presentation of organization development processes at these settlements, see Brenneisen, 1994; 2002; 2003 and 2004.
2 The dispossessed area was of 1,705 acres. That farm had previously been occupied by Mastro peasants, however, the judiciary ruled a case of repossession to the original proprietor.
3 We have committed to safeguarding the identity of the MST members who were interviewed, because their statements on the existing controversies could cause complications or even trigger further misunderstandings. So their names are not disclosed in this paper.
4 An important aspect in understanding the fight for land during these initial years is with regard to the scenario of political opening and redemocratization within Brazilian society. In this context, Jose Richa, member of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB), with support of segments linked to the fight for land and committed to agrarian reform, was elected governor of Paraná State, appointing Claus Germer - former advisor to the CPT and an agronomist linked to the fight for land -, as Secretary for Agriculture.
5 Similar experiences were in progress at that time in other settlements in Paraná, such as Vitória da União, located in the municipality of Mangueirinha, in the south-east of the State. For further information on this experience, see Bonin et al., 1989.
6 The Cooperative System of Settlers – Sistema Cooperativista dos Assentados (SCA) was made up of regional, state and national organizational instances, whose objective was to develop cooperative models within the MST. Nowadays it is known as the Sector for
17
Production, Cooperativism and Environment.
7 The families belonged to a larger group of around 1,200 people who had occupied the Papagaios farm in Inácio Martins, in August 1998.
8 The “Experimental Workshop-Laboratório Experimental” or “Field Organizational Workshop - Laboratório Organizacional de Campo” was conceived by Clodomir Santos de Morais, an old activist and member of the Brazilian Communist Party - Partido Comunista Brasileiro (PCB). It consists of developing a group of at least forty people to organize a collective enterprise. According to Morais own words, the model he created has the main objective of altering the peasants’ ideological behavior, eliminating crude habits inherited from the craftsman’s work forms., making the peasants capable of developing a collective enterprise. For further information on the subject see Morais, 1986.
9 The information contained herein were collected from a document elaborated by the leaders during the workshop held.. cf. Coprac, 1992.
10 Coara is a regional service rendering cooperative (CPS), founded in 1993, with the objective of meeting the needs of settlers in western Paraná State, such as transportation, and commercialization of grains and mainly developing own agricultural-industrial projects. This cooperative is based in the town of Lindoeste and is linked to the Cooperativa Central dos Assentados – Settlers’ Central Cooperative (CCA), which is based in the State capital, Curitiba.
11 In this respect see: Ademar Bogo, Perspectivas da cooperação agrícola no MST, 1994 (mimeo); Paulo Cerioli e Pedro Cristofoli, A crise das cooperativas de produção, 1994 (mimeo); Ademar Bogo, Perspectivas da cooperação agrícola no MST, 1995 (mimeo); Ademar Bogo. Limites e desafios do SCA, 1995 (mimeo); MST/Concrab. “Enfrentar os desafios da organização nos assentamentos”, in: Caderno de Cooperação Agrícola, São Paulo, n. 7, 1998; Ademar Bogo, Novo ascenso na organização da cooperação, Bahia, 1999 (mimeo); MST/Concrab. “A evolução da concepção de cooperação agrícola do MST (1989 a 1999)”, in: Caderno de Cooperação Agrícola, São Paulo, n. 8, 1999.
12 See: Stédile e Fernandes, 1999: 101.
13 In that group, four peasants were single. Presently, there are five single peasants due to an alteration in the original group, as one of the families (although it was an occupation) was substituted by another farmer, who as the others, was the son of a settler.
14 Regarding this topic, see Torrens, 1992.
15 Regarding this symbiotic relationship between CPT and MST, see the clarifying paper by Martins, 2000a.
18
16 In her text, the author shows the effects exerted by the predominance of structuralist revolutionary conceptions in the organization of the struggle for land.
17 Stédile e Fernandes, 1999: 101.
18 David José Caume, in his study on a settlement situated in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, shows other mechanisms of social inclusion, such as the production and dissemination of a predominant memory (2003). In another study, this author shows how aesthetics serve political goals in rural settlements (2002).
19 This type of communitarianism was rooted in the activism of the Catholic Church by means of the CPT and groups related to the church called “pastorais rurais”, which are active supporters of the landless movement. They educated and formed various MST union and settlement leaders, politically and religiously. Many of those cadres who operated as agents of the church in the beginning, constructed what they called the “sindicalismo auténtico - authentic unionism” - Some others got engaged in the construction of the MST at State and National levels.
20 Officially candidates register in the Sistema Integrado dos Projetos de Reforma Agrária (Sipra) - Integrated System of Agrarian Reform Projects. And are screened according to certain criteria. Besides the demand of being over 18 years of age and not having any criminal records, such criteria included the following: skill for family work, experience in associations (such as having belonged to a union), and time of work in farming.
Bibliographical references
Bonin, Anamaria Aimoré et al. “Luta pela terra e contradições de um projeto comunitário de vida.” In: Bonin, Anamaria Aimoré et al: Movimentos sociais no campo. Curitiba: Edições Criar, 1989.
Brenneisen, Eliane. Luta pela terra no Oeste paranaense. Do movimento ao assentamento: limites e contradições de um projeto coletivo de produção. Dissertação de mestrado. PUC-São Paulo, 1994.
__________. “Assentamento Sepé Tiaraju: persistências do passado, fragmentos do presente”. , In: Martins, José de Souza. Travessias, a vivência da reforma agrária nos assentamentos. Porto Alegre: Ed. da UFRGS, 2003.
__________. Relações de poder, dominação e resistência. O MST e os assentamentos rurais. Cascavel: EduniOeste, 2002.
__________. Da luta pela terra à luta pela vida. Entre as persistências do passado e os fragmentos do presente. São Paulo: Annablume, 2004 .
Caume, David José. “A tessitura do assentamento de reforma agrária: discursos e práticas de enquadramento social”. V Congresso da Alasru, 2002.
__________. “Memórias da luta e lutas pela memória”. História Oral - Revista da Associação Brasileira de História Oral. São Paulo, n. 6, 2003.
Carvalho, José Murilo de. “Mandonismo, coronelismo, clientelismo: uma discussão
19
conceitual.” Dados, Rio de Janeiro, 40, n. 2, 1997. Coprac. “Laboratório organizacional de campo,” Lindoeste, 1992 (mimeo). Foucault, Michel. Microfísica do poder. Rio de Janeiro: Graal, 1979. __________. Vigiar e punir. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1987. __________. História da sexualidade I: a vontade de saber. Rio de Janeiro: Graal, 1988. Martins, José de Souza. Reforma agrária. O impossível diálogo. São Paulo: Edusp, 2000a.
__________. “As mudanças nas relações entre a sociedade e o Estado e a tendência à anomia nos movimentos sociais e nas organizações populares.” Estudos Avançados 14, n. 38, 2000b.
__________. O sujeito oculto. Ordem e transgressão na reforma agrária. Porto Alegre: Ed. da UFRGS, 2003.
Morais, Clodomir Santos de. “Elementos sobre a teoria da organização no campo.” Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST). Cadernos de Formação, São Paulo, n. 11, 1986.
Navarro, Zander. “Assentamentos rurais, formatos organizacionais e desempenho produtivo: o caso do assentamento Nova Ramada.” Anpocs, Caxambu, 1994.
_______. “Mobilização sem emancipação. As lutas sociais dos sem-terra no Brasil.” In: Santos, Boaventura de Souza. Produzir para viver: os caminhos da produção não- capitalista. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2002.
Stédile, João Pedro; Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. Brava gente: A trajetória do MST e a luta pela terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Perseu Abramo, 1999.
Scherer-Warren, Ilse. “Abrindo os marcos teóricos para o entendimento das ações coletivas rurais.” Anpocs, Caxambu, 1997.
Thompson, E. P. “The moral economy of the English crowd in the eighteenth century.” In: Customs in common. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1993.
Torrens, João Carlos S. “Alianças e conflitos na mediação da luta pela terra no Paraná: o Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra 1979/1990.” Dissertação de mestrado. UFRRJ, 1992.
BRENNEISEN, Eliane. O MST e os assentamentos rurais no Oeste do Paraná: encontros e desencontros na luta pela terra. Estudos Sociedade e Agricultura, abril 2004, vol. 12 n. 1, p. 128-163. ISSN 1413-0580.
20
Resumo: Este artigo resgata três estudos sobre assentamentos rurais, localizados no Oeste paranaense e representativos das mudanças pelas quais passou o Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra (MST) ao longo dos anos, sobretudo no que se refere às modalidades organizacionais definidas para os assentamentos rurais. Essas modalidades tiveram como base a organização coletiva da produção e, quando foram implantadas, provocaram conflitos e enfrentamentos, evidenciando equívocos na adoção de tipologias modelares da organização da produção nos assentamentos rurais. O texto analisa os muitos desencontros entre direção e base do MST como resultado da existência de dois projetos em franca colisão: o projeto político-ideológico da direção do MST e o projeto de vida e de organização da produção da base social do movimento.
Palavras-chave: assentamentos rurais, MST, reforma agrária.
Abstract: (The Landless Rural Movement and the Settlements in the west of Paraná: agreements and disagreements over the struggle for land). This paper examines three case studies of rural settlements in the west of Paraná, which were settled in different periods, and are representative of the changes in the Movement of Landless Rural Workers (MST) over the years, particularly as regards the organizational forms assumed by the rural settlements. These were based on the collective organization of production, which, when implemented, provoked conflicts revealing the inadequacies of such model. This paper also highlights the tensions between the leadership of the MST and its base, directly related to the existence of two projects in clear opposition: the ideological political project of the MST leadership and the project for organizing daily life and production by the social base of the movement.
Key words: rural settlements, MST, agrarian reform
Translated by Enrique J. Romera Translation from Estudos Sociedade e Agricultura, vol. 12 n. 1, Apr. 2004 p. 128-163.
21

1998
Education
International Review of Education
SOCIAL MOVEMENTS IN BRAZIL AND THEIR EDUCATIONAL WORK
ELIE GHANEM

Abstract – Using a distinction first proposed by Alain Touraine between historic and social movements, Ghanem’s review of grassroots initiatives in Brazil argues that, despite differences in composition and aims, movements such as the landless rural workers, indigenous groups, and the women’s movement in Brazil have attempted to shift the current socioeconomic order toward a new equilibrium – a process that is, however, not yet complete. In Ghanem’s view, these movements are best described as historic movements. Addressing their educational aims, the author finds that they tend to fall into two types: (1) the self-provision of knowledge related to the set of problems that gave rise to their movement in the first place; (2) the striving for access to knowledge that is due to them as citizens and yet not given to them by the state. Often, social movements in Brazil are obliged to offer educational services through their own resources, services which are characterized by precarious conditions and which make the right to quality education still a distant dream.
Zusammenfassung – Ghanems Überblick über vor-Ort-Initiativen in Brasilien bedient sich einer von Alain Touraine angeregten Unterscheidung zwischen his- torischen und sozialen Bewegungen. Damit wird argumentiert, daß trotz Differenzen in Zusammenstellung und Zielen, Bewegungen wie Landarbeiter ohne Grundbesitz, einheimische Gruppen und die Frauenbewegung in Brasilien übereinstimmend versucht haben, das gegenwärtige sozialökonomische System in ein neues Gleichgewicht zu bringen – ein Prozeß, der noch nicht abgeschlossen ist. Nach Ghanems Auffassung kann man diese Bewegung am besten als historische Bewegung definieren. Bei der Erlangung ihrer Bildungsziele sieht der Autor den Ansatz zweier unterschiedlicher Methoden: 1) die Selbstversorgung mit Wissen in Zusammenhang mit den Problemen, die zur Gründung ihrer Bewegung geführt haben; 2) die Bemühungen um Zugang zu Wissen, das ihnen als Bürger zusteht, vom Staat jedoch nie gewährt wurde. Oft müssen soziale Bewegungen in Brasilien Bildungsdienstleistungen mit eigenen Mitteln finanzieren, Leistungen, die durch prekäre Konditionen charakterisiert werden und das Recht auf eine qualitativ gute Bildung kaum näher rücken lassen.
Résumé – Partant de la distinction établie en premier lieu par Alain Touraine entre mouvements sociaux et mouvements historiques, l’étude de l’auteur menée sur les initiatives populaires au Brésil relève que, en dépit des différences de structure et d’objectif, les mouvements brésiliens tels que ceux des ouvriers agricoles non pro- priétaires, des groupes autochtones ou des femmes ont tous tenté de faire progresser l’ordre socio-économique en place vers un nouvel équilibre, objectif qui n’est cepen- dant pas encore atteint. Selon l’auteur, ces mouvements sociaux se désignent le mieux par mouvements historiques. Lors de l’analyse de leurs objectifs éducatifs, il constate qu’ils ont tendance à se diviser en deux groupes: ceux qui transmettent en toute autonomie les connaissances liées à l’ensemble de problèmes qui a engendré leur action, et ceux qui luttent pour obtenir l’accès au savoir qui leur est dû en tant que citoyens et leur est encore refusé par les autorités. Les mouvements sociaux brésiliens sont souvent contraints d’investir leurs propres ressources pour proposer des services
International Review of Education – Internationale Zeitschrift für Erziehungswissenschaft – Revue Internationale de l’Education 44(2–3): 177–189, 1998.  1998 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
178
éducatifs, qui se caractérisent par des conditions précaires et maintiennent le droit à une éducation de qualité au stade d’une lointaine utopie.
Resumen – Usando una diferenciación propuesta por primera vez por Alain Touraine entre los movimientos históricos y los movimientos sociales, Ghanem sostiene con la revista que realiza de las iniciativas locales de base en el Brasil que, pese a las diferencias existentes en cuanto a la composición y los objetivos, los movimientos tales como los de trabajadores rurales sin tierra, los grupos indígenas y el movimiento de la mujer en el Brasil han apuntado a cambiar el orden socioeconómico corriente para obtener un nuevo equilibrio, un proceso que, sin embargo, aún no se ha com- pletado. Desde la óptica de Ghanem, la descripción más acertada de estos movimientos sería la de movimientos históricos. Contemplándolos según los objetivos educa- cionales, el autor comprueba que estos movimientos tienden a pertenecer a dos cate- gorías: (1) la autoadquisición del conocimiento relacionado con la problemática que dio origen al movimiento mismo; (2) el esfuerzo por acceder al saber, al que todos tienen derecho como ciudadanos y que aún no se les ha concedido por parte del Estado. Con frecuencia, los movimientos sociales en el Brasil se ven obligados a ofrecer ser- vicios de educación a través de sus propios recursos, que se caracterizan por condi- ciones precarias y que convierten al derecho de recibir una educación de calidad en un sueño que aún está muy lejos de realizarse.
Defining social movements
This article assumes that the educational practice carried out by social move- ments is closely connected with the manner in which these movements grow, look for new members, and present themselves to other groups. Taking this as the point of departure, the article makes a brief distinction between social
179
movements and historic movements in order to depict with greater precision the nature of the predominant movements in contemporary Brazil. The article will then show the terrain in which they act and the difficulties they face in their quest for inclusion in the social structure. This inclusion means mostly access to rights already stated in the law, one of which is the universal right to education.
As a prerequisite to understanding the educational work of social move- ments in Brazil, as in other countries, it is necessary to clarify the meaning of the term “social movement” and to distinguish social movements from historic movements. In spite of the abundant literature on social movements (in Brazil as well as elsewhere) and the recurrent use of this term in political debates, there has been little effort to clarify its meaning.1 To simply assume that the term includes each and every group that engages in collective action is not very helpful. Some might consider it sufficient to say that a collective action becomes a social movement when it confronts a problem and presents a list of demands that gives cohesion to the group.2 Such a definition is useful in ordinary discourse, but its limitations emerge when we consider the distinction between synchronic processes (referring to changes within an existing social system) and diachronic processes (referring to shifts from one social system to another). We will call historic movements those that result in diachronic processes of social change (Touraine 1989). We will reserve the designation social movements for those that refer to synchronic processes of dispute on the broader guidelines of a given social system. Under these broader guidelines some actions can bear upon the political system and con- stitute political pressure groups. Others can occur within organizations and are marked by reciprocal relations around defined norms based on guidelines which emanate from the political system. It should be clear that a social movement can also combine (and generally does) action on the organizational level with political pressure.
Fundamentally, social movements address class conflict and have as their paradigm the labor movement, as a class actor opposing its adversary in the social control process created by industrialization. In this model, the self- definition of the actor (identity), the manner in which the opponent is defined (opposer), and the objective of the conflict (that which is at stake) are three elements that interact and mutually strengthen each other. A historic movement, in contrast, struggles against exclusion and in favor of national integration. In historic movements, the main objective is to mobilize all possible segments in favor of the country’s development.
To assess the performance of a social movement requires one to analyze its actions in detail. There needs to be a minimum set of criteria such as what type of problem is addressed, what image the group has of itself, and how it defines its adversary. Since the majority of the collective actions which will be mentioned here have not been previously submitted to analysis, we are obliged to assume that they are classifiable according to a predetermined concept and consider them as instances of historic movements.
180
In the case of Brazil, it is important to remember that more than twenty years of a dictatorial military regime (1964–1984), which established a period of accelerated development and modernization, added new social problems to those already historically accumulated. This period created many obsta- cles to the expression of popular interests and aspirations, which nonetheless multiplied among groups in civil society. The accumulation of these sup- pressed interests, given the closed political system and in spite of their dif- ferences, brought about a convergence of pressure to open up the system. This movement rapidly took on a political character and became a call for democracy.
Some authors assume that the social movements have played a leading role in Brazilian democratization over the past two decades. Other authors, without necessarily underestimating these movements, contend that the main effort to open the system came from political pressure groups within the parties (Cardoso 1985). The social origin of a great number of these groups was in the economically privileged upper classes, including those of an openly con- servative perspective. Whatever the case, the fight to open a closed political system brought together a varied assortment of groups, which shared a collective opposition to the regime while preserving their own particular char- acteristics. There are those who interpret this process of putting together a collective identity as the distinctive mark of the educational dimension of the movements. In their view, the creation of an “active conscience” makes “learning how to organize and participate” a reality.
Characteristics and educational effects of social movements in Brazil
In examining the educational dimensions of the movements, several aspects must be discussed. First, we must differentiate between the forces that operate in urban areas and those active in rural zones. Second, we must point out two lines of action that in our opinion are strongly related to modernizing processes in Brazil: those regarding ethnic issues (primarily concerning the Afro-Brazilian population) and those concerning gender. As will be argued, such distinctions are more analytical than real because all the various move- ments converge toward the central issue of constructing a modern, and socially and culturally integrated nation.
The emergence of popular group movements, observed during the crisis of the military regime at the end of the 1970s, occurred at a time when impor- tant economic and social transformations had already taken place because the military regime accentuated the consolidation of industry and urbaniza- tion. At the end of the 1950s the majority of the population was rural; thirty years later more than 70 percent of the inhabitants were living in urban areas. The industrialization process came about at the same time as urbanization, although they were in many ways separate processes. It was in this setting that labor relations, placed on the agenda by the workers (chiefly metal
181
workers), became an important social issue within the main industrial centers, together with the struggle for state infrastructure and services required for life in the cities. There were those who demanded child care facilities, schools, health centers, paved streets, sanitation (water and sewers), electricity, street lights, police services, and – the basis for much of the struggle – low-cost housing. There is an estimated deficit of 10 million housing units in the country and, in the case of the city of São Paulo (with approximately 9.15 million inhabitants), 1 million live in shanty towns and 3.5 million in inner city slums although São Paulo is the richest city in the country.3 These problems become particularly aggravated by the immense inequality in income distribution, which is amply recognized as one of the worst in the world.
In rural zones, two types of movement are evident: those related to indige- nous people’s rights and those that confront the vast landed estates. The basis of both is the highly concentrated landed property structure. Of the 6 million agricultural establishments, half are small properties. These add up to 10 million hectares (2.69 percent of the agricultural land). The large properties comprise 165 million hectares (44 percent of the agricultural land), and among these are those that have more than one 1,000 hectares and use only 6.7 percent of their area. The 61 landed estates with more than 100,000 hectares use only 0.14 percent of their area. This concentration appears at first sight to be the result of a very backward rural world.
For the indigenous people, the essential problem of right to land intersects with the theme of cultural self-development and the preservation of their surroundings. These people are exposed to prolonged contact with the non- indigenous world. Their population is relatively small, and the frequent pres- sures of economic growth lead to conflicts over land and natural resources. Indigenous people thus face unfavorable forces, and the support they receive from the mass media and the NGOs cannot reverse this situation in the long term. Historically, the government has confined indigenous people into ever smaller lands. In order to impede the destruction of their traditions, the indige- nous people have been obliged to contest the steady socioeconomic expan- sion and the protection of big land tracts in the north and west of the country, where 60 percent of the present indigenous population is found. These groups rely on the tradition of managing resources in a gentle and environment- friendly manner, which brings their projects close to non-indigenous strate- gies of sustainable development, opening possibilities for balancing control over extensive land with low demographic density. For the environmental groups, the issue is one of making possible a partnership with the indigenous groups themselves, while simultaneously bringing the state to adopt a clear compensatory policy (in contrast to neoliberal strategies), to ensure the con- stitutional rights of indigenous groups and to promote native sociodiversity combined with biodiversity.
For the Movement of the Landless Rural Workers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, MST) the problem of the concentration of agrarian property is acutely linked to one of the most dynamic sectors of the
182
economy, the banking system, given that enormous areas of land are used as collateral for mortgages, loans and financial speculation. Ultimately, these interests sustain the preservation of a highly unjust landed property structure.
In both rural and urban areas, the movements resist a binary division of society and attempt to promote social integration and to invent mechanisms to make this possible. The struggles that prevail in the national arena do not fit into the framework of structured social relations within which social move- ments operate. These struggles are, on the contrary, a non-negotiable oppo- sition to the status quo. In these struggles the central question is to define to what extent the new society will be more inclusive and egalitarian, whether it will maintain or increase the contingent of millions of marginalized people. For example, the issue is not whether industrial policy and business man- agement will favor armaments or food production, but whether entrepreneurs can expand their activities in order to incorporate the majority of those who function within the informal economy. In my view, these are, conceptually, historic movements and not social ones.
Regarding the formal workplace, the movements are not merely preoccu- pied with combating exploitation of labor but with addressing wider problems of marginalized peoples. Among the movements with a privileged place in public opinion are those in defense of street children and landless workers – groups lacking even minimal conditions of existence, be it in the city or in the country.
Challenges to historic movements
The movements we have described are historic movements facing a situation that is critical and particularly adverse. Three aspects of this state of affairs must be highlighted. First, a good number of their leaders are divided on the issue of how to combine the revolutionary theories under which they were formed as militants (the goal of which is always to destroy a given order), with the demands of an institutionally democratic system regulated by legal norms, bearing in mind that these norms are systematically infringed by the state, which fails to guarantee social rights.
Second, there is a serious gap in Brazil between the political parties and the popular movements. Those who are elected tend to maintain a merely formal link with the political parties in such a way that electoral platforms are inconsistent with policy implementation. Information about the perfor- mance of the government is insignificant, and the weight of mass communi- cation media (whose control is highly concentrated) is a determining factor in projecting the candidates’ profiles and ensuring their election.
Third, the victory of the neo-liberal discourse is undeniable and has been devastating in its effects. Although governments since 1994 have succeeded in controlling inflation, the reforms they have introduced have opened the
183
economy to the external market, threatening and even destroying entire sectors. Furthermore, governments have pursued a “minimalist state” formula, scrap- ping state enterprises and pushing through privatization programs while simul- taneously cutting social expenditure.
It is in this unfavorable context that the social movements act. Education within these movements takes various forms. In addition to the education that happens naturally through involvement of people in their actions, the movements adopt a multiplicity of more systematic educational initiatives. Some of these take place in training centers, but the great majority are carried out as courses, seminars, meetings, and debates. In general, such movements need to have the support of NGOs to collect information and systematize the educational programs. There are no more than 180 NGOs, of different sizes, which fit the definition of civil non-profit organizations, and which can be described as “democratic agents of social, economic, and political develop- ment”. A research effort conducted with 145 of these demonstrated that 34 percent were dedicated to some form of education, called popular education, education for citizenship, training, or political education (Landim 1994).
Specific education programs
We will now mention just a few of the most significant experiences in edu- cation connected with the movements. It is to be noted that when the Workers’ Central Union (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores, CUT, the largest central union in the country) was set up, schools were organized in order to teach both union militants and members of other groups and movements. The educa- tive role of the media produced by union organizations is considerable. Bulletins, leaflets and newspapers add up to 12 million copies in circulation monthly. Besides the central unions, each of their branches provides training programs for militants and leaders. The themes of these programs include management training for the unions, negotiating practices, political activism, globalization, outsourcing trends, and social policy.
The MST set up its own training system to prepare both militants and leaders of the movement as well as public school teachers in areas where camps and settlements4 have been organized. For at least four years the National Movement of Street Boys and Girls has maintained an educational center functioning in three sectors, corresponding to three of the country’s regions. These sectors have served the movement’s activists as well as other social workers (called “educators”) involved in assistance programs for poor children and adolescents.
The education program for indigenous people reflects the variety and dis- persion of these ethnic groups (there are about 206 peoples and 170 lan- guages), but in general they have been directed at Indian teacher training with the intention that this would promote bilingual school education. The coop- erative movements, such as the sisal workers in Bahia or the fishermen in
184
Pernambuco, try to combine their literacy initiatives for youth and adults with productively oriented programs.
Women’s movements, such as the Movement of Rural Working Women of Rio Grande do Sul, have gained the recognition of working and social rights and continue fighting for the fulfillment and expansion of these rights. This particular rural movement covers 100 municipalities and involves about 35,000 peasant women. A number of feminist groups combine their action against gender inequality with the agendas of other movements and political parties. Some of them campaign for reproductive rights. Catholic Women Pro Choice, for instance, struggles for the right to contraceptives and abortion.
Another important aspect of the women’s movement is the denunciation of domestic violence and the demand for public programs to support victims of violence. However, it must be pointed out that the far-reaching process of change which launched Brazil into its urban-industrial era created new forms of production, consumption and communication. A parallel process took place in the social and cultural realm, altering daily practices and interpersonal rela - tions, including gender relations (Touraine 1992). In this process, mass com- munication media, especially television, have played a role that has been perhaps even more important than women’s movements in encouraging the questioning of gender inequality. This has removed obstacles to the affirma- tion of feminine identity, including recognition of diverse forms of women’s sexuality.
The work of the women’s movements offers important analogies to that of an indefinite number of groups and organizations that make up what has been conventionally called the Black Movement.5 The majority of these groups combine two objectives: denouncing discrimination in giving legal assistance to crime victims, and promoting a positive identity for the black community. In some cases, they fight for the legal acknowledgment of lands remaining from the quilombos (a name given to those areas that were controlled by fugitive slaves during colonial times).
As we can see, the activities of the movements are largely efforts to change public opinion, and to that extent, they have an educational character. The National Forum Against Rural Violence, for example, aims to make safety a public issue. It fights for public authorities to recognize security as a funda- mental citizen’s right, it attacks the current privileged treatment given to landed estates to the detriment of guaranteeing individual lives, and it strives to overcome the corporate behavior of state organs (e.g. their preference for protecting business interests). It also criticizes the inefficiency of the law and the collapse of the prison system. Although it considers mass media as “creators and manipulators of truth”, and “producers and reproducers of the culture of violence” and of “antidemocratic concepts of security,” the Forum sees some media vehicles as allies. This educative mobilization strives towards a public security policy which counts on wide participation in elaborating and controlling it, which is democratic (serving the entire population), which is
185
preventive in nature and not merely repressive, and which seeks to bring national legislation into line with international norms.
The movements generally recognize the democratic necessity to go beyond the particular interests of the specific group of which they are a part, thus affirming their capacity to formulate general policies for reorganizing or trans- forming social life. In this way, the educational programs are faced with two fundamental aims: to modify public opinion and to empower themselves through the elaboration of public policy. These are two fronts that would lose effectiveness if dissociated.
The magnitude of these challenges can be recognized by analyzing the housing movement, for example, which draws together people with very low incomes and insufficient access to basic services in health and education. These movements have to face the widespread practice of real estate specu- lation in urban centers and the impressive power of real estate capital. They campaign for land restructuring, the occupation of empty urban spaces, and the modification of legal procedures relating to property and the use of urban land. These movements also have to make urban, housing and land policies compatible with one another.
Another group worth mentioning is the Community Organization Move- ment (Movimento de Organização Comunitaria, MOC). This group covers 10 municipalities within the region of Feira de Santana in the State of Bahia. MOC attempts to influence municipal management by means of popular mobilization during the elaboration of “organic” laws (the organic law of the municipality is the highest law at this level of government). Parallel to this, MOC has developed a project to train literacy teachers. This involves grass- roots groups, municipal administrations6 and a state university. From this position the movement tries to increase its bargaining power and to accom- plish the goal of establishing a favorable and systematic relationship with public authority.
Some important institutional preconditions for a dialogue between the movements and state organs were created over the past few years at the munic- ipal, state and federal levels. There are a number of councils with reciprocal membership, that is, with government and non-government representation, created within the executive sector. These include the councils of social assis- tance and the councils of child and adolescent rights. The latter have been officially assigned the task of defining guidelines for basic social policy (such as health and education). The majority of the child and adolescent rights councils have a merely formal existence. The social assistance councils, on the other hand, are negotiation arenas. For this reason, educational programs of the movements have to deal both with rights sanctioned in legislation and with how they work within the relevant state organs. They also have to address the problems with which sectoral policies must deal (De Tommasi 1997).
The movements have shifted from demanding autonomy for themselves in the 1970s and 1980s during the military regime to becoming disoriented under
186
the democratic regime. Throughout Brazilian history, a characteristic that persists in today’s movements is their subordination to state acts and polit- ical interventions. This is the reason why so many boundaries between state and civil society are not clear. For a long time the state was, above all, the promoter of economic development. After the “lost decade” of the 1980s the state forfeited that position but, in many ways, still acts as an organizer of social demands. This occurs because of inertia or omission, or when the state acts as an interlocutor with which demands are negotiated or as a center of elaboration and implementation of policies. In this manner, collective strug- gles appear mainly as reactions to state intervention. The experiences at the municipal level show that changes of municipal government – to either the so-called “popular democratic” or the “conservative” factions – generally coincide with extinguishing mobilization, ending certain alliances between groups in civil society and the state in favor of some new policies, or even interrupting policies that had already been implemented (see for instance Stromquist’s account of the demise of the MOVA literacy program in São Paulo, 1997). Such subordination is part of a larger phenomenon that reflects the links between social forces and the state. This interdependence provokes “a colonizing of the state by interest groups”. In this way the state breaks down the opposing social forces which, caught by the need to develop short- term political strategies, lose their capacity to engage in autonomous action.
In spite of their uneven trajectory and performance, the historic movements that have emerged over the past 15 years can be considered responsible, not exclusively but in great measure, for the affirmation of social rights and for recognizing the necessity for corresponding social policies of a universal kind. This is the mood that prevails at present, although it is not certain for how long. The affirmation of these rights and these policies has been integrated into public opinion and has been incorporated into the spirit of current legis- lation, embedded in the Constitution of 1998. For example, ideas that “health is everyone’s right” or that eight years of basic education is a universal right no longer suffer the rejection they did no more than 40 years ago. In the same manner, the principles of consulting the population and of popular par- ticipation in defining public policy have already been sanctioned and are beginning to be enacted by some (but few) municipal governments. Agrarian reform is no longer one of the taboos and has become a state policy with a favorable consensus, with the only remaining issues being those of form and extent, no longer those of necessity and urgency. In general, the state has come to act in a more explicit, distributive manner, which it had not done in the past – but it is still necessary to overcome its timidity. In addition to this, several policies relative to women, to the Afro-Brazilian and indigenous populations, to those who suffer some kind of handicap, are beginning to be outlined.
Formal education and social movements
The educational action of the movements as regards the school system has two aspects. One of these is the movements’ determination to exercise their influence on school education. This involves an effort both to integrate their practice into the formal educational program and to have their educational practices recognized (Haddad 1992). It is less a matter of teaching methods or of different pedagogical concepts and much more one of content and focus on certain themes. For example, the Regional Commission for Those Affected by Dams (Comissão Regional de Atingidos por Barragens, CRAB) produced, with the help of an NGO, a primer on environmental education and orga- nized related courses for municipal schoolteachers within the area in which the movement worked. Another example is the work of the groups of the Afro- Brazilian movement that denounce racist content in school textbooks. Yet another is the use of instruction material (books and videos) by several move- ments, such as those that condemn prejudices against sexual preferences (Gay Group of Bahia, for instance) or promote sex education (Aids Prevention Support Group).
The second aspect concerns the movements’ provision, with their own means, of services which are not being provided by the state, as demonstrated in the offering of literacy classes for youth and adults (Brazil has a total of 19 million absolute illiterates aged 15 years and older, which represents about one half of the illiterates on the continent). There are also the so-called com- munity schools and child care centers that attend predominantly to very young children and are used mainly to provide the children with a safe place to stay while the parents work, although they also prepare the children for regular education. This type of educational action is ambiguous. It takes place where a population is not provided for by state services, although it can frequently count on some state financial aid. When a group takes on the role of substi- tuting for deficient state education, it nearly always faces problems beyond the already difficult conditions faced by public school education in the pro- vision of materials, technical advice and teacher salaries. Contrary to the aspirations of most organizers (Pontual 1996), the movements do not organize educational activities from which adequate pedagogical practices are created. Nor do they initiate mobilizations to incorporate these educational activities into public education policies as minimal conditions for achieving satisfac- tory and continuous service. It can be affirmed that the struggle to oblige the state to assure educational rights for all constitutes the greatest challenge to social movements working on educational issues in Brazil today.
Translated by Anne Marie Speyer and Nelly Stromquist
187
188
Notes
1. Among the various theoretical lines of analysis of social movements, one which seems to be of great usefulness is that developed by Alain Touraine in the field of sociology of action.
2. One interpretation among many of this type can be found in Ghon 1992. 3. These inner city slums are called cortiços. They are collective habitations, usually big and very old houses where each room is rented to one or more families. In
some cortiços there are as many as 30 families living. 4. Settlements are rural areas with new dwellers who are in the process of becoming
owners and are awaiting legal regulation. 5. Movimento Negro is the name given by the Afro-Brazilian participants of this
movement. 6. Prefeitura refers to the executive body of a municipal government and is translated
here as municipality.
References
Cardoso, Ruth Corrêa Leite. 1982. A trajetória dos movimentos sociais. In: Evelina Dagnino, ed., Anos 90: política e sociedade no Brasil (81–90). São Paulo: Brasiliense.
Cardoso, Ruth Corrêa Leite. 1985. Formas de participação popular no Brasil con- temporâneo. São Paulo em Perspectiva 1(3): 46–50.
Dagnino, Evelina. 1994. Os movimentos sociais e a emergência de uma nova noção de cidadania. In: Evelina Dagnino, ed., Anos 90: política e sociedade no Brasil (103–115). São Paulo: Brasiliense.
De Tommasi, Livia. 1997. Em busca da identidade: as lutas em defesa dos direitos da criança e do adolescente no Brasil e a questão da participação. Paris: Ph.D. dis- sertation, University of Paris I.
Gohn, Maria da Glória. 1994. Movimentos sociais e educação. São Paulo: Cortez Haddad, Sérgio and Maria Clara di Pierro. A educação no movimento dos trabal-
hadores rurais sem terra em Bagé e Sarandi (RS): estudo de caso. Brasília: INEP. Haddad, Sérgio. 1992. Balanço da educação popular através do ensino público. La
Piragua (5): 41–43. Landim, Leilah and Cotrim, Leticia. 1994. ONGs: um perfil. Cadastro das filiadas à
Associação Brasileira de ONGs. Rio de Janeiro: ABONG/ISER.
Pontual, Pedro de Carvalho. 1996. Desafios pedagógicos na construção de uma relação de parceria entre movimentos populares e governo municipal da cidade de São Paulo na gestão Luíza Erundina: a experiência do MOVA-SP. São Paulo: master’s thesis, Pontifícia Universidade Católica de São Paulo, 1996.
Ricardo, Carlos Alberto, ed. 1996. Povos indígenas no Brasil: 1991–1995. São Paulo: Instituto Socioamiental.
Stromquist, Nelly. 1997. Literacy for Citizenship: Gender and Grassroots Dynamics in Brazil. Albany: State University of New York.
Touraine, Alain. 1992. Critique de la modernité. Paris: Arthème Fayard.
Touraine, Alain. 1989. Palavra e sangue: política e sociedade na América Latina. Tradução de Iraci D. Poleti. Campinas: Editora de Universidade Estadual de Campinas.
189
The author
Elie Ghanem has a master’s degree in education from the University of São Paulo. He is a member of the advisory board of Ação Educativa – Pesquisa, Assessoria, Informação, an educational NGO based in São Paulo. His research and practical inter- ests revolve around the work of popular educators in urban areas.
Contact address: Mr. Elie Ghanem, Ação Educativa, Av. Higienopolis, 983, s. 32, 01238-001 São Paulo, Brazil. E-mail: acaoeduca@originet.com.br

2010
Geography
Journal of Latin American Geography
This Land is Ours Now: Social Mobilization and the Meanings of Land in Brazil
Marcellus M. Caldas

Published by Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers
DOI: 10.1353/lag.2010.0017
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/lag/summary/v009/9.2.caldas.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/16/11 12:11AM GMT
Book Reviews	173
This Land is Ours Now: Social Mobilization and the Meanings of Land in Brazil. Wendy Wol- ford. Durnham: Duke University Press, 2010. 275 pp. Photos, notes, appendices, and index. US23.95 Paperback (ISBN: 978-0-8223-4539-9).
Wendy Wolford uses her fifteen years of experience with the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem-Terra, or MST (the Rural Landless Worker’s Movement) to write This Land is Ours Now. The book is centered on extensive ethnographic research in two states in Brazil, Santa Catarina and Pernambuco. Wolford seeks to understand social mobiliza- tion within a movement. In her own words “... to understand how the movement works in particular places” (6) To achieve her goals, she presents an innovative framework by focusing on ordinary people, on everyday political economies, and common sense. Two MST settlements are compared and contrasted: the Campos Novos settlement in Santa Catarina state in southern Brazil, and the Água Preta settlement in Pernambuco in north- eastern Brazil. The settlers in Campos Novos were characterized as small farmers for generations before joining the MST, while settlers in Água Preta had almost all worked in sugarcane plantations for a wage. Consequently, the two locations represented differ- ent political economies, customs, culture, and context, or “moral economies.” Wolford shows that in mobilizing throughout Brazil, MST seeks to produce a coherent movement identity, or its imagined community of landless people. However, this is not always pos- sible.
The author argues that when settlers joined the MST, they did so with a variety of aspirations. In general terms, all settlers had similar desires such as the dream of a better life, but what they wanted depended on a whole set of specific meanings: what land meant to them, what family meant, what justice meant. Wolford argues that to un- derstand these meanings and how they influenced people’s decisions to join the MST we need to understand how the institutions that structured their lives, and the norms that shaped their behavior, were rooted in each particular place, family practices, and commu- nity traditions. In this context, in the Campo Novos settlement, small farmers joined the MST in order to continue the way of life that they had practiced for generations. On the other hand, in the northeast two factors were important in joining the movement. First, MST members were pushed into the movement by their desperate situation and lack of alternatives. Second, they were pulled into the movement by the prospect of belonging to an organization directly connected to channels of power.
Before delving into a deeper examination of each settlement, Wolford starts by conducting an analysis of historical property relations in Brazil. Three points are high- lighted. First, the historical circumstance and conditions have produced a smallholder farm-based politics in southern Brazil. Second, the author argues that any analysis of the MST official genesis story is incomplete without an accounting of structural factors and moral economies. Third, the MST ideals, strategies, and culture were heavily influenced by the moral economies of smallholders from southern Brazil. However, the influence of smallholders from southern Brazil did not transform the MST into a regional move- ment. On the contrary, the author suggests that the identity that MST created relies on a politics of scale and that the MST has privileged scale over place in an effort to national- ize the struggle for land. Consequently, this allowed the movement to achieve significant success at the national and international levels, but it has also generated contradictions in particular places. A good example of this contradiction is found in the Água Preta settlement in the zona da mata of Pernambuco state, a region characterized by sugarcane plantations. The author argues that MST took so many years to develop in this region because the moral economies of sugarcane plantations were so different from the moral economies of small family farms in southern Brazil.
174	Journal of Latin American Geography
Wolford analyzes social mobilization by providing testimony from several movement members as an example of diverse membership within the movement and she situates the decline of the movement in the zona da mata through three important issues: pro- duction, property and politics. The book concludes with an analysis of the relationship between the MST and the “Lula” government by discussing the implications of the cur- rent conjecture for agrarian reform in Brazil.
In general, this book brings together several arguments and ideas that have been published before by the author in several journal articles, but this does not make the book a mere collection of articles. A reader unfamiliar with the MST would think that this book highlights the MST failure to “conquer” other regions of Brazil. In other words, the movement failed to expand its ideology from the south (where it was born) to the northeast. Wolford shows how difficult it is to scale up from a local organization to a national one, and she does so by raising the question of why the demobilization in the northeast took hold. The book is well-written and makes a valuable contribution to the study of land reform in Brazil in an original framework. It makes good use of social movement theories and will be a valuable work for geographers who have interests in social movements in Latin America, particularly in rural Brazil.
Marcellus M. Caldas Department of Geography Kansas State University
Holiday in Mexico: Critical Reflections on Tourism and Tourist Encounters. Dina Berger and An- drew Grant Wood, Eds. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2010. 393 pp., diagrs., photos, notes, and index. $24.94 (ISBN: 978-0-8223-4571-8) ($24.95)
This rich volume is steeped in historical accounts and critical inquiries about the subjectivity surrounding the portrayal of Mexico over the past two centuries by tour- ists, government officials, and the media. Historians, a lawyer, an administrative director, and a journalist wrap their discussions around three themes: (1) how Mexicans promoted and imagined their country and culture, (2) the politics through which Mexicans and their guests interact with each other, and (3) the advantages and disadvantages of tourism. In brief, “the essays presented here offer a detailed and complex view of tourism –a critical topic which has largely been ignored by historians of Mexico” (2).
Three periods frame the volume. The first assesses tourists between 1846 and 1911, spanning the onset of the Mexican-American War to the Mexican Revolution. Andrea Boardman shows that soldiers-tourists had ample time to interact with people and landscapes while treaties were being drafted and governments were being staffed. Through their memoirs, drawings, various forms of ‘mappings,’ and the like, the Ameri- can public (newspapers, family members and kin of the soldiers) became primed to ex- plore their neighbors to the south. Although most of this soldier-tourist interpretations were filtered by gendered, ethnocentric, and religious (e.g., most soldiers were Protestants in a Catholic nation) perspectives, the seed was planted in thousands of readers to get to know Mexico. Railway completion and extensions in the 1880s made that possible for U.S. residents.
Christina Bueno’s chapter on Teotihuacán next explores how the centennial celebrations of 1910 coincided with the excavation of Mexico’s treasured pyramids. She claims that the dilapidated monuments allowed the Porfirian government to attract for-

2011
Sociology
Latin American Perspectives
Participatory Democracy in Action : Practices of the Zapatistas and the Movimento Sem Terra 
Amory Starr, María Elena Martínez-Torres and Peter Rosset

Latin American Perspectives 2011 38: 102 originally published online 7 October 2010 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X10384214
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://lap.sagepub.com/content/38/1/102
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Latin American Perspectives, Inc.
Additional services and information for Latin American Perspectives can be found at: Email Alerts: http://lap.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://lap.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://lap.sagepub.com/content/38/1/102.refs.html
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Participatory Democracy in Action
Practices of the Zapatistas and the Movimento Sem Terra
by Amory Starr, María Elena Martínez-Torres, and Peter Rosset
Participatory democracy has been studied as an auxiliary to state processes and as an institutional and cultural part of social movements. Studies of the use of participa- tory democracy by the Zapatistas of Mexico and the Movimento Sem Terra (Landless Movement—MST) of Brazil show a shared concern with autonomy, in particular avoidance of demobilization through the clientelism and paternalism induced by gov- ernment programs and political parties. Both movements stress training in democracy (the experience of “being government”) and the obligation to participate. Detailed examination of their governance practices may be helpful to communities building democratic movements in other places.
Keywords:   Democracy, Social movements, Governance, Zapatistas, Movimento Sem Terra, MST
Antiglobalization or “alterglobalization”1 movements insist on finding other ways of achieving power than elections, parties, and unions; “they are not fundamentally organized to seize state power” (Stahler-Sholk, Vanden, and Kuecker, 2007: 6). In various contexts, these movements have created new institutions and practices. Critics argue that because they so often refuse to “address the question of the state,” they can only be trivial and marginal. And yet, around the world, although their struggles and tactics and ideologies vary dramatically, these movements recognize each other in their passion and com- mitment to create democratic power here and now. Their claim, compelling and controversial, is that an intensely personal participatory democracy is a response to the deprivations of globalization. (Meanwhile, as Stahler-Sholk et al. point out, these movements’ effects include dramatic change in states and parties, but that is not our interest here.) They have also have inspired political practice all over the world by changing the discourse about the sources and structures of social justice.
We are interested in the specific internal democratic practices of the most powerful of these movements because their project is to create the power to
Amory Starr is the author of Naming the Enemy: Anti-Corporate Movements Confront Globalization (2000), Global Revolt: A Guide to the Movements Against Globalization (2005), and a forthcoming book on the social control of global social movements. María Elena Martínez-Torres is a faculty member in the Environment and Society Program of the Center for Research and Graduate Studies in Social Anthropology, Southeast Campus (CIESAS-Sureste), located in San Cristóbal de Las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico. Peter Rosset is a researcher at the Center for the Study of Rural Change in Mexico (CECCAM), an associate of the Center for the Study of the Americas in Berkeley, CA, and co- coordinator of the Land Research Action Network.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 176, Vol. 38 No. 1, January 2011 102-119 DOI: 10.1177/0094582X10384214 © 2011 Latin American Perspectives
102
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	103
solve their own problems and to do so democratically. We imagine that move- ments around the world are interested in adapting successful practices to their own contexts and eager to have specific information about how these move- ments operate. We are also interested in confirming the recognition that many forms of democracy are active and possible and that the rejection of the neolib- eral fantasy is accompanied by a rich collection of tangible alternative realities, among them authentic democracy.
One would expect political scientists to have provided a rich literature on various approaches to democracy. Disappointingly, this is not the case. The bulk of political science research regarding democracy is devoted to the study of political parties, elections, and representative/parliamentary systems. Indeed, despite considerable anthropological evidence of their frequency, no com- pendium of world-historic democratic practices exists (see Clastres, 1987). Indigenous communities, in a valiant attempt to save the world from their conquerors, have increasingly argued that their ways contain the social and political technologies required for ecologically sound, diverse, and dignified societies (Indigenous Peoples, 1999; Indigenous Peoples Kyoto Water Declaration, 2003; Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism, n.d.).
Works that do seek a more inclusive view almost always understand “par- ticipatory democracy” as a kind of advisory process to state decision making (Barber, 1983; Wainwright, 2003; Mutz, 2006; Goodin, 2003; Fung and Wright, 2001) Similarly, in Latin America “decentralization” has referred not to a localization of political power but to a way of responding simultaneously to cost-cutting pressures from international financial institutions and local pres- sures for more accountable social services (García-Guadilla and Pérez, 2002; Fox, 1994; Barczak, 2001; Forero-Pineda, 2001). The forms of “direct,” “delib- erative,” and “decentralized” democracy discussed in these works are all ways of participating in the state. Participatory democracy as a viable politi- cal practice independent of the state has seldom been a serious object of scholarly attention. Any investigation has been discouraged by Robert Dahl’s (1970) influential pronouncement that participatory democracy is simply infeasible and therefore an indulgence (or, at best, a resource) for social movements. There has been widespread pessimism among academics about the capacity of participatory forms to work on a large scale or be sustained on any scale.
Our cases need no introduction to readers here. The Zapatistas of Mexico and the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural Workers—MST) of Brazil are among the most influential movements of the past two decades. The Zapatistas have contributed concepts and inspira- tion that have directly and visibly shaped the emergence of the movement confronting global summits, participatory media, indigenous movements in the Americas, and local movements across the North America and Western Europe. Meanwhile the MST was central to the building of an effective and accountable international peasants’ movement, the Vía Campesina, now repre- senting some 500 million families around the world.
These movements have been written about extensively. Regarding the Zapatistas, scholars have examined their construction of a response to neo- liberalism (De Angelis, 2005; Collier and Collier, 2005; Ross, 2002; 2006), their
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
104	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
contribution to the emergence of transnational networks (Midnight Notes Collective and Autonomedia, 2001; Rosset, Martínez-Torres, and Hernandez- Navarro, 2005; Olesen, 2005; Khasnabish, 2007), their participation in post- modern forms of politics (Martínez-Torres, 2001; Langman, 2005; Callahan, 2005; Cleaver, 1998; 1994; Tormey, 2006), and their contributions to politics in Mexico (Swords, 2007; Weinberg, 2000) and elsewhere (Swords, 2006; Holloway, 2005; Zugman, 2005; 2009), and they have also contributed extensive texts of their own to public discourse (EZLN, n.d.; Marcos et al., 1995; 2004; Mora, 2007) Scholars have attended to the theological-political origins of the MST (Löwy, 2001), the political economy of its land-reform strategy, (Wright and Wolford, 2003; Houtzager, 2005), its role in the emergence of a solidarity economy (Eid and Pimental, 2001), its cooperativism (Scopinho, 2007), the social contexts in which it organizes (Wolford, 2006), its leadership (Veltmeyer and Petras, 2002), its development of subjectivity (Leite and Dimenstein, 2006), its spatial creativity (Castells, 2002), and its mística (Issa, 2007). Yet little of this work addresses democratic practices in great detail. Dias Martins (2006) has studied the development of participation in the MST, and Ross (2005) has studied part of the Zapatista governance structure.
Drawing on extensive fieldwork with these movements,2 we focus here on their practices of participatory democracy with an eye to identifying lessons for other movements that seek to use their techniques. We first describe each movement’s structure of participatory democracy in some detail and conclude with a comparative analysis.
ZAPATISMO
Since appearing as a guerrilla army in January 1994, the Zapatistas have worked to elaborate the practice of autonomy as a response and an alternative to globalization. When the Mexican government betrayed the 1996 San Andrés Agreement, which would have granted limited autonomy to indigenous regions of Mexico, the Zapatistas decided to construct political autonomy unilaterally. As of 2007 they have been implementing participatory democracy in six dimensions, each of which has a specific democratic method suited to its responsibilities:
1. Political and military leadership. The Comité Clandestino Revolucionario Indígena (Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee—CCRI) is com- posed of mostly civilian comandantes, at least one male and one female repre- senting each of the 11 indigenous ethnic groups in the area, plus mestizos. It directs the military operations of the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional (Zapatista Army of National Liberation—EZLN) and until 2003 was also responsible for matters of civilian affairs. It functions as the ultimate authority in Zapatista territories.
2. Consultations and assemblies. All major CCRI decisions go through a con- sultation process involving all of the more than 1,111 Zapatista communities.3 No major strategic or policy decision is made until it has been considered and approved by consensus in every community’s assembly. Major decisions take
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	105
about six months. The community assemblies also make political decisions regarding community matters, including elections to the Zapatista govern- ment. Assemblies are held at the community, municipal, and regional level. Communities choose representatives to attend municipal and regional assem- blies. On certain matters of general concern, such as health, people from all levels may attend a special regional assembly. Attendance at community assemblies is generally considered mandatory for Zapatistas older than 12 or 15 except in the case of illness or conflicting work obligations. Assemblies may involve from 50 to 200 people, depending on the size of the community. The decision-making process begins with the coordinator (who is not necessarily a political leader) explaining the issue and continues with discussion among members in their respective languages. There is little imposed order or struc- ture to the discussion; it proceeds organically until eventually two or three ideas or positions emerge and the coordinator summarizes them. The process continues in the same lively, chaotic manner until eventually someone asks, “¿Acuerdo ya?” (Do we have agreement?).
3. Good-government juntas and councils. In July 2003 the EZLN relinquished its civilian governance function to the municipal and regional juntas described in detail by Subcomandante Insurgente Marcos in the “Treceava Estela” (Marcos, 2003). The CCRI remains responsible for military and politi- cal functions (strategy), but the juntas manage economic and civic affairs for the municipalities and provide services that people need from govern- ment. There are some 38 municipal councils/juntas (the number changes from time to time) and 5 regional juntas de buen gobierno (good-government juntas), which function in centers called caracoles. Being autonomous, they all have slightly different rules and methods of rotation. The regional juntas provide coordination among the assemblies of the autonomous municipali- ties. While only Zapatistas can serve on them, the juntas provide essential government services for Zapatistas and non-Zapatistas alike who live in the Zapatista region, estimated to be about 300,000 people. Zapatista municipali- ties actually cross the territories of two governments (the former/official government and the Zapatista one), and communities may have two separate sets of institutions (schools, health, festivals).
Service in the juntas is designed to give every Zapatista the experience of government. The idea is that everyone should serve eventually so that people will no longer be mystified by the process of government. Representatives to municipal councils are elected in community assemblies by open ballot and form a rotational pool for the regional juntas, from which 8–16 members gov- ern the region at any one time. People serve from one to three years, periodi- cally rotating into the junta for periods of seven to ten days so that they can maintain their other responsibilities, usually on their home farms. Each com- munity supports the representatives, using collective projects such as pig rais- ing to pay for their transportation, taking care of their fields when they are away, providing their food, etc. Nobody is paid for service on a junta or in any other position of authority or service.
The municipal and regional juntas have no staff. There are some volunteers who serve occasionally in secretarial or other staff roles. The juntas have com- missions that report to them; these involve more people than the elected rep- resentatives, and they are not required to rotate on a fixed schedule. They do
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
106	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
much of the ongoing work in areas such as health, education, and production; the number of commissions varies with the level of organization and develop- ment of that area. The juntas make the major decisions; the commissions han- dle the details. Each commission has promotores (volunteers from the community) who do the actual work. The juntas address problems and issues on a first- come, first-served basis. They have no bank accounts. Enlace Civil is a nongov- ernmental organization that handles donations to the Zapatistas, but the juntas make the decisions about expenditures.
The municipal juntas provide conflict resolution and criminal justice through the 3 comisiones de honor y justicia, conducting careful investigations and bal- anced deliberations. They have worked hard to prove that they are not biased against non-Zapatistas and provide them good services. Since the juntas have established a reputation for impartial resolution of conflicts, they are often preferred and chosen even by non-Zapatistas over the regular government justice system (in the latter it is often the case that the person with more money or political influence wins, regardless of the facts of the case). These commis- sions offer several benefits: their services are free and nonbureaucratic, they are conducted in indigenous languages, and they are impartial. On one occasion a taxi drivers’ union outside of Zapatista territory traveled to a Zapatista junta seeking dispute resolution. In matters of criminality, even for very serious crimes, community service is required as restitution (planting 1,000 trees, building a school, opening a road), after which the person is pardoned and accepted fully back into the community. In most cases punishment is tempo- rary (there is no permanent criminal record attached to a person); in the most extreme cases the maximum penalty is permanent expulsion. This system of justice is based on the traditional methods of indigenous communities.
The regional juntas govern the activities of foreign charitable/solidarity proj- ects, ensuring that the projects are directed by the Zapatistas and that they pro- vide benefits to communities equally rather than only to the more accessible ones or the ones where outsiders have already established contacts (Marcos, 2003). Foreign projects now have to work through the regional junta, which knows the priorities. The junta will change or adapt proposed projects. For basic goods that come from outside the territory, the juntas organize cooperative purchasing for Zapatista territories, making sure to get good prices and to avoid corruption. These goods are provided to the Zapatista stores in the communities.
The regional juntas have two additional commissions with which they work side by side. The Information Commission is the unelected “political” dimen- sion of the junta and is staffed by long-term Zapatista leaders/cadres who live in the region. These people are the product of the history of the movement. The Vigilance Commission, which is elected, is responsible for informing the com- munities of what is going on with the junta—basically a “public audit” or watchdog function. It has a separate space from the junta. Anyone who takes an issue to the junta also has to go to this commission.
In its first public evaluation of the juntas in August 2004, the CCRI acknowl- edged that it needed to control its impulse to make suggestions and to inter- vene in the civilian process. Typically only a quarter to (rarely) half of the junta representatives are women, short of the intended gender equity. The CCRI has on various occasions recognized the need to work harder to confront issues at the family level that make it hard for women to be away from home to serve in the juntas.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	107
4. Local economy and autonomy. The Zapatistas are attempting to reconstruct a vibrant local rural economy after the devastating effects of free trade and neo- liberalism in recent decades. These effects included the inundation of the local maize market with cheap imports that local farmers could not compete with, the privatization and cutback of credit for farmers, the privatization of parastatal marketing agencies that had helped farmers bring crops to market, cutbacks in essential services, the deepening of rural poverty, and increasing migration. Reconstruction of the local economy involves organizing cooperatives and col- lectives that produce agricultural products, handicrafts, and even clothing and boots; transportation cooperatives move these products (as well as people) regionally, and community shops facilitate regional trade. It also involves creat- ing training opportunities for youth who would otherwise have to migrate in search of paid work. This training may include learning how to cut hair, design clothes, repair machinery, bake bread, or fix computers, along with carpentry, electrical work, masonry, bricklaying, and plumbing, encouraging the develop- ment of small businesses that strengthen the village economy. At the same time, the Zapatistas have established programs to promote agroecological farming practices in order to reduce dependency on purchased imported farm chemicals and establish agricultural independence. These programs typically connect agr- oecology with the indigenous cosmovisión (worldview).
5. The Other Campaign. As a key social movement in Mexico, the Zapatistas have (reluctantly on occasion) accepted responsibility for assisting in the transformation of the political framework of the country as a whole. The Other Campaign (launched with the Zapatistas’ Sixth Declaration in 2005) is a project with Mexican civil society in which the Zapatistas and their sympa- thizers are constructing a different form of politics. In the old politics, domi- nated by corporativism and clientelism, the same people always dominate, discuss, and decide, and women, indigenous people, and others are marginal- ized. The Other Campaign is composed of those who are “below and on the left” in the structure of society. In December 2006 the Other Campaign became explicitly anticapitalist and antipatriarchal. The Zapatistas have reached out to all sectors, especially the indigenous peasant sector, even including com- munities who continue to accept financial support from the government. Anyone willing to sign on to the Sixth Declaration (which can be done through the web site at http://enlacezapatista.ezln.org.mx/especiales/2/) and is not a member of a political party may become part of the Other Campaign.
In the first phase of the campaign, “getting to know you,” Subcomandante Marcos himself traveled around the country for six months modeling the way to listen to voices in the community. With him, everybody listened to every- body else’s stories of resistance. In the second phase, a commission of coman- dantes toured the country in an effort to come up with a consensus national platform and create a national network of local resistances to government and corporate actions, gas stations, dams, World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank actions, the repression of sex workers, etc. When local struggles and resistances all over Mexico are linked, they all become more powerful. If the police repress one, then the others can undertake solidarity actions. Through this process local resistances can grow into a national move- ment for national transformation. It is worth noting, however, that this mutual
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
108	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
assistance is not yet powerful enough to stop government repression, as the cases of San Salvador Atenco and Oaxaca, among others, attest.
So far the Other Campaign does not have a clearly defined structure. Despite the cultural diversity of indigenous peoples, they generally have similar pro- cesses for decision making—a mixture of consensus of the whole community plus a council of elders. Indigenous people seem to envision that the Other Campaign will take on some structure similar to that of the juntas. Those in the Other Campaign who come from the traditional left, however, anticipate that it will take on the structure of a hierarchical party. The alternative collectives in the campaign are opposed to the idea of structure because they are worried that it will bring back the “old” politics (and in fact those politics are apparent in some cases already).
6. International meetings. As part of a global social movement, the Zapatistas have periodically invited allies from the rest of the world to meet in “interga- lactics” or international meetings. The first intergalactic was in 1996, when the Zapatistas invited anti-neoliberal activists from all over the world to gather together and exchange ideas and experiences. Comandantes were present at every roundtable, but only to listen. When people said, “We came all the way around the world to hear the Zapatistas speak,” they answered, “We are here to listen and to facilitate the emergence of collective positions.” There were two more meetings in Spain in August 1997, but the Zapatistas themselves were unable to travel and did not participate. The next international meeting was in Chiapas in December 2006 and was the first meeting between Zapatista com- munities and the peoples of the world. At this meeting the various juntas and sectors reported on the progress that they had made with their new form of organization. Subsequent meetings in July and December 2007 followed simi- lar formats. The meeting at the end of 2007 was also the first meeting of Zapatista women with the women of the world.
One of the things that the Zapatistas and Marcos have stressed is that to create a truly democratic structure one must demonstrate the ability and willingness to listen. They demonstrated this ability and willingness in their first intergalactic, and Marcos did so in his six-month tour for the Other Campaign. In meetings running for 12–16 hours in which hundreds of people would get up and tell their stories, he would listen patiently for hours and speak only at the end. In effect the pedagogy of the meeting was, “If you want to work with us, you have to be able to listen.” Indigenous communities in Mexico typically have general assemblies in which members speak for as long as they want to (though in some cases only once per person). Each speaker finishes by saying, “Esto es mi palabra” (This is my word). All the meetings of the Other Campaign are conducted in this way. Listening is a key element in building a democratic structure.
THE MST
Adopting a strict ideological and structural plan growing out of liberation theology, Leninism, and Marxism, among other sources, the MST has organized
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	109
1.5 million landless workers in 23 of Brazil’s 27 states (see CONCRAB/MST, 2004; Harnecker, 2002). Since 1985 it has legalized 2,000 settlements housing 350,000 families, and another 180,000 families are currently encamped awaiting land. The settlement communities range in size from fewer than 100 to 5,000 people and involve a land area larger than Italy. The communities include mul- tiple productive cooperatives. The MST structure of participatory democracy also has six components:
1. Encampments. Before an occupation, MST organizers (militantes) encour- age landless workers to gather the necessary materials, such as boots, plastic for tents, sacks of grain, etc., to form an encampment.4 Once the materials have been gathered (which may take up to a year), an encampment is set up on land along a road. Many of the people are extremely poor and also have problems such as alcohol, drugs, violence, abusive behavior, and lack of trust. Many of these problems are faced and dealt with effectively in the encamp- ment, partly because of their rules and partly because of the intimacy of the encampment, in which it is impossible to hide these behaviors. When there is a discipline problem, the person goes before the discipline sector of the camp and may be required to perform community service. Expulsion is a last resort. Immediately, everyone is participating in governance and building trust and community. Every adult immediately chooses or is assigned a “sec- tor” (e.g., education, health, gender, discipline, production, cooperation, mís- tica). After some years in the encampment, the community occupies a legally expropriatable piece of land, typically entering into a protracted conflict with private security guards and police. Finally, the lawyers go to work negotiating with the government for permanent land title (though this may be on yet another piece of land). Once the permanent land is acquired, participation becomes more challenging, as the movement must struggle against a tendency toward relative demobilization and declining interest in politics once land has been obtained and other concerns such as prices and credit come to the fore. (This is always a difficulty for land reform movements [see Anderson, 1994].) Nevertheless, the MST’s participatory process results in a far lower rate of abandonment than in other land-reform settlements (see Rosset, Courville, and Patel, 2006: Pt. 2, introduction and Ch. 15).
2. Decision making. The MST operates according to democratic centralism. Each group of 10 families is called a núcleo de base (base nucleus) and elects one man and one woman to the council of its settlement/community. Each settle- ment then elects one man and one woman to the regional council; each regional council elects one man and one woman to the state- or province-level council and to the national council (which meets for 2 days every 45 days). About a third of the members of any council rotate off and are replaced at the national congress, which is held every three years. The reelection of some incumbents ensures that the congress retains the benefit of more experienced representatives.5
The MST decision-making process strives for consensus, but when disagree- ments arise that cannot be resolved by consensus the elected leader makes the decision. This means that people must place their faith in their representatives to higher levels. The MST uses the concepts of “ascending” and “descending”
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
110	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
democracy (McCowan, 2003). All issues are debated in the base nuclei, which instruct their representatives how to vote at the higher levels. Once the final deci- sion is made at the higher level, its implementation returns to the level of the base nucleus. Criticism of or resistance to the descending decisions is generally expressed through the ascending process, which begins with a debate in the base nucleus and is transmitted upward if the nucleus as a collective decides to do so.
In the MST, people are in meetings much of the time. The base nuclei meet at least once a week. The meetings are coordinated by the people who know the most. In the MST culture of meetings, the emphasis is on being brief and efficient. Speakers are obliged to be efficient in making their points. If someone speaks for more than five minutes without coming to the point, someone will invevitably say, “Companheiro, be more synthetic, please. What is the point you are trying to make?”
At larger regional and national meetings, people are still organized into nuclei. If there are 500 people at the meeting, they are divided into 50 groups of 10. Each group reads the preparatory documents, debates, decides its position, and prepares comments to present to the plenary. Afterward the groups discuss what everyone said in the plenary and decide what they want to say at the next plenary. Each group also has a representative on the coordinating team for the meeting that meets every night to discuss how the day went and plan for the next as well as to address any problems of the gathering itself, such as food or housing. At the June 2007 congress of the MST in Brasilia, this method was used with 17,000 participants. The nuclei were a little bigger, about 50 people, organized in terms of which bus they traveled in, and each one began its discussions as it set out on its journey to the congress.
3. Education. The MST holds that knowledge is power. Its ideology is clear that this is a movement to change the system. Domination occurs by keeping people in ignorance. The MST runs its own schools on a Freirean model blended with the ideas of other noted pedagogues such as Anton Makarenko from the early days of the Russian Revolution. The teachers and students in the schools participate in the MST governance structure by electing one male and one female to represent each base nucleus (10 students or 10 teachers). In addition to the schools, members of the MST are obligated to continue learn- ing. Each member spends two months a year studying. Those who are illiter- ate learn to read and write, and those who have finished college must go to graduate school.
In addition, the base nucleus meets regularly for ideological study and criti- cism/self-criticism. The MST ideology is strengthened and reinforced through the creation and practice of rituals called mística that help build peasant-worker identity and unity. No MST meeting begins without a mística. (Mística is also common in peasant organizations that belong to the Vía Campesina [Martínez- Torres and Rosset, 2010], but the MST seems most committed to using them [see Issa, 2007].)
One of the features of the MST that makes it such a powerful force in Brazil is its large numbers of trained militants or cadres, who serve as community organizers or outreach workers. In principle, each base nucleus is expected to
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	111
free one member for a year and a half to two years at a time to work as a part- or full-time activist for the movement. The families in the base nucelus commit to covering that person’s labor by contributing work or farm products to the per- son’s family. The person who has thus been liberated attends a political training school that moves around the country. Militants go to areas where landless people are not yet organized and organize them to undertake land occupations and create settlements. They then accompany the settlements until they are self- sustaining. The presence of more than 15,000 militants at any given time makes it possible for the movement to organize dozens of new land occupations, accompany dozens of encampments, mobilize large marches and sit-ins at gov- ernment offices, and administer regional and national cooperatives.
4. Resources. “We are very Cartesian,” said one MST member. “Everything has coordinates.” Getting resources from the state without becoming con- taminated ideologically or co-opted is managed not by refusing all state funding and support programs (as the Zapatistas do) but through ideology and confrontation. Powerful actions are employed to “hit the state hard and take the resources.” MST members obtain funding for education and agricul- tural credit by demanding their proportional share of the state and federal budgets. They use the laws on cooperatives to establish and legally register production and consumption cooperatives. They get capital through the fed- eral programs for credit unions. Their relative success at obtaining public resources has been used against them by the Right on numerous occasions.
5. Production. Originally, one of the sectors was “cooperatives,” which really meant “collectives.” It soon became apparent, however, that while slum- dwellers who participated in land occupations were happy working together in farming collectives, peasants who had recently become landless dreamed of recovering their individual family farms. To make room for this range of expectations, the MST changed the name of the “cooperatives sector” to the “sector of cooperation” in order to allow for a broader set of activities. Production co-ops are established within a settlement. Some families work land collectively, while others work separately but have a co-op for the pur- poses of credit and marketing. The families involved decide what they want to do, the point being that they should be cooperative rather than competitive with one another. There are regional cooperatives for marketing, transporta- tion, storage, processing, technical assistance, and collective purchasing of inputs, as well as credit. There are national cooperatives for agriculture and education that manage very large amounts of money in an accountable way. The federal education money goes through one of these. The cooperatives are represented in the MST governance structure as part of the production sector.
There is some internal debate about whether the big bureaucracies of the co-ops and the tasks of administering money and organizational resources are compatible with the social-movement functions of the MST. The more admin- istrative functions are seen as possibly depoliticizing. There is therefore a lot of discussion about what degree of bureaucratization is useful and how it affects mass mobilization and political action for land occupations and mas- sive protest marches. Looking for the right structures to do these things well is an ongoing process.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
112	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
6. Engagement with other social movements. The MST has come to the conclu- sion that it needs strong alliances to achieve the structural changes it desires in Brazil. At the national level, this has meant trying to strengthen allied rural movements through the Vía Campesina–Brazil. As the “strongest sibling” among the rural movements, with an established training infrastructure, the MST has begun to open half of its training and political opportunities to cad- res from Via Campesina–Brazil’s five other member organizations. Because change in Brazil also requires change in global economic governance struc- tures, the MST has begun to devote substantial resources to strengthening the Vía Campesina International. As a result of the movement’s participation in this global peasant alliance—in which the issue of farming technology has become politicized as a historic clash between ecologically destructive indus- trialized agribusiness and a rediscovered peasant model of farming—the MST has developed internal programs to promote agroecological farming.
Finally, in a move similar to and indeed influenced by the Zapatistas’ Other Campaign, the MST is building a national political movement allying the rural and urban lefts that is called the Consulta Popular (Popular Consultation), an open political space in which different movements seek to negotiate consensus positions for a new “national project” for Brazil. Within the Consulta Popular, the MST promotes a smaller, more tightly controlled space called the Asamblea Popular (People’s Assembly), which functions as a sort of steering committee for the mass-based social movements and allied trade-union sectors. Similar to the methods of the Other Campaign, in 1998 there were discussions across the country (Dias Martins, 2006).
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Although these two movements operate in very different contexts and with very different kinds of power, for both the central concern of participatory democracy is autonomy. Unfortunately, many social-movements scholars and political scientists and much of the traditional left are, as one Zapatista sup- porter put it, “illiterate in terms of autonomy” (Mora, 2007: 66). Mora points out that the neoliberal state attempts to construct a concept of multicultural autonomy that is universalistic, individualistic, and ultimately another form of the “consumer choice” touted by globalization. Zapatista autonomy is col- lective, relational, “intercultural,” and centrally concerned with territory, self- governance, and control over resources. The Zapatistas establish their own systems of governance, manage provisioning (including health and educa- tion) for communities, control the activities of outside organizations (includ- ing both the Mexican military and foreign charities), and establish policy (such as the ban on alcohol use). The MST establishes autonomy by creating self-governed, self-provisioning communities committed to liberation at every level from the family to the economy. These communities trade internally (to a lesser extent than the Zapatistas) and produce much of their own essentials (seeds, food, education).
In contrast to many other social movements, these two have a sense of space and place that they defend militantly, though the Zapatistas have more
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	113
of a sense of “territory.” In the core of their territory, Zapatistas have author- ity to bar pesticide salesmen. At the outskirts, Zapatistas live in mixed com- munities with two systems of government. Between is a zone of communities some of which are 100 percent Zapatista, some non-Zapatista, and some mixed. The MST still think mostly in terms of “land” rather than “territory,” but this is changing as they increasingly examine issues regarding contiguity and permeability.
For the MST and the Zapatistas the biggest issue of autonomy is how to avoid demobilization through clientelism and paternalism induced by govern- ment programs and political parties. Zapatistas cannot accept any funds from government programs (such as agricultural subsidies or the subsidy to families called Oportunidades). Since some people have had to leave the Zapatistas in order to receive this support, the Other Campaign is a way for them to continue to participate in the Zapatista process. The MST accepts and power- fully expresses entitlement to government money and relations with elected officials but defends itself from electoral politics ideologically and culturally.
Members of electoral parties cannot be Zapatistas, nor can they be members of the Other Campaign. (Members of revolutionary parties that are not electoral can be part of the Other Campaign.) The MST has at times been loosely allied with an electoral party, the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party—PT), but it maintains autonomy structurally by endorsing a cross-party slate of can- didates. It supports some PT candidates and also candidates from other parties who have signed a pledge that they will be loyal to peasant interests over party interests whenever these conflict. MST militants cannot be members of political parties, but grassroots members of the communities may be and may also run for election to local municipal councils.
The MST focuses intense efforts on inoculating members against clientelism and paternalism through ideology (see Dias Martins, 2006). The Zapatistas are not as organized on this point, but in their communities they do work to call attention to the contradictions between the old and the new politics. People are pressured to choose a side. While the MST insists that only mass struggle can produce real change, the Zapatistas emphasize the need to create another form of politics.
We were most impressed by the movements’ emphasis on the “school of democracy.” For the Zapatistas, once everyone has had the experience of “being government,” no one can be fooled by it. In the MST, democratic decision mak- ing is pervasive and immediate. Each base nucleus has democratic meetings and participates, through rotating representatives, in shaping the commu- nity. We were also struck by the concept of the obligation to participate. The Zapatistas require attendance at community consultations and rotate partici- pation in community government. The MST requires participation in the base nucleus, in rotating governance, in sectors, and in education. For both the Zapatistas and the MST, people are obligated to contribute to the support of community members who are serving as representatives or militants. Moreover, ideological formation is an obligation in the MST. As Dias Martins points out, members of the MST also “observe their individual attitudes . . . to make changes from inside themselves” (2006: 273). Stahler-Sholk, Vanden, and Kuecker (2007: 10) ask “whether . . . autonomy yields more horizontal and participatory and
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
114	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
transparent processes.” Both movements seek autonomy from what they describe as the old politics, creating new, more accountable and participatory forms of politics and a more equitable material situation as a result.
One of the things learned in the school of democracy is a political culture. For the MST, the struggle is not only to gain land but to change the culture—to produce Che Guevara’s “new man and new woman.” The Zapatistas are also constantly trying to raise consciousness. Migration is seen as devastating to the fabric of communities. Zapatistas may not migrate for work without the per- mission of the junta, and this is given only upon demonstration of family need. One of the goals of the schools is to link children to their communities instead of depreciating life in the countryside and glorifying the city. Zapatista schools educate children in local history in a national and global context and in skills for use in their communities (see Baronnet, 2008).
Political culture also includes the way people relate to each other. (Polletta [2002] found that associational style was both the strength and the Achilles’ heel of social movements.) Zapatista political culture involves listening to whatever people want to share with the group. MST political culture is a matter of short, efficient meetings, in which it is important to speak succinctly and to the point. Militants’ training includes how to conduct meetings, and they teach by example. These styles are different from the ones Polletta identified in U.S. movements. The Zapatistas and the MST have a revolutionary party style based on allegiance to an ideology that is internally defined and held together with communal social control. Trust is determined by membership. Having survived the years of commitment in the encampments is the basis of trust for the MST. To be in the Zapatistas requires commitment and hardship. When a family demonstrates commitment through practice (quitting the gov- ernment programs, not sending its children to the government school, etc.), it is a trusted member. When it abandons this practice, it is trusted no longer; it is no longer Zapatista.6
Polletta found that deliberative talk and experimentation help participatory democracy to overcome limitations of associational style. Both these move- ments use these two practices extensively. The Zapatista “culture of listening” and the MST culture of ascending and descending democracy are both methods of empowering deliberation while preventing domination. Both movements use rotation to avoid a few persons’ gaining too much authority. In addition, the Zapatistas prepare internal reports, and one issue of self-criticism has been too much intervention by the more experienced cadres. Openness, information flow, and genuine deliberation are protected by Zapatistas through the use of community consultations with no time limits and in the MST by the regular meetings of the base nuclei and ascending democracy.
The Zapatistas’ view of autonomy is that things can be done differently at different levels in the context of consensus. It is easy to get authorized to do something differently as an experiment. For example, when one community did not want to contribute money to a region-wide program, the regional junta agreed that that community should experiment with its own methods while self-financing the program in its area. Similarly, the MST experiments with dif- ferent ways of laying out settlements (clustering the houses or dispersing them with the farmland) in an effort to promote political consciousness.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	115
A major concern of leftist observers is these movements’ commitment to social diversity. The Zapatistas and the MST hold themselves accountable for fully integrating those who are an organic part of their base community. Thus the Zapatistas provide representative positions to all of the ethnic groups in their territory and the mestizos. The MST does not perform land occupations in areas claimed by indigenous people. This solidarity extends back to its ori- gins (Wright and Wolford, 2003). Both movements are committed to the full participation and equal power of women and are self-critical of their having failed to conquer the plague of machismo. Moreover, in their political dialogue beyond their own communities, the Zapatistas express solidarity with people who are politically marginalized and oppressed in many ways in many places, calling for a broad alliance of solidarity.
The anthropologist David Graeber (2007) reminds us that modern civic representative systems were based on an “interstitial cosmopolitan” proletarian and multicultural history of “democratic improvisation,” owing little to ancient Greece and possibly something to pirate ships. We hope that this detailed view of these movements practices will be helpful to communities building democratic movements in other places.7
NOTES
1. “Alterglobalization” expresses the generation of alternatives that accompanies these move- ments’ rejection of corporate/capitalist globalization (see Starr, 2005).
2. The following sections are based on extensive fieldwork (see DeWalt and DeWalt, 2002) by Martínez-Torres and Rosset with the Zapatistas (since 1995) and the MST (since 1998). This research has involved participation in and/or observation of workshops, training sessions, meet- ings, public forums, site visits, etc., and, in the case of the MST, substantial collaborative work. For reasons related to the nature of these movements, we have chosen not to share details such as interview subjects, dates, and specific locations.
3. In September 1997, representatives from 1,111 communities traveled in a caravan to Mexico City. This is the most recent official count of Zapatista communities.
4. At first the MST donated the materials for the encampments, but it discovered that with donated materials people would flee if the police attacked. If they had had to gather their own materials, they stayed to defend them.
5. For recent changes in this representation scheme, to make it even more democratic, see Bogo, 2010.
6. Commitment to the Zapatista cause is, of course, not just a matter of family practice but involves indigenous community identity and campesino customs such as collective labor and assembly decision making.
7. For diametrically opposed views on participatory democracy among the Zapatistas, see Estrada Saavedra (2007; 2020); on the MST see Navarro (2010). Our extensive personal experi- ences provide no support for the versions described by these authors, who are both linked to officialist circles. See Baschet (2010) for a critique of Estrada Saavedra and this type of anti- movement work in general.
REFERENCES
Anderson, Leslie E. 1994 The Political Ecology of the Modern Peasant. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
116	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Barber, Benjamin R. 1983 Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Barczak, Monica 2001 “Representation by consultation? The rise of direct democracy in Latin America.” Latin American Politics and Society 43 (3): 37–59.
Baronnet, Bruno 2008 “Rebel youth and Zapatista autonomous education.” Latin American Perspectives 35 (4): 112–124.
Baschet, Jérôme 2010 “Punto de vista e investigación: el caso del Zapatismo.” Desacatos 33: 189–201.
Bogo, Ademar 2010 “Las formas de la democracia interna dentro del movimiento de los Sin Tierra de Brasil (Entrevista).” Contrahistorias 14: 67–77.
Callahan, Manuel 2005 “Why not share a dream? Zapatismo as political and cultural practice.” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 29: 6–37.
Castells, Alicia 2002 “The creativity of the Brazilian Movement of the Rural Landless Workers in the social construction of their habitat.” Paper presented to the International Sociological Association, Brisbane, Australia.
Clastres, Pierre 1987 Society Against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cleaver, Harry 1994 “The Zapatistas and the electronic fabric of struggle.” http:/www.eco.utexas.edu/ Homepages/Faculty/Cleaver/zaps.html. 1998 “The Zapatista effect: the Internet and the rise of an alternative political fabric.” Journal of International Affairs 51: 621–640.
Collier, George A. and Jane F. Collier 2005 “The Zapatista rebellion in the context of globalization.” Journal of Peasant Studies 32: 450–460.
CONCRAB/MST 2004 Método de trabajo popular. Cuaderno de Formación 24. São Paulo: CONCRAB.
Dahl, Robert Alan 1970 After the Revolution: Authority in a Good Society. New Haven: Yale University Press.
De Angelis, Massimo 2005 “‘Zapatismo’ and globalisation as social relations.” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 29: 179–203.
DeWalt, Kathleen M. and Billie R. DeWalt 2002 Participant Observation: A Guide for Fieldworkers. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Dias Martins, Mônica 2006 “Learning to participate: the MST experience in Brazil,” pp. 265–276 in Peter Rosset, Raj Patel, and Michael Courville (eds.), Promised Land: Competing Visions of Agrarian Reform. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
Eid, Farid, and Andrea Eloisa Bueno Pimental 2001 “Solidary economy: challenges of cooperative agrarian reform in Brazil.” Journal of Rural Cooperation 29 (2): 141–152.
Estrada Saavedra, Marco 2007 La Comunidad Armada Rebelde y el EZLN. Mexico City: El Colegio de México. 2010 “Consideraciones finales: Zapatistmos locales,” pp. 419–434 in Marco Estrada Saavedra, and Juan Pedro Viqueira (eds), Los Indígenas de Chiapas la Rebelión Zapatista: Microhistorias Políticas. Mexico City: El Colegio de México.
EZLN (Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional) n.d. “Communiques from the EZLN.” http:/flag.blackened.net/revolt/mexico/ezlnco.html.
Forero-Pineda, Clemente 2001 “Participatory democracy in Latin America: a comparative analysis.” International Society for New Institutional Economics, Berkeley. http:/66.102.1.104/scholar?num=20&hl=en&lr=&s
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	117
afe=active&q=cache:gq0NGJbfDE0J:www.isnie.org/ISNIE01/Papers01/forero-pineda.
pdf+forero-pineda+democracy. Fox, Jonathan
1994 “Latin America’s emerging local politics.” Journal of Democracy 5 (2): 105. Fung, Archon and Erik Olin Wright
2001 “Deepening democracy: innovations in empowered participatory governance.” Politics
and Society 29 (1): 5–41. García-Guadilla, María Pilar and Carlos Pérez
2002 “Democracy, decentralization, and clientelism: new relationships and old practices.”
Latin American Perspectives 29 (5): 90–109. Goodin, Robert E.
2003 Reflective Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Graeber, David
2007 “There never was a West, or, Democracy emerges from the spaces in between,” in
Possibilities: Essays on Hierarchy, Rebellion, and Desire. Oakland, CA: AK Press. Harnecker, Marta
2002 Sin Tierra: Construyendo un movimiento social. Madrid: Siglo XXI. Holloway, John
2005 “Zapatismo urbano.” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 29: 168–178. Houtzager, Peter P.
2005 “The Movement of the Landless (MST), juridical field, and legal change in Brazil,” in Boaventura de Sousa Santos and César A. Rodríguez-Garavito (eds.), Law and Globalization from Below: Towards a Cosmopolitan Legality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Indigenous Peoples 1999 “Seattle Declaration.” http:/www.maorinews.com/writings/papers/other/seattle.htm.
Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism n.d. “Resolutions by indigenous peoples.” http:/www.ipcb.org/resolutions/.
Indigenous Peoples Kyoto Water Declaration 2003 “Indigenous declaration on water.” http:/www.indigenouswater.org/Indigenous DeclarationonWater.html.
Issa, Daniela 2007 “Praxis of empowerment: mística and mobilization in Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers’ Movement.” Latin American Perspectives 34 (2): 124–138.
Khasnabish, Alex 2007 “‘You will no longer be you, now you are us’: Zapatismo, transnational activism, and the political imagination (Mexico).” Ph.D. diss., McMaster University.
Langman, Lauren 2005 “From virtual public spheres to global justice: a critical theory of internetworked social movements.” Sociological Theory 23 (1): 42–74.
Leite, Jader Ferreira and Magda Dimenstein 2006 “Subjectivity in movement: the MST in Rio Grande do Norte.” Psicologia & Sociedade 18 (1): 21–30.
Löwy, Michael 2001 “The socio-religious origins of Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers’ Movement.” Monthly Review 53: 32–40.
McCowan, Tristan 2003 “Participation and education in the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil.” Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies 1 (1). http:/www.jceps.com (accessed February 27, 2010).
Marcos, Frank Bardacke, Leslie Lopez, John Ross, Watsonville Human Rights Committee, and Human Rights Committee
1995 Shadows of Tender Fury: The Letters and Communiqués of Subcomandante Marcos. New York:
Monthly Review Press. Marcos, Subcomandante Insurgente
2003 “La treceava estela.” http:/www.nodo50.org/pchiapas/chiapas/documentos/calenda/
calendario.htm (accessed February 27, 2010). Marcos, Subcomandante Insurgente, Noam Chomsky, Žiga Vodovnik, and Naomi Klein
2004 ¡Ya Basta!: Ten Years of the Zapatista Uprising. Oakland, CA: AK Press.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
118	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Martínez-Torres, María Elena 2001 “Civil society, the Internet, and the Zapatistas.” Peace Review 13: 347–355.
Martínez-Torres, María Elena and Peter M. Rosset 2010 “La Vía Campesina: the birth and evolution of a transnational social movement.” Journal of Peasant Studies 37: 149–175.
Midnight Notes Collective and Autonomedia 2001 Auroras of the Zapatistas: Local and Global Struggles of the Fourth World War. Brooklyn, NY, and Jamaica Plain, MA: Autonomedia/MidnightNotes.
Mora, Mariana 2007 “Zapatista anticapitalist politics and the ‘Other Campaign’: Learning from the struggle for indigenous rights and autonomy.” Latin American Perspectives 34 (2): 64–77.
Mutz, Diana Carole 2006 Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative versus Participatory Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Navarro, Zander 2010 “The Brazilian Landless Movement (MST): critical times.” REDES 15 (1): 196–223.
Olesen, Thomas 2005 “Mixing scales: neoliberalism and the transnational Zapatista solidarity network.” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 29: 84–126.
Polletta, Francesca 2002 Freedom Is an Endless Meeting: Democracy in American Social Movements. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ross, John 2000 The War Against Oblivion: Zapatista Chronicles, 1994–2000. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press. 2005 “Celebrating the caracoles: step by step, the Zapatistas advance on the horizon.” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 29: 39–46. 2006 Zapatistas!: Making Another World Possible— Chronicles of Resistance 2000–2006. New York: Nation Books.
Rosset, Peter, Michael Courville, and Raj Patel (eds.) 2006 Promised Land: Competing Visions of Agrarian Reform. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
Rosset, Peter, María Elena Martínez-Torres, and Luis Hernandez-Navarro 2005 “Zapatismo in the movement of movements.” Development 48 (2): 5–41.
Scopinho, Rosemeire Aparecida 2007 “About cooperation and cooperativism in rural settlements.” Psicologia & Sociedade 19: 84–94.
Stahler-Sholk, Richard, Harry E. Vanden, and Glen David Kuecker 2007 “Globalizing resistance: the new politics of social movements in Latin America.” Latin American Perspectives 34 (2): 5–16.
Starr, Amory 2005 Global Revolt: A Guide to the Movements against Globalization. London: Zed Books.
Swords, Alicia C. S. 2006 “The power of networks: popular political education among Neo-Zapatista organiza- tions in Chiapas, Mexico.” Ph.D. diss., Cornell University. 2007 “Neo-Zapatista network politics: transforming democracy and development.” Latin American Perspectives 34 (2): 78–93.
Tormey, Simon 2006 “‘Not in my name’: Deleuze, Zapatismo, and the critique of representation.” Parliamentary Affairs 59: 138–154.
Veltmeyer, Henry and James Petras 2002 “The social dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’ Movement: ten hypotheses on successful leadership.” Revue Canadienne de Sociologie et d’Anthropologie/Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 39 (1): 79–96.
Wainwright, Hilary 2003 Reclaim the State: Experiments in Popular Democracy. London: Verso.
Weinberg, Bill 2000 Homage to Chiapas: The New Indigenous Struggles in Mexico. London: Verso.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Starr, Martínez-Torres, and Rosset / PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY	119
Wolford, Wendy 2006 “Families, fields, and fighting for land: the spatial dynamics of contention in rural Brazil,” in Hank Johnston and Paul Almeida (eds.), Latin American Social Movements: Globalization, Democratization, and Transnational Networks. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Wright, Angus Lindsay and Wendy Wolford 2003 To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
Zugman Dellacioppa, Kara Ann 2005 “Zapatismo and urban political practice.” Latin American Perspectives 32 (4): 133–147. 2009 This Bridge Called Zapatismo: Building Alternative Political Cultures in Mexico City, Los Angeles, and Beyond. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Downloaded from lap.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011

2007
Geography
Journal of Latin American Geography
Collective Action and Radicalism in Brazil: Women, Urban Housing, Rural Movements.
Cynthia Simmons


This book represents a multi-authored work by political scientists with extensive knowledge of social movement organizations (SMOs) and political dynamics in Brazil. The overall aim of the book is to provide a comprehensive examination of the origins and evolving expressions of populist mobilization that emerged in Brazilian society be- ginning with the first democratic transition in the early 1930s, through to present-day incarnations of radicalism. The text focuses on three case studies, that of the women’s movement, urban housing movements, and the landless movement. The underlying hy- pothesis, as outlined in the introductory chapter, is that the rise and expression of popu- lar protest was defined and shaped by the interaction of (1) exogenous factors and ex- ternal forces (i.e., debt crisis; IMF, World Bank, structural adjustment, and liberalization), and (2) endogenous factors intrinsic to the SMOs (i.e., origins, leadership, discourse, and participation), that changed in response to threats and opportunities afforded under the political framework of the time. Of particular importance is the rise of modern-day radi- calism in Brazil, which Duquette contends is justified by the failure of the government to fulfill true social reform, a feat virtually impossible given the mounting debt crisis and the pursuit of liberalization and structural reform in the wake of democratization in the 1980s. Twenty years later, popular protest and SMOs grew in number and strength with the determination to create a “radical alternative” to the status quo perpetuating social inequalities.
“Social Movements and Radicalism: The Brazilian Context” by Duquette, pro- vides an overview of current theoretical research into SMOs, and from this discussion he identifies the main theoretical constructs that inform the examination of radicalism and collective action in the case studies to follow. Specifically, each case study considers the hypotheses presented above, and, borrowing from Tarrow (1991) and Della Porta and Diani (1999), each examines the unfolding of “cycles of protest” encompassing the ascending, optimal, and descending phases. Also, the chapter presents a brief, yet concise, history of Brazilian politics in order to identify the opportunities that frame the emergence and development of SMOs. Duquette clearly illustrates three periods of radical mobilization that emerged in response to changing political opportunities, and he identifies key characteristics that shaped the framework of opportunity in Brazil, these include weakness of the party system, loosely defined rules and institutions, and archaic socioeconomic structures.
In “Women’s Movements: From Local Action to Internationalization of the Repertoire”, Marques-Pereira and Raes trace the emergence of the women’s movement under the military authoritarian regime in the 1960s and its manifest incarnations with the democratic transition. Of particular interest, the women’s movement found support with the military government as long as it focused on domestic demands, while other movements were brutally suppressed. With the onset of democratization, a multitude of feminist demands that had been simmering covertly emerged on the scene, and the movement became vocal advocates for ending authoritarian rule. The descending phase of the movement is marked by creation of the multiparty system, and intensification of opposition parties, into which the movement was incorporated.
Levy’s “The Housing Movement in the City of São Paulo: Crisis and Revival” first provides an overview of the emergence of UPMs during the military regime, defined as the ascending phase, in response to the horrible conditions in the sprawling shantytowns in the 1970s. The main thrust of the chapter is three contemporary periods of movement
Book Reviews	161
evolution. During the optimal phase (1982 to 1989), grassroots protest was transformed into a popular movement uniting disparate groups and forming broad-based alliances, most notably with the church and Workers Party (PT). The descending phase (1990 to 1996), ironically, began with the election of UPM leaders into public office, which forced them to switch attention from UPM demands to public interest. The final period 1997 to 2000 represents the revival of the UPMs and the radicalization of the movement, which is characterized by large-scale land occupations inspired by the success of the Movi- mento de Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST). To illustrate the radical alternative presented in this phase, the chapter considers the cortiço (downtown slum) movement in São Paulo.
In “The Return of Radicalism to the Countryside: The Landless Movement” Galdino examines the inception, expansion, and transformation of the rural landless movement beginning with its historical roots in the peasant leagues in the 1940s. He separates this discussion into three waves of mobilization, as defined by Petras (2000). The first wave involved actions by the peasant leagues organized by the Brazilian Com- munist Party (PCB), Ação Popular, and the National Federation of Agrarian Workers (CONTAG). Although the peasant leagues and AP were harshly repressed after the mili- tary coup, the Church and CONTAG were afforded leeway to fight for limited workers rights. The second wave involved actions of the Christian Base Communities (CEBs), the Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), and smallholder movements in the south. The third, and final, wave came with the transition to democracy, and radicalized in response to the failure of liberalization and structural adjustment reforms.	In this context, he focuses the remainder of the chapter on the emergence of the MST, and an examination of its evolution through cycles of protest, and on to its recent radical incarnation.
The last chapter, “Collective Action at the Crossroads: The Empowerment of the Left”, sets out to provide a critical and comparative examination of the case studies, and in the process outline an analytical framework for understanding radicalism and collec- tive action in Brazil. Despite this stated objective, the chapter does not follow a logical pattern, the text is repetitive, and cohesive comparisons and conclusions are not easy to discern from the discussion. Moreover, nearly half of this chapter, including the conclu- sions, introduces new material focused on the PT. Although I agree that the PT and its role in collective action and radicalism merit discussion, I found the concluding chapter to be a poor place for it. Here, I expected to read about the insights drawn from the case studies and the lessons to be learned from Brazil’s experience.
After reading the book in its entirety, I was left with one question, which does not necessarily rise to the level of a criticism. First, the aim of the book is to provide the reader with a general understanding of collective action and radicalism in Brazil through an examination of three important SMOs. But do these movements, as they were presented in the case studies, adequately represent the “radical” trends in Brazil? In particular, is the focus on UPM mobilization in São Paulo representative of like activities in other parts of the country? Does the women’s movement, as it is presented, provide a “radical” alternative in contemporary Brazil? And finally, although the MST has the larg- est membership and geographic impact, are they truly radical given the multitude of new “radical” landless movements that are popping up across the country? I acknowledge the need to limit attention to a manageable number of examples, and those selected by the authors would probably rank among the most notable to Brazilian scholars, myself included. But, I am still overwhelmed by the magnitude of popular protest across the country taking form in countless SMOs, especially in recent years, and would like to have seen some mention of these new radical trends.
In conclusion, I generally find multi-authored and edited volumes lacking in
162	Journal of Latin American Geography
terms of cohesion, given the many voices and perspectives that culminate in the final text. Although the introductory section goes to great lengths to outline the overarch- ing structure and hypotheses for the text, raising my expectations, this clarity was not consistently applied across the chapters. Nevertheless, the detailed history and analy- sis of interactions between popular mobilizing and political dynamics revealed in the case studies more than compensates. Overall, it is my opinion that this book will prove to be a valuable resource for academics from across disciplines that have an interest in SMOs, collective action, and radicalism in Brazil, and elsewhere for that matter.
Cynthia S. Simmons GeographyDepartment Michigan State University
