"The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’ Movement: Ten Hypotheses on Successful Leadership*
HENRYVELTMEYEaRnd JAMEPESTRAS~t. Mary’s University
Cet article met I’accent sur Ie caractkre social ainsi que sur la dynamique sociale de l’autoritd politique dans ce qui est gkndrale- ment considere comme les caractJ5ristiques de classe ainsi que les carac- tbristiques sociales du leadership, B l‘interieur d’un mouvement que nous et d’autres auteurs considdronscomme le mouvement social le plus dynamique de nos jours en Amerique latine, le Mouvement des Sans Terre (MST)au Bresil. Nous fonderons notre discussion de cette dynamique sociale sur dix hypotheses qui tracent, en effet, un por- trait sociologiquedu leadership du mouvement.
This paper focusses on the social character and dynamics of political leadership in what is widely regarded asthe class and social character of the leadership of a movement that we and others regard as the most dynamic social movement in Latin America today-the	Rural Landless Workers’Movement (MST)in Brazil. Discussion of these social dynamics is made with reference to ten hypotheses that pro- vide, in effect, a sociological portrait of this movement’s leadership.
SOCIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF SOCIOPOLITICAL MOVEMENTS in recent years have addressed a number of questions related to the social base of these movements, the issues around which collective action is mobilized, the form of struggles involved, and the context in which these struggles take place.‘ What is generally missing in these studies, however, is an analysis of the role and social dynamics of political leadership, a curi- ous omission given the saliency of this factor in earlier studies and the non- or post-structural “social actor” approach taken by so many social movements analysts today (Calderh, 1995; Escobar and Alvarez, 1992; Esteva and Prakash, 1998).
One possible explanation of this is the emergence of a	ostmodernist sensibility among sociologists and historians in this area.8The effect of
This manuscript was first submitted inJanuary 2001 and accepted in September 2001.
1.	For examples orthese studiesee,inter alia. Burgwal(1990);Calder6n(1985); Calder4nand J e l h (1987); Camacho and Medivar (1989);Eckstein (1989);Latin American Perspectives (1994);Zapata (1987).
80	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
postmodernism generally has been to turn attention away from structural factors and to eschew a comparative and objective analysis of these move- ments. Indeed this lack of comparative analysis, together with a focus on contextualized and well-described but largely unexplained collective actions of a single movement, is a notable feature of sociological studies in the 1980s and 1990s (Munck, 1997).
Another feature of these studies is an orientation towards a post- structuralist form of discourse analysis and, in this new intellectual con- text, an abandonment of structuralisms, particularly Marxist class theory (Howarth, Norval and Stavrakakis, 2000; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001a; Veltmeyer, 1997). This essay is written as a’counterpointto this post- structuralist form of analysis and associated postmodernist and post- development theory. In this context it is argued, with reference to the political leadership factor, that the dynamics of sociopolitical movements in Latin America can best be understood in structural terms and on the basis of a reconstituted form of class analysis.
This argument is structured as follows. First, we establish the emer- gence of what we have termed new peasant sociopolitical movements (NPSMs).We then explore the dynamics of these movements in terms of a structuralist form of discourse analysis, which we contrast to the more dominant poststructuralist form. We then discuss the class and social character of the leadership of a movement that we and others3regard as the most dynamic social movement in Latin America today, This discus- sion is made with reference to ten hypotheses that we constructed for the purpose of interpreting our field research data on the leadership of the Brazilian Rural Landless Workers’Movement and for drawing a sociological portrait of these leaders4With reference to these hypotheses, derived not from any general theory but from prior studies by the authors into diverse social movements and on the basis of field research data, we argue that what is distinctively “new” about the peasant-based movements that dominate the contemporary struggle for social change in Latin America is precisely the class character of their leadership as well as the organic ties of this leadership to the social base of the movements. We draw out various theoretical-and	political-implications	of this argument in the conclusion.
2. Onthispointsee,interalia,Brass(1991;2000);Haber(1996);Mallon(1995);Slater(1985);Veltmeyer (1997).
3.	See, for example, Roblea (2000). 4.	The data for this study were derived from three sources: 1) systematic observation, over a ten year
period(1992,1995-1996,1998-2001). ofbehaviouratanannualSchoolforLeademhipCadresinSanta Catarina. periodic coderences, workshops and meetings, and various encampments and settlements (11) and co-operatives (8) in S.Catarina, Rio Crande de Sul. Parana. Ceara. and SBo Paul0 State; 2) a survey conducted of thia movement’s leadership cadre: 32 regional and national leaders representing every state where the MST operates (conducted at a seminar on May 12-14.2000, in SAo Peulo);and 3) a series of in-depth interviews with Pedro Stedile, the leader of the MST,several regional leaders and activisb, and a caucue-of women leaden.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movernent The Emergence ofNew Sociopolitical Peasant Movements
(NSPMs)inLatin America
81
In the post-SecondWorldWarcontext of a large-scale development project initiated in the late 1 9 4 0 ~an~d a globalization project initiated in the 1980sunder very different conditions, it is possible to trace three waves of social and political struggles against the capitalist system in Latin America.‘ In the 1950s through 1970s the social and political forces of change were mobilized in three ways: via leftist political parties and the use of the electoral mechanism, a strategy exemplified in the success of Salvador Allende in bringing the working class to state power in Chile; via the unionization of labour and the struggle of the organized working class against capital and the state for higher wages, improved working condi- tions and greater social benefits; and, in the wake of the Cuban revolution, via a guerrilla form of armed struggle against the state.
Each modality of political struggle helped incorporate elements of the working class and rural producers into the political and economic development process. But none of these antisystemic struggles and strate- gies managed to overcome the array of forces ranged against them and the project of social revolution or societal transformation ultimately ended in defeat. In the 198Os, however, in the context of a democratization process, a regionwide debt crisis, and the implementation of a new project based on a neoliberal program of policy measures designed to structurally adjust the economies in the region to the requirements of a new world economic order,’ protest against the new economic model of neoliberal capitalism and the project for social transformation was taken up by a second gen- eration and a new form of social and political organization-a	popular movement protagonized by the urban poor and a proliferation of non- governmental organisations that manifested a burgeoning “civil society” and the emergence of a social, as opposed to the political, left. But the forces mobilized by these civil society organisations were subsequently- in the 1990s-demobilized under conditions generated by a neoliberal pro- gram of economic and political reform measures implemented by govern- ments in the region.’
6. On this project see, inter alia, McMichael (1996). In the optics of postdevelopment (Esteva, 1992; Embar, 1995;Rahnema and Bawtree, 1997;Sachs. 1992) this project is viewed as an imposition of an idea (development), which is “at the centreof an incredibly powerful semantic constellation” (“mod- ern mentality”), able to exert a most powerful force in “guiding thought and behaviour” (Esteva, 1992).
6. On the theoretical and practical postulates of these two intellectual and political “projects” and the processes to which they gave rise, see,inter alia. Veltmeyer (2001b). A periodization and analysis of these waves of struggle to bring about change and implement an emancipatory project in Latin America can be found in Petras (1997).
7. On this new project-globalization-see,	inter alia, Bulmer-Thomas (1996); Green (1995); and Petras and Veltmeyer (2001b).
8. On the diverse strategies implemented by governments against antisystemic movements see, inter a h . Veltmeyer (2001a).
82	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
In the 199Os,the region was hit by a third wave of social and political forces ranged against the system in place. The labour movement was in disarray, its forces and organizational and mobilizing capacity decimated by the forces of a “silent revolution’’wrought by the capitalist class under the agency of the state. The new social movements that had dominated the political landscape in the 1980s suffered a similar fate. With very few exceptions, the forces that they had mobilized were dissipated. But in the same context there surfaced a new wave of rural activism protaganized by a number of peasant-based sociopoliticalmovements-the	Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) in Mexico; an indigenous uprising and social movement led by the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities (CONAIE) in Ecuador; the Rural Landless Workers’ Movement (MST) in Brazil; and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). These movements, all except the FARC organized in the 1980sand all but the EZLN operating on a national scale, took centre stage in the 1990sand dominated the popular struggle for social antisystemic change.
Currently, these movements constitute the most dynamic forces for social change in the region, as well as opposition to the economic and polit- ical system everywhere in place. However, these movements are still not that well understood, raising more questions than answers and generating a scholarly-and	political-debate as to the nature of their social base and the dynamics of struggle involved (Brass, 2000; Bernstein, 2001; Foweraker,1995;Haber,1996;Petras, 1997;PetrasandVeltmeyer,2001a).
The Question of Leadership-Ten	Hypotheses
The debate on the nature and dynamics of the new peasant-based socio- political movements in Latin America has generally focussed on the social base of the movements and the dynamics of their organization and mobi- lization-the	general form of their struggles, the particular strategy and tactics involved, and the associated ideology. However, the character and form of leadership seems to be an equally important factor in explaining the relative success of these movements in organizing and mobilizing the forces of resistance and opposition-of social change. Forexample, the FARC is the only peasant-based guerrilla army that not only survived the forces of counterinsurgency in the 1970sand 1980sbut that has actu- ally increased its mobilizing capacity. The one striking difference between the FARC and the other guerrilla armies of national liberation and social change formed in the first two waves of post-Cuba insurrectionary activi- ty is the social character and form of its leadership. In terms of their social base and operating ideology these guerrilla armies were very similar, if not identical (see, for example, Wickham-Crowley,1993);the FARC, however, is the only such movement that was not only peasant-based but, like the NSPMs, peasant-led.
In the 1980s,the emergence in the region of what was conceived to be “new social movements” whose social base could not be reduced to or
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
83
understood in class terms led to a widescale abandonment of class analysis and the adoption of poststructuralist forms of discourse analysis (Calder6n and JBlin, 1987; Camacho and Menjivar, 1989; Escobar and Alvarez, 1992; Mallon, 1995;Slater, 1985;Zapata, 1987).In the 199Os,class analysis vir- tually disappeared from the map of social movements being drawn and redrawn by political sociologists,leading the authors of this paper to seri- ously reconsider the class origins and character of the leadership of the peasant-based social movements in the region today.
In this context, and with the aim of sparking a return to a reconsti- tuted form of class analysis, the authors chose to conduct a case study of the MST leadership in Brazil. To inform and direct this study, the authors formulated a number of hypotheses, each of which is discussed below in terms of observations made and data collected on the basis of several research visits; conversations on site with, and in-depth interviews of, sev- eral MST leaders and activists; and a formal survey conducted of a cadre of 37 leaders representing every state where the MST is represented. These hypotheses were derived not from any general theory but from an understanding that resulted from field work on a number of peasant-based social movements in the region (see, for example, Petras, 1997; Veltmeyer, 1997). Given percentages relate to a statistical analysis of the data gener- ated by this survey.
Hypothesis 1: The MST leaders have deep and continuing roots in the countryside and among the constituencies that they are organizing.
One of the most striking characteristics of the MST relative to other Latin American rural movements in the past is the high proportion of leaders with long-standing ties to the rural poor who are the social base of the movement. First, close to two-thirds are sons and daughters of peasants- small producers (37.640.6%) or landless rural workers (18.2-21.9%). Although there are no systematic data or studies for comparable move- ments in earlier waves of peasant movements, most analysts of these movements over the years have commented on the urban middle-class ori- gins of the leadership. In the case of the MST, however, most leaders (79%) originate in families of small farmers, members of producer co-operatives or landless workers.
There is an ongoing academic debate as to how to conceptualize these various categories of “peasants” in the context of an advanced process of capitalist industrialization, social decomposition and class differentiation, but the subjects of this debate generally see and define themselves both as “peasants” and as “landless workers,” creating problems of objective cat- egorization, if not self-definition (Bernstein, 2001; Brass, 2000; Kearney, 1996;Mallon, 19951.’
9.	In the context of a p m s s of industrial capitalist modernization, a part of the ”pensantry” isconvert- ed into D class of rural capitalists who most oRen invest their accumulated capital in the purchase of
84	CRSAIRCSA, 39.1	2002
From our converaations with diverseMSTleaders it is clear that they not only tend to have deep roots in the countryside but they maintain and cultivate their rural ties. They return to the countryside whenever possible, usually in the context of mobilizing a land occupation, and work actively to ensure a lack of social distance from the rank and file in the field by identifying with their struggles and way of life. Furthermore, there is little to differentiate these leaders from the rank and file in terms of material conditions, including housing, eating, modes of transport and personal possessions. In this connection, it is well known that leaders who share the same material conditions as their followers are more likely to engage in struggles that relate to their common interests, as opposed to bureaucrats ensconced in hierarchies who tend to be focussed on and to defend their own particular privileged position. Although there are no comparable data for other rural social movements in the past, both in South and Central America and in Mexico, there are clear indications that relative to the MST these movements were characterized by a significant social distance between the leaders and the rank and file. On this see, inter alia, Wickham-Crowley ( 1991).
Hypothesis 2: The leaders are relatively well educated and committed to continuing education, thus securing the learning and teaching shills to diagnose social realities and develop appropriate strategies.
Successful movements of the popular classes require leaders who are well trained and capable of articulating and formulating grievances, devising appropriate strategies and diagnosing social situations. In many, if not most, situations, social movements have tended to rely on well-educated leaders from the urban middle class or rank and file leaders with little formal education. However, the MST is possessed of a large cadre of grassroots leaders from the popular classes who are relatively well or highly educated. Over half of the MST leaders have some post-secondary education (either technical school or university). In addition, another third (27.9%) have completed or attended high school. Only 12% have never attended school or failed to complete primary school. In addition, the MST invests a large part of its budget in education and has developed ties with a number of universities that provide extension courses for leaders and activists (Caldart, 1997; 2000). Women leaders, who constituted 31% (9/29)of our survey sample," are particularly well educated: twice as many women as
land, new technology, export production and transportation. Another part u converted into a claaa of indqmndent, medium-sized proprieton and pmducen and a large part, nt Ieut 60% ir converted into a rural p r o h r i a t and a rrmiproirtariat of jornaleron, landleu or near lrndlau workers, many of whom migrate to and are abiorbed into the burponing rlumr and the informal wcton of Braril'n cities. On the bash ofcensun d a b , the rural E X ~ U Bfrom 1986 to 1996 in eitlmatrd to have reached a level of 6.6 million, leavlng an entimated 4.6 million landlean workrrn or peuants in the countryride, many of whom am expected to migate to tho cities in the next few yearn (INCRA, 1999; Petraa and Veltmeyer, 2000).
10. In its second to last Conpeaa (in 2000) the MST adopted a resolution to increase the current repre- wntation of women in the regional delegations of lenders from a current level of around 4 0 4 to parity with men.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement	85
men have some university education. Thus it is clear that the MST has a cadre of popular leaders with both the formal training and class experi- ence to develop successful national organization drives. In this regard they differ significantly from the leaders of an earlier wave of guerrilla move- ments formed in the 1970s,most of whom, particularly those who were well educated, had no organic ties to their rural constituency. With thc exception of FARC’s leader, Marulanda (Tirofijo), these leaders, like those of the Central American guerrilla movements of the 1970s and 198Os, were reliant on a much smaller leadership cadre that, with few exceptions, was drawn from the middle strata of the class structure. On this, see Johnson in Dominguez (1994).
Hypothesis 3: The primary loyalties of the leaders of the MST are to that organization. They do not have any conflicting loyalties to other political groups that could lead to ideological divisions and undermine their unity of purpose.
One of the perennial and divisive scourges of popular movements in Latin America is sectarian political conflict. Since many of these movements’ leaders tend to come from political parties whose prime purpose is to use such movements to build their parties, the movements are often canni- balized and immobilized in the process.” In contrast, the MST is a sociopolitical movement that has fraternal relations with other parties, particularly the Workers’Party (PT),but its leadership insists on retaining the autonomy of the movement and its capacity for independent action (Stedile, 2000). Most leaders joined the movement through participation in MST-organized land occupations and/or through attending meetings and discussions. Having been introduced to the movement through direct contact with its activities rather than “party intermediaries,” their ideo- logical formation and practice is essentially a result of social interactions within the movement. This shows up in their political attitudes: large majorities, ranging from 65to loo%, are in agreement on the major issues of the day-the	negative influence of Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s regime on effective agrarian reform and the negative impact of the policies designed and sponsored by the IMF and the World Bank. This internal consensus allows the Movement to focus on building outside support and to channel available resources in the direction of organizing, and mobilizing, direct action. Again, this is not a conclusion drawn by the authors as much as a point made in as many-or	few-words	by Pedro Stedile himself and other leaders whom we interviewed. Indeed, it is clearly a matter of inter- nal policy as well as general strategy that conflicting loyalties and other conditions that might undermine a unity of purpose be avoided, if possible and counteracted, if not.
11. This relationship of social movements topolitical parties is well knownand is one of the key issues on the agenda for debate and discussion at the annual Foro de Slo Wulo where, for the past 11yenrs. rep- resentatives of leftist or Marxist political parties and associated social movements have met.
86	CRSAIRCSA, 39.1	2002
Hypothesis 4: The main source of recruitment is based on practical problem solving that attracts “doers”rather than ideologues.
Most of the political organisations that recruit their members on the basis of ideological polemics at the leadership level tend to create “armchair” revolutionaries given to spinning theories and discovering ideological dif- ferences-highly	ideological “purists” divorced from the language and interests of the people at the social base of the movement (on this see, inter alia, Liss, 1991; Wickham-Crowley, 1991).
As for the MST, leaders generally joined the movement through par- ticipation in land occupations and public meetings. By their own accounts, their attraction to the movement was based on its history of success in solving practical problems, including their own. In this regard, a majority of leaders (69%)have participated in ten or more land occupations and over two-thirds believe that land occupations are the most effective way to bring about agrarian reform and translate theory into practice. While the MST as an organization is acutely aware of the need for both theory and practice, and to unite the two, its emphasis on continuing political educa- tion needs to be understood in the context of a concern for practical problem solving. As a result, the MST tends to recruit “doers” rather than “ideo- logues”-a	perception confirmed by the leaders themselves.”
Hypothesis 5: The leaders have accumulated practical experience via con- tinuing direct actions that enhance their capacity to organize and carry out successful actions that can, and do, attract new members and supporters.
MST leaders do not engage in successful action to then rest on their lau- rels. They are, as it were, in continuing action. Despite their relative youthfulness (88%are under 40 years old and over one third in their 20s) many have been involved in multiple land occupations. These occupations frequently involve prolonged experiences in which squatters are organized to administer the settlement, negotiate with the government, and pres- sure for a favourable resolution. Through these multiple and varied experiences the leaders of the MST have developed the know-how to secure land appropriations in such a way as to benefit their main con- stituency-landless	or near landless workers. This continuing, cumulative practical problem-solving type of leadership, and the emphasis on contin- uous, if limited, gains, appears to be a key factor in the success of the MST. At least, this is the view expressed by the leaders themselves in various discussions on this point. In this connection, the MST has settled over 300,000 landless families over fifteen years of struggle and, from 1995 to 1999, at the height of the struggle for land and land reform, the MST
12. Notwithstandingthir perception, M pointed out by a reviewer of thia w y , the key to mccae.~in build- ing a social movement i i an ability to theorize politicel practice and to convert theory into practice- tocombine theory and practice. On thin point, one of the very few truism of sociological thought on social movements, all of the MST leaders are in agreement.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement	87
mobilized 363,053 families of landless “peasants” or workers for land occupations (Robles, 2000: Table 5; Petras and Veltmeyer, ~ O O ~ CIn) .t’h~e first six months of 1999 the MST organized 147 occupations involving 22,000 families, a level of mobilization maintained in subsequent years under conditions of a major counteroffensive launched by the Cardoso government. No other sociopolitical movement in Latin America has demonstrated anything close to such dynamism and relative success in making practical gains to the benefit of so many of its members.
Hypothesis 6: The leaders tend to be self-reliantand less dependent on elec- toral politicians, thus able and willing to engage in bringing about change via direct action.
Unlike movement leaders in other contexts (particularly the ex-guerrillas in Central America) the leaders of the MST have what could be regarded as a healthy distrust of electoral processes and politicians.“ For one thing, they have seen many popular leaders over the years enter parliament and abandon the struggle. For another, they have seen the success to be achieved via direct action.“ Both in terms of their own recruitment and in terms of evaluating the best strategy for bringing about agrarian reform, over two thirds (70%) favour land occupations over the electoral process as a means of bringing about change. And the pressures to opt for what the government and the international community of development assistance organizations term “forms of peaceful and civil struggle” (including use of the “electoral mechanism”) are considerable.16Although political condi- tions were radically different and perhaps not comparable, this finding dif- fers markedly from findings related to sociopoliticalmovements for agrar-
13. Not all “occupations”have led to permanent settlements;the conversion of land occupations into set- tlements requirea a process of negotiation with the government, which has its own land reform agen- daNevertheless. from1990to1999theMSTmanagedtocreate2,194permanentsettlementsinvolv- ing 368,325 families of peasantsnandless workers (Robles, 2000: Table 6). To appreciate the scope of the problem-and	success of the MST-it	is estimated that there are in Brazil upwards of 1.5 million landless workers or peasants.
14. On the penchant of Central American ex-guerrillas for electoral politics, and their accommodation and absorption into the “political class” see, inter alia, Vilas (1995) on Nicaragua and Zamora (1995) on El Salvador, as well asJorge Castafieda (19931, who explains (or constructs his theory ODthe widespread abandonment by the Latin American leR of what he regards as its utopian quest for transformative or revolutionary change, largely in terms of the shift in political orientation and behaviour of these and other such ex-guerrilleros.
15. Apart from their own experience, this is also the lesson that the MST leadership (Stedile, 2000) has drawn from the history of other movements in the region such en the EZLN, CONAIE and FARC. as wellaspeasant social movements in Bolivia,Paraguay and Central America.Onthis point e m Petras (1997).
16. Inthis connection the MST has. for over a year at the time of writing (June 2001), been subject to a major government offensive based on a multipronged stategy that includes outright repression, a major public-relations media campaign and concerted eITorts to channel grievances and land claims into the World Bank-sponsoredLand Bank program. On the political dynamics of thin process, see Veltmeyer (2001a).Aspart of the intellectual weaponry marshalled by the World Bank, the Brazilian government has a	h turned towards the ”sustainable livelihoods approach (SLA)to tackling the prob- lem of entrenched NIUI	poverty Basedon the agency of civil society organizations (CSOs) in partner- shipwith thegovernment,theSLAispredicatedonempowermentofthepoor,increasingtheiraccess to society’a productive resourceti, and enmuraging the use of the “market mechanam” (land titling. land banks) and the “electoral mechanism” (Amalric, 1998; Chambers and Conway, 1998; Liamzon el. al., 1996; UNRISD. 2000).
aa	CRSNRCSA, 39.1	2002
ian or land reform in Central America (see, inter alia, Edelman, 2000). In addition, a significant minority (23%)of MST leaders believe that a com- bination of direct action and electoral campaigns provides the best route to social change. Only one leader prioritized the electoral path towards social change and development, again in contrast to what analysts have found with regard to other land reform movements in the region. In this context the MST does support progressive politicians who support their program (mainly from the Workers’ Party) but always from a position of the autonomy of their social movement; they do not, for example, suspend land occupations during election campaigns.
Hypothesis 7: There is a common understanding or consensus of the lead- ers as to who are their common enemies, the nature of state power and the impact of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other international financial institutions (IFIs) on their followers and the process of agrarian reform.
MST leaders manifest a high level of consensus regarding their adver- saries and the nature of state power: 75% perceive the Cardoso regime as completely opposed to agrarian reform; over two thirds see the govern- ment and landlords as acting in concert against agrarian reform; over 75% perceive an increase in repression over the years of the Cardoso presiden- cy; there is unanimous agreement that the World Bank and IMF program of structural acijustment are designed in the interests of the rich and the well-to-doaswell as the large corporations that dominate the economy. Its impact on the producing and working classes of Brazil are perceived as very negative. Specifically on this issue, 90% think that IMF-WB policies largely benefit foreign investors and Brazil’s rich and powerful; 94% believe that with reference to the operations of transnational corpora- tions, foreign direct investment and neoliberal policies mandated by the IMF and the World Bank, the impact of the US. on Brazil has been totally negative. In this connection, almost two thirds of MST leaders are orient- ed to one form or another of socialism and 84% are optimistic about the future. It is difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain the precise source of this ideologicalorientation-class background, experience or political edu- cation-but	there is no question as to its saliency in defining the MST.
Hypothesis 8: The leadership has a “realistic” view of the international and national conJigurationor structure ofpower and whose interests it serves.
Unlike the Central American ex-guerrillas (see Vilas, 1995) the leaders of the MT!	have no illusions about the international configuration of power.	For one thing, they have a clear understanding of the imperial
17.AquestionmightberaisedPItowhatmightconrtitute“politidredim.”Wedefiieit,M doprop nenb of the realist school of political science, in tornu of the wntnlity of power nlationi In politics andthetendencyforpowerholdrntopunuetheiro mC~AMintemsb.However,itirnotunusualfor thole without p o l i t i d power who wek to advance their own intareatr to harbour 111lorto of illusions about the motives ofpower holders.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil‘s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
89
nature of US. policy and interests; and, as a result, they are generally hos- tile to IFIs and have a clear understanding of the class alignments organized against them. This is evident in several survey questions in which MST leaders were asked to define their ideological orientation and to report on their views regarding the World Bank, the IMF and other international financial institutions, which are almost universally viewed by the national and regional leadership as “agents of US. imperi- alism.” As a result, these leaders are generally resolved to mobilize internal support rather than appeal to “outside organizations” for support or con- dition their action to accommodate the interests and demands of such organizations. Both the interviews that we conducted and our survey pointed towards this conclusion.
Hypothesis 9:The movement leaders have a common vision of an alterna- tive social system that informs their actions, thus motivating the organiza- tion and providing guidelines to action.
Many former leftist parties, especially but not only in Central America, have adapted to neoliberal realities, shedding their former socialist views in the process. On this see, for example, Castefieda (1993) as well as Petras (1997). This could in part explain the divorce of so many of these move- ments from the mass struggle and their electoral pragmatism. In contrast, the leaders of the MST and their actions continue to be guided by a socialist vision of an egalitarian, participatory society based on Brazilian realities. Unlike Central American revolutionaries (see Halebsky and Harris, 1995; Liss, 1991; Vilas, 1995; Wickham-Crowley, 1991) their socialist vision rejects the Soviet model and thus was not affected by the downfall of the USSR and the collapse of “actually existing” socialism. Of the MST’s 37 leaders, 27% favour socialism as practised in Cuba; 33% favour the demo- cratic socialism advocatedby Brazil’sWorkers’party (PT);and 33% project anew form of Brazilian socialism.That is, 90%are oriented towards social- ism in one form or another but not as practised in the former USSR.’*
At a different level, that of practice rather than ideology, the MST leadership is clearly committed to the principle of substantive or popular democracy. This is evident in the decision-making related to both the for- mulation of political strategy and in the social organization of production. Our observations of actual practice in diverse contexts (small meetings and congresses that bring together up to 10,000 rank and file members, popular assemblies, consultations and open discussions with the rank and file in the encampments and on permanent settlements-and	their con- stituent communities) point towards a very substantive or egalitarian form of “participatory democracy.” Discussions are open, voting is direct
18. This supports similar findings about the ideology of other peasant-based and -led social movements in the region such asFARC, CONAIE and the EZLN. On this seeFARC-EP (2000) with regards to FARC; Macas (2000a. 2000b) with regards to CONAIE; and Harvey (1994) and Veltmeyer (2000).
90	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
but secret and decisions, even on matters of fundamental strategy and policy, are generally reached, and made, on the basis of popular participation. For example, after a year of “occupation,” “encampment” and %ettlement”- and successful negotiations with the government on the legal expropria- tion o f the occupied land-peasant	families are free to choose whether or not to form a production co-operativeand collective, the strategy preferred and promoted by the national leadership, or to work the land on an indi- vidual household basis.
Hypothesis 10: The leaders have the klan and mystique required in bring- ing about change in the future, thus providing the motivation to sustain action in times of repression and opposition by formidable adversaries.
Unlike the leaders of so many left-wing parties and movements who tend to be sceptical about large-scale change and pessimistic about socialism, the leaders of the MST manifest a high degree of optimism (&%I,	based on their own practices and successes, as well as faith in the righteousness of their cause. It is difficult to operationalize the concepts of “Blan” and “mystique” as critical factors in the mobilizing capacity of a social move- ment. But with regard to the former (“Blan”)we took cognizance of the degree of enthusiasm and positive spirit exhibited by the leaders in their response to questions about what the movement means to them and their sense of its future prospects. The degree of enthusiasm and optimism about the future was striking, much greater than that exhibited by leaders of various urban-centred social movements whom we have interviewed over the course of research visits undertaken over the last four years. To some extent this enthusiasm and what we have termed dlan is generated and maintained via the movement’s anthem, flag carrying and other rituals that precede and accompany each official act or daily training session at the MST’s leadership training school in Santa Catarina. Asfor “mystique” it defines the particular relationship that most peasants have to the land and is exhibited in the quasi-religious spirit of solidarity (the reference here is to Durkheim) generated by ritualized events such as the annual gatherings of leaders and activists at regional and national congresses and the national meetings of regional leaders, such as the one in Sho Paul0 where we conducted our interviews. The mystique of the movement is also reflected in the many symbolic representations of the movement’s historic struggle against the forces of reaction: banners, insignias, and songs of struggle and conquest written to lift the spirits of the movement’s members and to mobilize them to collective action. The use of such sym- bols is a characteristic feature of events staged by the MST,including meetings and daily openings of sessions of lectures and classes at the Leadership Cadre School in Santa Catarina.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
Class asa Dynamic Factor in Political Organization and Leadership
91
Despite the propensity of recent sociological analysts armed with post- modern theory to downplay, if not ignore, the class factor in social movements, viz. the objectivityand subjectivity of class conditions, there is little question about the centrality of class in regards to the social base of the most significant and dynamic sociopolitical movements in Latin America, including the MST (Veltmeyer, 2000; Petras and Veltmeyer, 2001a). But when it comes to leadership, the issues that surround the con- cept of class are more clouded. A number of peasant- or worker-based sociopoliticalmovements in the region draw much of their leadership from the urban-centred middle class, particularly its intellectual stratum. In the case of the MST, however, the movement is peasant-led as well as peasant-based; class is a salient feature of leadership as well as the social base of the movement.
As to the role of class as a factor of analysis, our research suggests that the principles of class analysis established by Marx, and generally used by Marxists, continue to be useful as a guide to analysis and practice: that is, the dynamics of social movements such as the MST are based on a dialectical interplay between the objective and subjective-between the objectivity of the structural conditions shared by the MST leadership with their members and the corresponding subjectivity of shared awareness as to these conditions. This is not to say that the radicalism and orientation towards direct action exhibited by the MST is directly attributable to the class origins of the leadership and the rank and file. The political land- scape in Latin America and elsewhere is littered with counter-examples. However, the leadership of the MST exhibits a high degree of class- consciousness of the socially shared conditions generated by the economic structure of Brazilian society. The mobilizations and direct actions taken by the Movement clearly reflect this class-consciousness as well as the class origins of the leadership. This consciousness is also reflected in the political education programming at the MST’s leadership training school. Also, the responses of the MST leaders whom we surveyed and inter- viewed to the questions put to them clearly establish the centrality of class as a dynamic factor in both the social organizations of the Movement and the strugglesinvolved,aswellasthe subjectiveconsciousnessof the leaders and activists. Class, defined as both a relationship to the means of social production and to the instruments of political power, is clearly a central factor in the thinking, and actions, of these activists.
Summary and Conclusion
Our case study of a successful leadership group is based on a leadership whose social origins are proximate to their organizing constituency, that
92	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002
is, who have organic ties to the social base of the movement; and that have achieved a higher education than the norm and are directly involved in practical struggles that engage supporters and are independent of other political organizations. These leaders have a unified political vision of the future and have a positive view of the emeacy of their action and are highly motivated regarding future success.
The antithesis of this positive profile of successful leadership would be a leadership drawn from social classes that are distant from their con- stituency (part of the rural elite or urban professionals) or who are from the same class but poorly educated, drawn to the organization for purely ideological rather than pragmatic reasons, remote from the actions taken (leaders ensconced in central headquarters) and relying on the electoral process for solutions. Leaders who have illuaions about concessions and reforms from established regimes or international donors are likely to lack both vision and initiative and to misdirect the organization with false expectations that tend to lead to internal divisions, ideological conflicts and political demoralization-a	sense that there are no alternatives.
The bane of many popular movements is the “prodigal son” pheno- menon: leaders who are renegades from their class, usually in the middle strata of the class s t r u c t ~ r ew, h~o~identify with the lower classes but who, upon achieving institutional positions, return to a middle class “centrism” and shift their politics accordingly, thus undermining or derailing collec- tive actions in the direction of fundamental and sustained social change. Drawn, to a large extent, from a class of landless or near-landless workers in the rural sector, the MST leadership has shown no propensity toward accommodation to the status quo as a means of feathering their own nests. While the organization has grown and to some degree has become institu- tionalized, with its national headquarters in a two-story building in Sio Paulo, as well as a network of professional accountants and agronomists, it still depends heavily on the voluntary actions of lawyers, clerics and, above all, its own members to carry out daily operations. Institutionalization without bureaucratization seems to work well in providing regularities and order while supporting a decentralized and innovative style of leadership that is very responsive and accountable to the membership. Arguably, the small material differences that separate top leaders from rank and file members is a critical factor in the MST’s successful mobilizations. At least weforwardthisasatentativesuggestionthatwarrantshrther comparative study. The idea is that a relative equality of material conditions, a simi-
19. On the role of the middle Btrata or c l a u in Latin American m c i d movementr we Johnson (Dominguez, 1994). A characterintic feature of the new psaunt rociopolitid movementr that have swept acrou Lath America’n political landscapa in the 1 9 9 0 ~ir that they are pennant-led a# well M peuant-bMed (Petran, 1997). Although thir factor need# to he examined more c l o ~ l yi,t might very well explain the fact that FARC 1 the only peaaant-bad guerrilla movement of the many formed in the wake of the Cuban revolutlon that not only ~ u r v l v dtha counterinrurgency movrmentr of the 19708 and 19801, but that has actually continued to build loeial and political force8 of rmistanw b the point that it now controls up to 40 percent of the countryride in Colombia (FARC-EE 2000).
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movernent
93
larity in social origins and shared social perspectives make for long-term commitments and sustained struggles.
Land occupations are a key element in the MST’s strategy for effecting agrarian reform. The success of this strategy is based on democratic par- ticipation by the mass of beneficiaries in the planning, organization and execution of the occupations and in resisting repression by local gunmen and the military police. The importance of the land occupation strategy in the thinking and actions of the MST leadership is closely linked to the par- ticipatory style of social change practised by this movement.
The centrality of the MST in the lives, beliefs and practices of the leaders is a critical factor in the creation of the high degree of cohesion that sustains their activity. The MST is the social, political and economic organization for realizing activity.There is no separation between “party,” “trade union” and “enterprise” with concomitant parallel and competing loyalties, as is the case in most Latin American countries. A unified and combined sociopolitical movement provides both social practice and ideo- logical direction, thus avoiding the typical problems of social movements dependent on political parties, and subject to their separate agendas. Over the years, we have come across innumerable complaints by activists of being used or manipulated by their political or guerrilla leaders, the prac- tical and essential goals of the organization sacrificed for supposedly higher ends. However, the self-reliance of the MST leaders has guaranteed that the fundamental issue of interest to their constituency-land reform-has	remained in the forefront of their program, struggles and negotiations with political authorities.
In conclusion-and	this is the theoretical point of our analysis- successful leadership seems to coincide with material equality within the organization, social solidarity as an outreach strategy and participatory democracy in the realization of organizational goals. The fact that there is no gap between the goals of the movement and everyday practice means that cynicism and pessimism do not take root. Furthermore, the coinci- dence of everyday realities and idealism fuels optimism, faith and a belief that people can change the world-and	that this change can benefit “the people.”
References Amalric, Frank. 1998. “Sustainable livelihoods, entrepreneurship,political strategies and
governance.”Development, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 3144. Bernstein, Henry.2001.“‘Thepeasantry’ in global capitalism:Who, where and why?” In
Socialist Register 2001. L.Panitch & Colin Leys (eds.).London: Merlin.
Brass,Tom. 1991. “Moral economists, subalterns, new social movements and the (re) emergence of a (post) modernized (middle) peasant.”Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 18, No. 2.
Brass,Tom.2000.Peasants, Populism and Postmodernism: TheReturn oftheAgrarian Myth. London:FrankCaas Publishers.
94	CRSNRCSA. 39.1 2002 Bulmer-Thomas, Victor. 1996.The New EconomicModel in Latin America and its Impact on
Income Distribution and Poverty. New York St. Martin’s Press.
Burgwal, Gerrit. 1990.“An introduction to the literature on urban movements in Latin America.” In Structures of Power, Movements of Resistance: An Introduction to the Theories of Urban Movements in Latin America. Willem Assies et al. (eds.). Amsterdam: Centre for Latin American Research and Documentation.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1997.Educqcio em Mouimento. Formaqciode educadoras e educadores no MST. Petr6polis: Vozes.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. 2000.Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra. Petrdpolis R.J.: Vozes.
Calderh, Fernando.1995.Movimientossocialesypolftica. Mexico: SigloXX1.
Calderdn, Fernando and Elizabeth Jelin. 1987.Clases y movimientos sociales en AmCrica Latino:perspectivasy realidades. BuenosAres: CuadernosCEDES.
Carnacho, D. and R. Medivar (eds.). 1989.LQSmouimientospopulares en AmPrica Latina. Mexico: Siglo XX1.
Castededa,Jorge.1993.Utopia Unarmed: TheLatinAmericanLeftAftertheColdWar.New York: Random House.
Chambers, Robert and Gordon Conway. 1998.“Sustainable rural livelihoods: Some working definitions.” Development, Vol. 41,No. 3.
Dominguez, Jorge (ed.). 1994.Social Movements in Latin America. The Experience of Peasants, Workers, the Urban Poor, and the Middle Sectors. New York: Garland Publishers.
Eckstein, Susan. 1989.Power and Popular Protest: Latin American Social Movements. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Edelman, Marc. 2000. Peasants Against Globalization: Rural Social Movements in Costa Rica. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Escobar, Arturo. 1995.Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Escobar, Arturo and Sonia Alvarez (eds.). 1992.The Making of Social Movements in Latin Americo: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Esteva, Gustavo. 1992.“Development,” in Wolfgang Snchs (ed.) The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledgeand Power. London, Zed Books.
Esteva, Gustavo and M.S. Prakash. 1998.Grassroots Postmodernism. London: Zed Books. FARC-EE 2000.Historical Outline-International	Commission Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia Peoples Army. Toronto: FARC-EE International Commission.
Foweraker, Joe. 1995.Theorizing Social Movements. Boulder, Colo.: Pluto Press.
Gledhill, J. 1988.‘Agrarian social movements and forms of consciousness.” Bulletin of Latin American Research, Vol. 7,No. 2.
Green, Duncan. 1995.Silent Revolution: The Rise of Market Economics in Latin America. London: Cassell.
Haber, Paul Lawrence. 1996.“Identity and political process: Recent trends in the study of Latin American social movements.” Latin American Research Review, Vol. 31,No.1, pp.171-87.
Halebsky, Sandor and Richard Harris (eds.).1995.Capital, Power and Inequality in Lutin America. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Harvey, Neil, 1994.Rebellion in Chiapas: Rural Reforms, Campesino Radicalism and the Limits to Salinismo. San Diego: Center for US-Mexican Studies.
The Social Dynamics of Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers’Movement
95
Howarth, David, Aletta J. Norval and Yannis Stavrakakis(eds.).2000. Discourse Theory and Political Analysis: Identities. Hegemonies and Social Change. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
INCRA-Instituto Nacional de Colonizaqio e Reforma Agriria. 1999. Balanfo da Reforma Agraria e da Agricultura Familiar 1995-99. Brasilia: Ministerio do Desenvolvimento Agrijrio.
Kearney, Michael. 1996. Reconceptualizing the Pernuntry. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Latin American Perspectives. 1994. “Social movements and political change in Latin
America.” Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 5. Liamzon, Tina et al. (eds.). 1996. Towards Sustainable Livelihoods. Rome: Society for
International Development (SID). Liss, Sheldon. 1991. Radical Thought in Central America. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Macas, Luis. 1999. “Los desafios del movimiento indigena.” Boletin ICCI, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Macas, Luis. 2000a. “Diez ~	o desl levantamiento del Inti Raymi de Junio de 1990: Un bal- ance provisional (Ten years of the Inti Raymi uprising of June 1990: A provisional assessment).”Boletin Mensual (Instituto Cientifico de Culturas Indigenas),June 15.
Macas, Luis. 2000b. “Movimiento indigena ecuatoriano: una evaluaci6n necesaria.” Boletin ICCI, Vol. 3, No. 21.
Mallon, Florencia. 1995. Peasant and Nation: The Making of Postcolonial Merico and Peru. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Markoff,John. 1996. Waoesof Democrucy:Social MouementsandPolitical Change.Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Pine Forge Press.
McMichael, Philip. 1996. Deoelopment and Change: A Global Perspectioe. Thousand Oaks. Calif.: Pine Forge Press.
Munck, Gerardo. 1997. “Social movements and Latin America: Conceptual issues and empir- ical applications.” Paper presented to the Latin American Studies Association, Guadalajara,April 17-19.
Petras, James. 1997. “Latin America: the resurgence of the left.” New Lefr Review, No. 223, pp. 1747.
Petras, James. 1998. “The political and social bases of regional variation in land occupations in Brazil.” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 25, No. 4.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2000. B r a d de Cardoso : Expropriapio de un pais. Petr6polis: Editorial VOZES.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2001a. “Are Latin American peasant movements still a force for change?” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 28, No. 2.
Petras, James and Henry Veltmeyer. 2001b. Unmasking Globalization: The New Fuce of Imperialism. London: Zed BookdHalifax: Fernwood Books.
Rahnema, M. and I! Bawtree (eds.). 1997. The Post-Development Reader. London: Zed Books. Robles, Wilder. 2000. “The rural landless workers’ movement in Brazil,” Canadian Journal
of Development Studies, Vol. 22, No. 2. Sachs, Wolfgang (4.19)92.. The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge and Power.
London: Zed Books.
Slater, David. 1985. New Social Movements and the State in Latin America. Amsterdam: CEDLA.
Stedile, Joao Pedro. 2000. Interview, May 14.
96	CRSNRCSA, 39.1 2002 Stedile, Joao Pedro and Sergio Frei. 1993.A lutapela terra no Bmil. SBo Paulo: Scritta.
UNRISD-United Nations Research Institute for Social Development. 2000. “Civil society strategies and movements for rural asset redistribution and improved livelihoods.” UNRISD-Civil	Society a n d Social Movements Programme. Geneva: UNRISD.
Subcomandante Marcos. 1994.‘Atourist guide to Chiapas.” Monthly Review, Vol. 46 (May), pp. 8-18,
Veltmeyer, Henry. 1993.“The landless workers’ movement in contemporary Brazil.” Labour, Capital and Society, Vol. 26,No. 2, pp. 20425.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 1997.“Classand identity: The dynamics of new social movements in Latin America.” Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 25, No. 1,pp. 139-69.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 2000.“The dynamics of social change in Mexico and the EZLN.” Latin American Perspectivea, Vol. 27,No. 5, pp. 88-110.
Veltmeyer, Henry, 2001a. “Civil society and social movements in Latin America: The dynamics of intersectoral linkages and alliances.” Thematic Paper. Geneva: UNRISD.
Veltmeyer, Henry. 2001b.“The politics of language: Deconstructing postdevelopment dis- course.” Paper presentedaakeynote address at meeting of the Canadian Association for the Study of International Development (CASID),Quebec City, May 27.
Veltmeyer, Henry and James Petroe. 2000. The Dynamics of Social Change in Latin America. London: Macmillan PresslNew York: St. Martin’sPress.
Vilaa, Carlos. 1995.Between Earthquakes and Volcanoes: Market, State, and the Revolution in CentralAmerica. New York Monthly Review Press.
Wickham.Crowley, Timothy (ed.). 1991.Exploring Revolution: Essays on & f i n American Insurgency and Revolutionary Theory. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharp.
Wickham-Crowley, Timothy (ed.).1993.Guerrillas and Revolution in Latin America: A Comparative Study of Insurrection and Regimes Since 1956. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Zamora, Ruben. 1995.“Foreword.” In Free Trade and Economic Restructuring in Latin America, Fred Rosen and Deidre McFadyen (eds.).New York: Monthly Review Press.
Zapata, Francisco. 1987.“El nuevo cardcter de 10s movimientos socialesenAmdrica Latina.” Estado y Sociedad, No. 3.

The Landless Workers' Movement and Social Struggles against Neoliberalism Author(s): Lucio Flavio de Almeida, Felix Ruiz Sanchez, Laurence Hallewell Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 5, Radical Left Response to Global Impoverishment (Sep., 2000), pp. 11-32 Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2634155 .
Accessed: 12/03/2011 23:24
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
The LandlessWorkers'Movement and Social StrugglesAgainstNeoliberalism
by LucioFlvio deAlmeidaandFelixRuizSdnchez TranslatedbyLaurenceHallewell
Ithasbeensaidthathistoriys morecreativtehanthetheorietshatwe con- strucatboutit,includingthoseconcerninigtspurposeI.n the1990s,move- mentslikeBrazil'sMovimentdoos TrabalhadoreRsuraisSem Terra(Land- lessWorkersM'ovement-MST)seemtobeshowingusthathat"oldfool" Clio haspreparedonemoresurprise.
Twentieth-centuBryazilenjoyedone oftheworld'shighesteconomic growthrates.By 1940thevalueofindustriaolutputhadalreadysurpassed in valuethatofagriculture,venthoughthesourceofaccumulationwas coffeeproductioandthenucleusofcapitalisatccumulatiownasmercantile- financialI.ntheprocess,urbanizatioincreasedthroughouthte1960suntil Brazil'sruralinhabitantbsecamea minorityofthetotalpopulationT.he developmenotfruralcapitalismw,hichincreasedafterthemilitarycoup d'etatof 1964,broughitntoprominencae newagriculturpalroletariaotf boias-fria(scasuallaborerhsiredbythedayandtruckeidnfromthetowns). ThisreinforcetdheargumentosfthoseintheheartoftheBrazilianleftw,ho, longbeforeEricHobsbawmhad "verifiedt"hedisappearancoef thepeas- antryw,ereassertintghathestrugglfeorlandwasnolongerelevantothe formationfBraziliansocietyor,evenworset,hatitwasnolongera forcefor progress.
InBrazilas inotherdependenctountriesa,nyanalysisofthepotentiaflora revolutionarsytrugglien thecountrysidteurnedmainlyon thepresenceor absenceoffeudalismintheruraelconomyT.hosewhoarguedforfeudalism werereadytotrusitntherevolutionarchyaracteorfthepeasantstrugglefsora varietyofreasons.Some consideredthat,in fightinfgorlandreformt,he peasantswerefightintghemostconservativfeorcesinBrazilianpoliticsand werecontributintogtheenlargemenotfthedomestimc	arkeatnd,as a conse- quence,tothedevelopmenotfa nationallbyasedcapitalismI.notherwords, theyviewedthepeasantsas animportanftorceinthestrugglfeora demo-
LucioFlaviodeAlmeidaisa professoirntheDepartmenotfPoliticsofthePontificaUlniversity ofSao Paulo.F6lixRuizSanchezisaprofessorinthDepartmenotfSociologyofthatuniversity. LaurenceHallewell,untilhisretiremenwta,sLatinAmericanlibrarianC,olumbiaUniversity.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue114,Vol.27No.5,Septembe2r000 11-32 C 2000LatinAmericanPerspectives
11
12	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
craticandanti-imperialicsatpitalismO.thersbelievedthatthepeasants' strugglceouldprovideleveragefora moredirecptassagetosocialisme,venif itwasthrougahprocessthata,lbeitbrokenupintostagesw,ascontinuouasnd directedbytheproletaria(otrbythepoliticaplartythatconsidereditselfthe representativofe theproletariatT).he presuppositioonf almostall those debatingthequestionwasthati,ftherelationshiposfruraplroductiownere predominantclaypitalistla,ndandthestrugglfeoritwouldlosetheirimpor- tance.The defeatoftheleftled anddominatebdytheBrazilianCommunist party-identifiebdyitsargumenftorthepresenceoffeudalismintheBrazil- ian countryside-andtheburstof capitalistdevelopmenthattookplace mainlyduringtheyearsofthe"Brazilianmiracle"(1969-1973)helpedto reinforcteheimpressionthathelandquestionin Brazilhad ceased to be politicallyrelevant.
Thepatteranssumedbythepopularstruggleasgainsthemilitardyictator- shipfromthe1970sfurthesrtrengthentehdisview.Despitetheimportancoef thestrugglienthecountrysidseu,pportepdrincipallbyytheprogressivweing oftheCatholicChurcht,hemostpoliticizedmassmovementasndthosethat weremosteffectivienconfrontinthgeregimewereoverwhelmingulyrban: thestudenmtovementm,ovementosfprotesatgainsthecostoflivinga,nd, mostimportanftr,om1978on,theso-callednewworkersm'ovemenlto,cated intheheartofthenewindustrisaelctor(theprideofthemilitardyictatorship). In shortt,heothersideofthe"Brazilianmiracle"was showingitsface:the greaturbanmasseswhosebasicneedswerenotbeingsatisfieadnd,aboveall, astrongyoungworkersm'ovemenmt,anyofwhoseleadershadfreedthem- selvesfromtheold populistmoldoftieswiththestate.
A strikaettheScania-VabipslantintheindustricalityofSao Bernardodo Campo,inGreaterSao Paulo,unleashedoneofthemostimportanwtavesof workers'truggleosfthesecondhalfofthetwentietchenturyD.espiteallthe apparatuosfrepressionavailabletotheauthoritietsh,ereweredemonstra- tionsinvolvintgensofthousandosfparticipantTsh.isputthedictatorshoipn thedefensivaendobligedthebourgeoiosppositiontotheregimetoinclude theworkersd'emand(ssuchastherightostrikei)ntheirprogramIsn. anum- berofplacesthesestruggleascquiredan explicitlyclass character.'
Thisnewthrusotfworkers'trugglewsaslargelyresponsiblfeorthecre- ationofacombativteradeunionfederationth,eCentraUlnicadosTrabalha- dores (Unique Confederatioonf Workers-CUT),2and the Partidodos Trabalhadore(Wsorkersp'arty-PT).Createdin1980,thePTwonimportant electoravlictorieisnvariousBrazilianmunicipio(scounties)a,ndin1989it nearlywontheBrazilianpresidencwyhenitschiefpersonalityLu,isInaicio da Silva(Lula),reachedthesecond-stagreunofafgainstFernandoCollorde Mello,thecandidatoeftherightT.hissurgeintheunionandpoliticalaspir-
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	13
ationsoftheBrazilianworkincglassis allthemoreremarkablwehenwecon- siderthato,ntheinternationlaelvel,the1980sweremarkedbythedeclineof unionsandpoliticaplartiese,speciallythosewithaworking-clabssase,and thatinBrazilas inothercountrieosfSouthAmericatheeconomybrokewith itslong-termtendencytogrowandenteredintoa deeprecessioncombined withhighlevelsofinflationt,heso-calledstagflation.3
DIFFICULT TIMES
The1989electionwsereprobablythehigh-watemrarkofthestruggltehat hadbegun11yearsearlierA.fterthemi,npartbecauseofsuddenchangesin theinternationsailtuationc,amethereactionD.espitethewaythegeneral public,andespeciallythestudenptopulationt,ookpartinCollor'simpeach- mentt,heweaknesseosftheleftbecameincreasinglcylearW.ithsomeexcep- tionst,helocalgovernmenctosntrollebdythePThadlostanydrivetobring aboutfundamentcahlange.Theirmainaimwasreducedtowinningelec- tionsw,hiletheorgansofboththepartyandtheunionbecameboggeddown inbureaucracyTh.eleftsteadilylostitspoliticamlotivatioanditsabilityto drawup anyplanthatwouldincludethebroadmassofthepopulationin nationaploliticasltruggleIsn.stitutionaliscmametodominatienboththeory andpracticeE.veninitspropagandat,hecallforpopularmobilizationwas increasinglryeplacedbyreferencetsosocialpoliciesofa purelycompensa- torynaturet,oattenuateheperverseffectosftheso-calledsocialexclusion.4
TheeasyvictoryofFernandoHenriqueCardosointhepresidentiaelec- tionof1994showedthathebourgeoibslockhadreconstitutietdselfandwas, atleastforthepresenti,nnodangerfromLula's secondrunas thecandidate representinthgeoppositionoftheworkerasndthepeoplebutunabletooffer anythincglearlydifferenftromtheofficiaRlealPlan-a simpleprogramof monetarystabilizationT.odaytheBraziliantrade-uniomnovemenftinds itselfina clearlydefensivpeositionr,eturnintgocorporatismIn.thenameof defendinigtsmoreimmediatienterestso,mesectionsi,nclearoppositionto othersh,avecometosupportheimplementatiofnneoliberaplolicies.The majorityoftheleftt,hePT,despitetheenormoupsotentiaolfstrugglefsor which it could be the almost naturalstartingramp,is divided and directionlessw,ithmanyofitsleadersbettingeverythinogn theelectoral campaignandseekingbyvariousmeanstodemonstraittestrustworthinteoss therulingclass.
In thiscontext,heillsleftbycenturieosfone ofthemostferociousys- temsofclassexploitatioonntheplanethaveonlyincreasedB.razil,thelast [western-hemisphere-Translactourn]trytoabolishslaveryh,asnotonly
14	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
failedtoresolvethe"traditionala"ndquestionbutaddedtoittheunemploy- mentproducedbytheinternationalizatoiofncapitalism(theso-calledglob- alization)w,hosevictimisncludepeasantswhohaverecentllyosttheirfarms tothebanksthroughtheimpossibilitoyfkeepingup theirmortgagpeay- ments.Landownershipis concentratedin the extreme:15 percent, 56,287,168ha,ofthetotalareaof376,285,577hais takenupby0.03percent ofholdings0;.83percenatccountfor38.15percenotfthistotala,nd9.11per- centaccountfor78 percen(tIGBE, 1985).Attheotherextreme5,3.07per- centoflandholdingosccupyonly3percenotfthesametotal.A5 centurayfter themassacreof theCanudoscommunityt,h6eBrazilianstate,underthe magicwandofa self-proclaimseodcialdemocratiacndmodernizingovern- menti,s administerinlagstritestosocialexclusione,xplainingthathereis nothingelse forittodo formillionsofthe"unemployable."
AllthishashelpedtomakeBrazilaninexhaustibsleourceofsocialstrug- gles,eventhoughthesehavelargelyfailedto haveanycumulativeffect. Now thathewaveofconflictosfthe1980s,ofwhichthefactoryworkers' movemenwtasthemaindrivinfgorces,eemstohaverunitscourseandsome writerasrestartintgoproclaimthatt,hrougghlobalizationt,hebourgeoisiies runningthecountryunchallengedt,herecomesthesuddenand vigorous emergencoeftheLandlessWorkersM'ovement.
ORIGIN OF THE MST
Althoughitsimpactis onlynowbecomingclear,theMST is notas newa movemenats itmightseem.Itis thecumulativexpressionofatleastthree importanptrocessesT.hefirsotftheseisthestronglcyonservativceapitalist modernizatiotnhatdominateBdrazilianagriculturine the1960sand1970s andwas responsiblfeorintensifyincognflictosverland,particularliynthe stateofSao PauloandinsoutherBnrazil,wheretheembryofthemovement appearedT.hesecondisthepastoraalctionofChristianaslignedwithlibera- tiontheologyanditsconvergencien,theBraziliansituationw,iththeideasof theMarxistleftT.heMST'soriginiscloselytiedtothe"newunionismo"fthe urbansocialmovementosftheComunidadeEsclesiaisdeBase (basicchurch communities-CEBs),muchlikethePT (Workersp'artya)ttheendofthe
1970s.Thethirdis theexperiencienorganizintghatruralworkerhsadbuilt upinthedecadesbeforethemilitartyakeoveorf1964,whichwasnot,orwas notwhollyi,ncorporateindtothetrade-unionrganizatiotnhatemergedlater. The experienceosfthePeasantLeaguesoftheUniaodos Lavradorese TrabalhadoreAsgricolasdo Brasil(UnionofPeasantsandAgricultural WorkerosfBrazil-ULTAB) areoftenreferretdobytheleadersoftheMST
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	15
themselveHs.oweverd,uringtheprolongedcrisisofthemilitarryegimet,he peasantsweretoengageina newformofstruggleo,nethatwouldbecomethe principaclharacteristoifcthemovementh:eorganizedinvasionandoccupa- tionoflandbya largenumberoffamiliesimultaneously.
ThechallengestoauthorittyhatmarkedthebeginninogftheMST were theoccupationofthepropertieosfMacali andBrilhantien themunicipio (countyo)fRondaAlta,inthestateofRioGrandedoSul,in1979.In1980 suchconflictbsecamewidespreadT.herewas theoccupationoftheBurro BrancoranchinthemunicipiofCampoEreinSantaCatarinaI.n Paranaa' disputewiththegovernmenatrose whenthemorethan10,000families whoselandswerefloodedbythebuildingoftheItaipuDam wereoffered onlymonetarcyompensationIn. Sao Paulotherewasthechallengeposedby thoseoccupyingthePrimaverraanchin themunicipiosof Andradinha, Castilho,andNoveIndependanciaIn. themunicipioosfNaviralandGloria de Dourados(inthestateofMatoGrossodo Sul),tenantfarmerbsegana fiercestruggleO.therconflictstarteidnthestatesofBahia,Rio de Janeiro, andGoyaz(Fernandes1,996:66-67).
Inacontextstronglmyarkedbyinstitutionalizatieosnp,eciallyelectoral conflict,hememberosftheMST hadrecoursetoanenormouvsarietyof formosfstruggleh,oldingpublicoffices,taginghungerstrikesp,aradingin citiesandsmalltownso,rganizinlgong-distancmearchesa,ndinvitinogther politicaflorcestojointhemindemonstrationAs.s7adocumenitssuedbythe MSTtitledElementosfundamentpairsahist6ridaoMST(seealsoStedile, 1997b:17)relatest,hefirsatttempatcoordinatioonccurredinJanuar1y983, whenrepresentativoefsfivestatesofsouth-centrBarlazil(Rio Grandedo Sul,SantaCatarinaP,arana'S,ao Paulo,andMinasGerais)gottogetherIn. January1984,inthecityofCascavel(Parana')t,hosetakingpartintheland occupationhseldthefirsmteetingofrepresentativoefs16statesi,nwhich theygave"thenameanditsownorganizatiotnotheMovemenotfLandless Worker(sMST)."
THE STRUCTURE OF THE MST
Accordingtodatasuppliedbyitsownexecutivet,heMST isorganizedin 22 statesofBrazil.An investigatiocnarriedoutbythenewsweeklyVeja (no.1491,35)reveals"Inthecamps,theranksoftheMSTareformedM.ost ofthem-some60 percent-areruinedfarmerbs,uttherearealso workers withnohopeoffindinjgobsanddisillusionecdivilservantsW.hatthecity offertshemis hopelessnessf,amilybreakuph,umiliatinjogbs,orunemploy- mentT.healternativfeorthosewhojointhecampsisdifferent-thewyanta
16	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
pieceoflandthatwillensurethemsustenance.A"lreadymanyofthosewho havefoundsomelandto squaton "areorganizedintoproductiocnoopera- tives,55 of whichhave alreadyjoined memberfederationsof the ConfederacMdiaosCooperativadseReformAagrairidaoBrasil(Confedera- tionofAgrarianReformCooperativeosfBrazil-CONCRAB)."
TheMST documentisnsisthathetypeofcooperativtehatheyaretrying toconstructh,eSistemaCooperativisdtaosAssentado(sSystemofFarmers' Cooperatives-SCA),isdifferenfrtomtraditioncaoloperativeTs.hetypeof cooperativtehatheMSTisadvocatinga,n"oppositioncooperative,m"ust havea dualcharactere,conomicandpolitica(lsee Cadernode Cooperaado Agricola5, 11-12).As an economicundertakinigt,mustbe managedeffi- cientlybutwithoultettinmganagemengtetinthewayofitspoliticawlorkT.his consistsin"organizinegachsettlemenptoliticallym,akingmemberpsoliti- callyaware,andengaginginpoliticaalctionatthegrassrootlesvel,""social mobilization,a"nd engagingin the"economicand politicalstrugglea"nd contributitnogthe"SectoroftheMasses'FrontF."ortheMST leadership"t,here willalwaysbe a contradictiobnetweenthetwofacesoftheSCA: carryinogn thepoliticaflighwthilestillfunctioninasganeconomicundertaking..T..he challengeisalwaystostrivteosucceedatbothw,hichwillnecessarilybring ustoa newcontradictionA."mongthesociopoliticaolbjectiveosftheSCA is itsorganizatioans "a formofresistancteocapitalism"-"transformitnhge economicstrugglientoapoliticaalndideologicalstruggle,""accumulating forcesforthetransformatioofnsociety,a"nd"contributintogtheconstruc- tionoftheNewManandNewWoman,t"hatis,"peoplewhoareresponsible, politicallyaware,culturallydevelopeda,ndinsolidarityandbrotherhood witheachother."
Each camporsettlemenetstablishesitsownrules,butgenerallythe assemblyissovereignT.hesettlemenatnsdtheSCA areorganizedintermosf baseorproductiounnitsR.epresentativoefstheseunitsformthemanage- mentcommitteet,ogethewrithanelectedtreasuresre,cretaryan,deditorof thesettlementewsletteJro,rnaSlemTerraI.nadditiont,hereisa women's committeaendoneforyoungpeople.Thesettlemenisttobe runontheprin- ciplesofcollectivmeanagemendti,visionoftasksandfunctionps,rofession- alism,willingnestsoturnone'shandtoa varietyoftasks,disciplinep,lan- ning,tiestothemasses,criticismandself-criticisman,ddemocratic centralism(Cadernode CooperafdoAgri'cola5, 54-55).
Each settlemenotragroindustrpyaysa "tax"of2 percentotheadminis- tratorosfthemovemenatthestatelevel.AccordingtoJoaoPedroStedile,a prominenMtST leader",thelocalgroupms	akevoluntarcyontributiotnosthe nationalleadership(i"nterviepwublished	May21,1996,12).Stedile
inAtenVao, goesontosaythateveryotheryear,"a nationaml	eetingof180delegates...
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	17
electsthe20-membelreadershipO.fthese,15participatdeirectliyntheoccu- pationsandsettlementins,accordancweithourpolicyofkeepingtheleaders intouchwiththegrassrootosfthemovementO.nly5 leaders'namesare madepublic.TheseincludemyselfJ,oseRainha,andGilmarMauro."Ina textwrittein 1996,StedilesetsouttheorganizinpgrincipleosftheMST, stressingprimariltyheneedfora "permanenltinkwiththemasses."The otherprincipleasre mass struggled,ivisionof tasks,collectiveleadership withdivisionofresponsibilitiedsi,sciplinet,heformatioonfcadres,andthe developmenotfa "mystique,t"hatis,a complexofritualsandsymbolsto encouragehopefora justandbrotherlsyociety(Stedile,1987: 104-105).
Variousinvestigationdse,spitesomeseriouslimitationsi,n8dicatea high averageincomeamongthesettlerse,speciallywheretheyhavedeveloped agroindustriacltivitiesT.heMSTleadershipinsistsn,everthelestsh,atits concernisnotjustwithimprovintghesettlersb'uyingpowerbutalsowith theireducationaalndpoliticaldevelopmentS.pecialemphasisis givento educationaalctivitiesw,hicht,heleadershipstressesa,renottobeconfused withmereschoolingT.herearemorethan38,000studentasnd"about1,500 teacherdsirectliynvolvedinthisprojectofa neweducationB.esidesthereg- ularcurriculumth,eMSTprovidecsoursesfortheacquisitionofskillswhich benefiatbout3,000personseveryyear.Amongtheseare teachertraining coursesandsecondary-school-lecvoeulrsestraininagdministratorfscoop- eratives.("Elementosfundament2a)isT,heemphasisplacedon educational andtraininagctivitieis a goodexampleofhowmuchtheMST is concerned withpoliticsandideology.Fromitsverybeginningtshemovemenhtas beeninvestinignthedevelopmenotfeducationprogramisnitscampsand squattersettlementTsh.isendeavorhashadadoubleobjectives:eeingthat publicschoolswereestablisheidnthesettlemenatnsdensurintghathepolit- icalandideologicamlanagemenotfsuchschoolswasunderthedirectinflu- enceoftheMST: themovemenwtasdeterminetdhathe"menofaction,t"he "landless,w"ouldbecomealso"menwithamessage."9
THE OLD AND THE NEW
TheapparenatirofmystertyhatsurroundtsheMST's activitiecsanleadto misunderstandinItgsn.oveltye,venitspoliticanloveltym,aybeexaggerated. Theparadoxis thathisapparenntoveltystemspreciselyfromitsneverhav- ingabandonedsomeofthecharacteristiocfsthesocialmovementshatflour- ishedinBrazilinthesecondhalfofthe1970s,inthemidstofthecrisisofthe militarryegimealreadymentionedIn. facti,thascreativeldyevelopedthose features.
18	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Thelandlessare,inlargemeasureo,neofthemostcharacteristpircoducts oftheconservativmeodernizationftheBraziliancountrysidAe.ndthispro- cessis,inturnp,artofthedevelopmenotfcapitalisrtelationshipinstheagrar- iansectorofa societywhosebourgeoirsevolutiohnasbeenassimilatetdothe "Prussianmodel"orthe"passiverevolutionw,"heretheexclusionoffarm workerfsromcivilrightsc,itizenshipa,ndpoliticalparticipatioins directly connectetdothesurvivaolfauthoritarianiasnmdsocialdespotismIt. isclear thatherecurrendtenunciationosfslaveryinthecountrysidheavetodo with notonlythepracticeosfprecapitalisetconomicagentsbutalso thoseofsec- torslinkedto the"advanced"and "hypermodersne"ctorsofindustrialnd financiaclapital.
Thepolicyofthemilitardyictatorshieps,peciallyduringthe"economic miracle,r"eorganizesdocialrelationisnthecountrysidteosecurea greater integrationfagriculturinetotheindustriaclycle.Fromthe1960sonthere wasagraduailndustrializatiofnagriculturaep,rogressiv"epurificatioonf" socialrelationsa, subordinatioonflabortocapital,andthedestructioonf family-managefdarmin(ghereandbelowwe relyon an analysisbyJose Grazianoda Silva).Thesetendencieasreatthebaseoftheacceleratedurban- izationofBraziliansocietyandthetransformatoiofnmuchofthepopulation intoa surplucsontingendtepriveodfaccesstolandandtransformiendtopoor andmarginalizecdasualdaylaborersandurbanwageearnersI.n the1980s thismodernizinwgave,mostsignificanint southerBnrazilandthestateof Sao Paulo,wasthemostimmediatreeasonfortheappearancoeftheMST,but itwas nottheonlyone.
Itis importantotremembetrhata,talmostheotherendofthecountry-in theregionsof thenortherangriculturfalrontieers,peciallyin theAmazon basin-theconditiontshataccountfortheemergencoefsocialmovementins theruraalreasweredifferenantdhadmainlytodowithlandownershipT.he agrarianpolicypursuedbythemilitarydictatorshipn 1984-1985favored theaccelerationof capitalistdevelopmenitn thecountrysidtehroughthe adoptionofmeasurestostimulatbeigcapitalinagriculturaendconcentrate landownershipT.hedictatorshipr'essponsteotheinevitabliencreaseincon- flictoverlandwastomilitariztehelandquestionT.hisapproachledtothe creationofa ministeripalortfolitodealwiththequestionunderthedirection ofthearmyandtheConselhode Seguran,aNacional(NationalSecurity Council-CSN).Thus,thecapitalismtodernizationfagricultuwreasaccom- paniedbytheinvestmenotfcapitalinruralandandthepromotioonfa link betweenagrariani,ndustriaal,ndfinanciailnterestwsithstronglocaland regionaclonnectionsT.heagroindustricaolmplexesthathismovecreated, linkingindustriepsroducinignputsforagriculturme,odernagriculturaen,d
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	19
theindustriepsrocessingagriculturaolutputsw,ereassistedbygenerous governmenstubsidiesT.heconsolidationofthisprocesswascompletedin theearly1980s.
Thedespotismofthetraditionlaalndedgentryan, atavistilcegacyofslav- eryandofthecompulsorfyormosfthesubjectionoflaborh,avesurviveidna newguise.Murderosfrurawlorkerasndtheirleadersthrougthhecollusion oftheorgansofstaterepressionwiththeinterestosfthegreatlandowning concernEldoradowerea constanthroughouthte1970sand1980sandhave continuetdhroughotuhte1990s.Thecombativeneasnsdsteadfastneshsown bytheMST haveincreasedtheimpactoftheseconflictosncitydwellers; Violenceinthecountrysidseo,methintghathasalwaysbeena constanthere, hasreachedtheawarenesosfthegeneraplublic.Accordingtoa reporotfthe ComissaoPastoradlaTerra(PastoraLlandCommission-CPT),in1995there were"554 conflicts4:40 ofthesewere[landdisputes-Translator2]1, were casesofworkeernslavemenatn,d93concernedlabor,tradeunionsd,rought, oragrarianpolitics."Thereporntotes,"Thiswas69morethanin1994,60 morethantheannualaveragein 1991-5of 494, continuintghetendency notedsince1993forsuchconflicttsoincreasea,n inversionofthetendency inthefirsytearsofthedecadeforthemtodecrease."Theconflictosf1995 involved"381,086individuals-72,467morethanin 1994,andabovethe annualaverageof364,206.The averagenumberofindividualisnvolvedin eachconflicwtas687.8,greatetrhanthe626averageof1994,butlessthan the1991-5averageof737.2."Therewere"41murderisn1995,6 fewerthan in 1994,but,significantloyf,these,39 resultedfromdisputesoverland,3 morethanin 1994.Since 1990,319 individualhsavebeenmurderedT.his representasdropof243 fromthe526 murdereidnthesecondhalfofthe 1980s,butintotalwehave881Brazilianrurawlorkerasssassinatedunderthe NewRepublico,ralmostwoa week."Asinearlieryearst,hegreatesntum- berofdeathshasbeenofthoseoccupyinlgand(19), "followedbythoseofthe landless(15), amongthemthe9 massacredin 1995inCorumbiara,n event thatmarkeda dividinglineinthehistoryoftheseconflictsT.hestateswhere mostofthesemurderhsaveoccurredarePara(4) andRond8nia(10)."Even allowingfortheincreasednumberof conflictisnvolvinglandlesspeople, "thebiggestincreaseinviolencewasthatperpetrateadgainsthosepossess- ingland,indicatintghecontinuancoefconflictosverlandoccupancythathad beengoingonsincethe1970s"(FolhadeSdoPaulo,June30,1996).Another signoftheMST's growingdynamismhasbeena changeinthegeographoyf theseruralconflictsA.lthoughmostofthemstillhappenintheNortheast, "theNorthf,orthefirstimeinmanyyearsi,s behindtheSoutheasatndMid- dleWest,"whichmeansthat"theconflictsa,lthoughtheycontinueinareas
20	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
ofagriculturealxpansiona,renowmovingtothosewiththemostmodern- ized agricultureT."hisis shownbythestatesthatwitnessedthemostcon- flictsin 1995:MinasGeraiscamefirstf,ollowedbySao PauldandBahiain secondplace.
ThevictorieswonbytheMST havebeenunequal.Between1986and 1996ithelped145,000familietsoacquireland.These"settlerf"amiliensow occupyanareaof48,080,172ha(figurefsromINCRAandMST). ByJune 30,1997,thesenumberhsadincreaseda; furthe1r2,512familieshadbeen settledinanareatotalinganothe4r8,883ha(figurefsromMST). Butwhen officiadlatafromtheIBGErevealthathereweresome81,818,014haof untilledlandinBrazilin 1985,thereis stilla lottobe done.'0Whatmatters mostisthat1997endedwithabalanceoftwopoliticavlictorieasgainstagov- ernmentthathadseemedtoBrazil'slowerclassesall-powerfuOl.ne ofthese victorieshad extraordinariydeologicalimportancet:heoverwhelming majoritoyftheBrazilianpeoplehadbeenshowingthemselveusnequivocally infavoroflandreform.O"nlearningofthis,manynewspapersf,romthe leadingFolhade SdoPauloondown,begantosupporthisreforma,lthough obviouslynotquiteinthesamewayas thatproposedbythemoreopenlyanti- capitalisstectorsoftheMST.
Untilthen,thegovernmenhtadadoptedw,ithconsiderablseuccess,the policyofdirectlcyonfrontinthgeworkerTs.hiswashowitreactedf,orexam- ple,tooneofthemostcombativceategorieosfBraziliantradeunionst,heoil industrwyorkersw,henthesebeganacampaignforawageincreasea,lready promisedbythegovernmenotfCardoso'spredecessorIt,amarFranco.The governmenetntrusteidtspreparationtsoanarmygeneralc,reatinga Latin AmericanversionofThatcherismT.he generalaid up stocksof gasoline, carefullcyhosethemomentobegintheconfrontatioan,dhadtherefineries occupiedbytroopstokeeptheworkerisnsideandforcethemtoworkatthe tasksconsideresdtrategitcomaintainoutputD.espitetheunionleaders'pub- licdenialst,hegovernmentv'isctorywasa crushinogneandservedtointimi- dateothercategorieosfworkers.
WiththeMSTthegovernmencotuldnotadoptthispolicyp,articularliyn viewofthemassacreoflandlesspeasantsonApril17,1996,inEldoradodos Caraja'sinPara,whichadmostunfortunantaetionaalndinternationraelper- cussionsN.oteventheleadingconservativpeoliticiansupportesduchbutch- eryw,hichwaswidelypublicizedbythemedia(eventhosemostloyaltothe governmenitn)a toneopenlyfavorablteotheMST. Thegovernments'tsrat- egyconsistedofpresentinigtselfas thedefendeorfa rationallandpolicyand tryingto isolatetheprincipaleadersofthemovementp,ortrayintghemas sectarianu,ncompromisinagn,dbackward-lookinTgh.eMST's response wasbrilliantIn.steadofcringinagtthisattacki,tlaunchedacounteroffensive
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	21
andplanneda marchtothefederaclapitalthatwastotaketwomonth(satan average20 km a day)-that is, it decidedon a symbolic"invasion"of Brasilia,withitsfeetliterally"ontheground,e"xactlya yearaftertheEldo- radodos Caraja'smassacre.
Themarchw,hichwaschristenetdheNationalMarchforLandReform, Jobs,andJusticeh,adanemotionailmpactonthewholecountryg,uarantee- ingtheMST spaceinthemediaalmosteveryday.Thepresenceofgroupsof marcheraslongthehighwaysw,earingrusticsandals,marchinfgromdiffer- entdeparturpeoints'2onthewaytoBrasiliaw,asnotjustunusuablutseemed quixoticT.hefirsgtreatquestionwaswhethetrheywouldactuallyreachtheir destinationT.hepeopleingovernmenbtetthatheywouldnot.Afterall,the marcherisncludedoctogenarianws,omena,ndchildrenH.owcouldmedical attentionf,ood,andlodgingbe ensuredalongthewholeroute?How would everyonbee keptinorder?Howwouldtheybereceivedbythecommunities throughwhichtheypassed,and,moreimportanwt,heretheywouldcamp overnightE?achofthesequestiontsurnedouttobea victoryforthemarch. The oldestmarchernsotonlyshowedextraordinarstyrengtahndoptimism butdeclaredthatparticipatiningtheMST hadgiventhembackjoyinliving. LogisticsupportworkedperfectlyT.he exampleof disciplinehad positive repercussionosntheinhabitanotsfthe253municipioosftheinteriotrhrough whichthemarcherpsassed.Smallstorekeeperwsereparticularliympressed athavingthemarcherpsassbywithouatnydisturbanceansdatbeingscrupu- louslypaidforeverythintghemarchernseededfromthem.
Inthesecontactswithruralcommunitietsh,ereweremovingincidents. The marcherosftenhadcontactwithlocal childrenandteenagersu,sually preparedbyelementarayndhighschoolteachersI.n someofthesemeetings thegreatmomenwtasthespeechdeliveredbya"landlesslittleone"(achild belongingtotheMST), whopresentebdasicexplanationosfwhotheywere, howtheylived,andwhathemarcherwsereabout.Therewerealsovisitsby thestudentasc,companiebdytheirteacherst,otheplaceswherethemarchers werestayingovernighAt.llthisnotonlyhelpedtoincreasesympathfyorthe movemenbtutalsoledtoa questioninogfwhatwasbeingtaughitnschool.In thisparticulart,heconclusionwas almostthesame:theyhadtopaymore attentiointheirstudiestowhatBrazilwasreallylike.
As faras thechildrenwereconcernedt,hemarcherssolvedtheirproblems verywell.NearCatalao(inthesouthofthestateofGoyaz),forexamplet,hey adoptedanabandonedbaby.Inthisway,theypointedtotheexistencoefone ofBrazil'sgreatesstocialplagues-thesituationofmiseryandphysicaalnd moralabandonmenintwhichmillionosfchildrefnindthemselveins Brazil- andshoweda waytosolveit.Eachdaytheconvictiognrewthathemarchers weregoingtomakeittoBrasilia,whichb,esidesincreasintghesympathoyf
22	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
increasingsectorsof thepopulationl,ed to theremovalof thelast of the restrictionthsatheprofessionpaloliticaleadershihpadplacedonthemove- mentT.heredevelopedalmostasortofunanimounsationagloodfeeling.
Obviouslyt,hosewhoevaluatedthemarchinterpretietdsmeaninginthe waythatbestsuitedthem.EduardoSuplicy,animportanmtemberofthe moderatweingofthePT,comparedthemarchtotheCivilRightsMarchon Washingtolned byMartinLutherKingin 1963.LeonelBrizola,themain leaderofthePartidoDemocraticodo Trabalho(DemocraticLaborParty- PDT), stressedthecontinuitbyetweentheMST andtheMovimentodos AgricultoreSsemTerra(MovemenotfFarmerwsithouLtand-MASTER), establishedwhenhehadbeengovernoorfRio Grandedo Sul. Lula,Brazil's chiefpopularleaderf,orgedinthefactorwyorkers'truggleosfthe1970sand
1980s,principalleaderofthePT,andexpectedtobea candidatfeorthethird timerunninfgorthepresidencoyfBrazilin 1998,soughtinsteadtochannel themovemendtirectlyagainstPresidenCtardoso.FromApril17 on,"the conscienceofthePresidenotftheRepublicwas madeawarethathe should neverchallengethefeelingofthepeople."AccordingtoLula,"160 million Brazilianshadlearneda permanenletsson,as had,aboveall,thearrogancoef thePresidenotftheRepublic."Althoughgivingrathermixedsignals,Dom PauloEvaristoArns,thecombativceardinalarchbishopofSao Paulo,had alreadydonehisbittopersonalizteheproblemH.ehaddeclaredhissupport forthelandinvasionsp,ointingoutthatagrarianreforminBrazilwas 500 yearsbehindthetimesb,uthealsocalledforthepeopletosupporPtresident Cardosobecause,ifhewereleftisolatedh,ewouldnotbeabletofacethedif- ficultiecsreatedbythepartietshatsupportehdim.Thepolicyoftheleadersof theMST wasthatofgatherinagllthesupporptossible.InreplytoCardoso, whohadaccusedthepoliticianosftheleftofseekingto"hitcha ride"onthe marcherst,heydeclaredthatheywere"proudofthesolidarityofthecom- panyofsuchfighters."
Foritspart,theMST,afterthetriumphalrrivaaltBrasilia,waswise enoughnottoconferanyspecialimportancoenPresidenCtardoso.Evenits leaders'interviewithhimwastreatedasaminorevent.Ultimatelyth,ey argued",Thechiefobjectofthemarchwastoopenchannelsofcommunica- tionwithsociety,a"ndin"listenintgosociety"theyhaddiscoveredthat"the peopleinthecity"werealsosufferinbgadlyfromtheeffectosfthepoliciesof a governmenthtatpaidattentioonlytotheinterest"softheelitesandthebig internationeaclonomicgroups.T"hemarchinfectesdocietywiththedream thatit was possibleto changethisrealitya,nd it demonstratetdhatthose excludedfromalleconomics,ocial,andpoliticablenefithsadnotbeenvan- quishedT.herewasawillandaninclinatiotnofight".Wherevewrewentwe lefta trailofhope."IntheinterviewithCardosotheymadeita pointto
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	23
recallj,okinglyt,hatheyhadalwayssaid,"withtheauthoritieist,is likethe summaroyfasoccergame.Itdoesnotdecidetheresultju,strecordtshenum- berofgoalsscoredT.hegamewasthemarcht;hearrivailnBrasiliaandsoci- ety'sreactionwerethescoreT.helandlesst,heworkincglass,andthosefight- ingagainstneoliberalismhavescoreda goalagainstheFHC government." Reiteratintghatheyarenotconcernejdustwiththeearlyimplementatiofn landreformt,heyreaffirmtehdatneoliberaploliciesdisadvantageedveryone andthiswaswhytheyhadbroughwtiththemtotheaudiencewithCardoso "representativoefsartistso,ftheChurcho,fthetradeunionso,fthewomen's movementan,dofnativeBrazilianations("MSThomepage,"WeContinue theMarch").
ThesuccessfumlarchnotonlyhelpedtheMSTbreakoutofthecorralin whichthegovernmenhtadtriedtopenitbutalso was thefirsvtictoryofthe lowerclasses overtheneoliberalpoliciesimplementebdy theBrazilian state.'3Itremaintsobe seenifthevictoryinthisgamecanreallyturnthings aroundwhentherightis stillclearlyinlineforthechampionship.
ACHIEVEMENTS ANDLIMITS
Thereis a greatdebate,ontheleftandontherighta,boutthenatureand rangeoftheMST'sproposalsF.orsome,proposinglandreforminaglobal- izedworldis ananachronismbothineconomicandinsocialtermsF.oroth- ers,eveniftheproposails notviableeconomicallyitisjustifiedbyitsimme- diateeffectosnthestandardoflivingofthousandosfhungrypeople.In this sense,thestrugglfeorlandreformis presenteads a means(perhapstheonly means)formillionsof"excluded"Brazilianstoachievetherightosfcitizen- ship.Finallyt,herearethosewhoconsiderthepracticaplrojectoftheMST revolutionaranydnotrestrictetdolandreformwithinthecapitalisstystem.'4
IndocumentpsroducedbytheMST weoftenfindthesecondviewpoinotr thethirdora mixturoefthetwo.ItsProgramade reformaagraria(Caderno de Fornna'io23, 21) saysthat"anymethodoforganizinganddeveloping productiointhecountrysidmeustakeintoaccounthesupremacoyflabor overcapital.Onemustseektheeliminatioonfall formosfexploitatioand oppression.O"therdocumentasremorexplicitincallingfora socialistpro- gram."Areformagrarianecessaria,p"ublishedontheMST's homepage, says,"Thisproposalforagrarianreformis partofthedesireoftheBrazilian workingclasstobuilda newsocietye:galitariaanndsocialistI.nthissense, themeasuresproposedas necessaryformpartofa broadprocessofchanges insocietya,nd,fundamentalloyf,a changefromthepresent-dacyapitalist structuroeftheorganizatioonfproductionT."hisdocumenta,trueprogram
24	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
forsocialtransformatigonoe,sontosay,"Thecorrelatioonfexistingforces inourpresent-dasyocietyfavorsthedominanctlasseswhocontrotlhegov- ernmenatndthelaws.Theinterestosfthelargelandowneros,fthebourgeoi- sie,andofforeigcnapitalstillpossessenormoustrengtwhithwhichtomain- tainthepresenstituationfora longtimetocome."
Othertextsaremorewide-rangingd,iscussingthestrengtohfsuchideas as "society,"citizenship,a"nd"nation."Thisis thecase withan analysis, publishedon thesamehomepage,titled"WeContinuetheMarchAgainst Neoliberalism.A"ccordingtotheauthorosfthisdocumenti,tis necessary thathepopulationbe thebeneficiaroyfthewealththatitproducest,obuild "aBrazilfortheBrazilianpeople.Inshortw,ewillbuildanation.T"heycon- clude,"WeoftheMST willgoonorganizinogurselveasndfightinfgorland reformA.ndwe willbe involvedineveryquestionconcernintghefuturoef ourcountryT.hisisa citizen'srighatndonethatweknowhowtoexercise.I"n anothedrocumenotnthehomepage,"ManifestoftheLandlesstothePeo- pleofBrazil,"thepolicyofCardoso'sgovernmenistdenouncedfor"benefit- ingforeigncapitalandthefinanciaslystema"ndproducin"gunemployment and the bankruptcoyf nationalindustryand agriculture.O"ne's initial impressioinsthatf,ortheMST,therearenointernablasesforsustainintghe Braziliangovernmentp'solicy(forexamplel,argeoligopolisctapital).How- everi,ntheircallforparticipatiointhestrugglet,heauthorosfthedocument aremoreselectivet:heycallon"workersi,ntellectualsm,allbusinessmen, theretiredh,ousewivesa,ndstudentst"ojoininconstructin"agnewplanfor Brazil'sdevelopmenftorBrazil,A ProgramoftheBrazilianPeople."
Weshouldnotunderestimatheedifferencoefsoutlookbetweenthelead- ersofthemovementit,slocal leadershipa,ndthoseatitsgrassroots.'5At timesthesameindividuaelxpressesopinionsthatseemsurprisinwghen comparedwiththosethathehasexpressedearlierJ..P.Stedilehimselfp,re- sentedbythemediaasaMarxistc,onsiderhsimselfaChristiansocialistand hassaidina recenitntervietwhatheisstrugglintgobuild"a newmancapable ofproducingoodsthatwillguaranteheisfamily'fsuturaendbenefistociety as a whole"(interviewpublishedinEstudosAvanCados31)." Perhapsthe bestideaofthesedifferenciensoutlookis thatgivenbythefirsitssueofthe journalSemTerra(July-Augu1st979).Theeditoriaplresentlsandreformas a causeof"everyBrazilianmanandwoman,f"oritaffectesveryonneotonly materiallbyutalsoethicallyh,avingtodowiththeneedto"builda nationthat isfreew,ealthya,ndjust,anationofcitizenwsithnooneleftout."Theneedto build"a nationaplrogramthatisreallynew"iscontrastewdith"theconomic modeladoptedbyinternationcalpitalandappliedinBrazilbytheFernando HenriqueCardosogovernmentT.h"esamerelationbetweenlandreformand thenation-buildinprgogramisdealtwithbyPliniodeArrudaSamapio,a PT
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	25
federadleputywitha Christiabnackgrounadnda specialistonthelandques- tion.Greatimportancies giventoaninterviewbyLulainwhichhedeclared that"thePT remainas socialistparty"andis stillaimingfor"theutopiaofa just,brotherlsyocietyr,eflecteidntheprinciploefsolidaritayndthedivision ofthegoodsofsocietyamongthewholeofsociety."On thequestionof socialismL,uladefendtshesystemofcooperativeasndasserts",Theworld's mostsocialistsystemofagriculturisethatofthekibbutziminIsrael,a capital- istcountryF."orhispartA,dalbertMoartinsC,ONCRAB'snationacloordi- nator,reiteratesthe position,alreadypublishedin the Caderno de CooperaCdoAgri'cola5, ofa modelofa cooperativtehatis botheconomic and politicalin charactearnd contributetso thedevelopmenotf class con- sciousnessandsocialistvalues.Thefinapliece,"DisobedienceIsNoCrime," signedbyAdermaBrogo,isa typeofsynthesibsytheleftofthejournaland, thereforoef,thevariouspositionosftheMST: itcriticizenseoliberalismbut also"thelefthatdoesnotwantobetheleftandtransformitselfintoa mere opposition"B;ogo assertstheneedtogobeyondmeretrade-uniodnemands because"inBrazil,almost30% oftheactiveworkforcaerejobless."He appealstothetraditioonfpopularstruggleisnBrazilandcallsfortheelabo- rationofa nationaplrogramH.ecriticizetshosewhoaccepthelimitationosf bourgeoidsemocracyandrejectinstitutionsatlruggleDs.espitetheheteroge- neityofoutlookcharacteristoifctheMST,thepotentiaflorconflicwtithBra- ziliancapitalismoveraspectsofitsprogram(andaboveallitspracticaalppli- cation)seemsundeniable.
Considerintghathecentraolbjectiveofthemovemenits thestrugglfeor accesstolandbyacontingenetstimatetdonumbemrorethan4,000,000fam- ilies,one ofthegreatnoveltietshatheexperienceosfthestrugglaendthe organizatioonftheMST haveintroduceids combininga politicalprogram forgettinmgorelandreleasedwithaprogramforthelandalreadysecuredI.t is preciselyinlinkingupwhatitcallsthestrugglefotrhelandwiththestrug- gleonthelandthatheMST revealsanextraordinaproytentiaflora confron- tationwithcapitalismIn. thisense,overandabovesomeaspectsofitseclec- ticprogramandeventhemixednatureofitspoliticaleadershipandofits socialroots,whatheMST actuallydoesinpracticeofferasglimpseofhow thestrugglefsoranalternativmeodelofsocietymighbtebroughtogetheIrf. we remembetrhatpropertryightsinBraziliansocietyhavegoneunchal- lengedandcastourmindsbacktothedebatesoverthenewconstitutioin, whichthemaingroupscampaigninfgorlandreformweredefeatedbythe combinedpowerofthelandedpropertiynterestosfthedominanctlasses(see Silva,1987;Veiga,1990),thentheradicalpotentiaolftheMST's strugglfeor landanditssocialpowerareobvious.Itsprogramis thereforuenacceptable tothedominanctlassesandtothecurrenftederaglovernmenBtu.tthegreat
26	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
noveltypresentebdytheMST maylieinthewayinwhichthecourseofthe strugglheasgivenrisetoa practicaelxerciseincommunitlyiving.
VarioustudentosfBrazilaretryintgodiscoverwhatmightexplainthe successoftheMST as a radicalsocialmovemenatndonesolidlyplantedin thebaseofsocietyT.hereisthecase,forexample,ofBernardoFernandes, who,goingbacktotheconceptsof"territorializatioand" "spatialization," analyzestheprocessesbywhichrealityis beingtransformerde,writtein space,andengravedwitha processofstrugglbeytheworkerosrganizedin theMSTthrougshuchconcretaectionsasdemonstrationpasr,adesm,arches, theoccupationofgovernmenbtuildingsn,egotiationasn,doccupationasnd reoccupationosflands.Theideaofspatializatiolninkedwiththestruggloef socialmovementis a fertiloene,becauseitsuggesttshatwithinthegeneral situationofbourgeoihsegemonyth,erecanbeislandsofresistancienwhich projectfsoralternativfeormosfsocietycanbedevelopedT.heMST'sexperi- enceseemstoconfirmtheideasofDavidHarveyw,ho,citingCerteauc,on- sideredthatheresurgencoefpopularpracticeisnourmodernscientifiacnd industrisaolcietyisnotlimitedtothepast,toruraalreas,ortoprimitivteribes butpresentintheveryheartofthecontemporareyconomyS.paces can be "liberatedm"oreeasilythanFoucaultimaginedp,reciselybecausesocial practicesfindtheminsteadofbeingcaughtupinsomerepressivweebof socialcontroTl.heMST hasmadesignificanadtvancesina contexotfrenewed socialconflicbtecauseitsactionscallintoquestionthespatialogicofBrazil- iancapitalismI.n thissense,ithaspresentepdroposalsfordevelopmenatnd waysofactingandorganizintghatquestionthexistinmgodel,eveninregard tothemoredefensivpeositionsadoptedbyothermassorganizations.
TheMSThasretainedaconsiderablmearginofautonomyinitsrelations withpoliticalpartiese,venthosewhosecandidatesitsmembersare most inclinedtosupportf,orexamplet,hePT.Thesamehashappenedinitsrela- tionswiththeCUT.Aswehaveseen,theMST leadershifpeelsthatheretreat ofunionismandtheacceptancoefinstitutionalibsmymanyPT memberhsas notbeendue solelytotheattackbyneoliberalismA.ccordingto Stedile, somethinmgorefar-reachinisghappeningu;nionsareceasingtorepresent themasses,whohavebeenthrowbnackintotheinformaelconomyand"have lostthestrategiocbjectivoefchangingsociety.T"hesamecanbe saidofmost ofthestateandlocal governmenctosntrollebdythePT. Stedilealso asserts thatheopinionheldbytheMST leadershipof"mostoftheactivemembers ofthePT andCUT" whooccupypostsinthesegovernmen"tisthatheyare onlylookingaftertheirjobs. Andwhatis worse,theyareenjoyingit."The samecriticismthatheyhavelostanywishtochangesocietyis aimedatthe otherorganizationosf theBrazilianleft(interviewpublishedin Atenvao, May21, 1996).Thedifferenicsethati,nthecase ofthelattert,herelationship
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	27
isweakert:heyarethesmallerpartiesw,ithlessappealtotheworkersp,artic- ularlyruralones.
At thesametime-and perhapsherelies thereasonforStedile'srough honesty-MST's chancetorealizeitspotentiaflortransformatidoenpends ona linkwiththestruggleisnthecities.Thereisalreadya closepartnership withtheCentradlosMovimentoPsopulare(sUnionofPopularMovements- CMP).17 ThemarchofJune25 wasconductejdointlyandendedina demon- stratiointheAvenidaPaulistat,hecentraalvenueofdowntownSao Paulo. WiththeactiveparticipatioonfMST membersa,MovimentodeTrabalh- adoresSemTeto(MovemenotfHomelessWorkers-MTST)wasformedin thecityofCampinas(Sao Paulo)thatsoughtoorganizethe"excluded"sec- tors,mainlytheunemployedT.hisisnota littleb,utitwillbeenough?The MST's fatedependsnotjustonitsownactionsandthoseoftheBrazilianstate butalsoonalltheforcesthata,lthoughformerlcyombatives,eemtohavelost theirsympathfyorthestruggleosftoday.
As we writethisarticlet,heworldstockmarkectrashhas hitexchange reservehsardandhasobligedthegovernmenontceagaintoinjectmillionsof dollarsintothefinanciaslystem".ThestockexchangesofSao Pauloand BuenosAireshavebothfallentwiceas muchas thatofHongKongwhenthe secondroundoftheEastAsiancrisisbegan";thedeficiotncurrentransac- tionsgrewinNovemberfrom4.32 percenotfthegrossdomesticproducto 4.43; reservesfell,and therewas an enormousloss of foreignexchange (FolhadeSao Paulo,December11,1997).Bothdomesticallayndexternally, theCardosogovernmensetemstohavelostmuchofitscharmS.everalcorpo- rationsarereconsiderintgheirplanstocometoBrazil,theforecourtosfthe car industryare filledwith"popular"models(designedforthemiddle classes)thathavefailedtofindbuyersa,ndaftera feverofconsumptiotnhat sweptoverthosewhohadmanagedtokeeptheirjobs "repossessionh"as becomepartoftoday'svocabularyIn. shortt,heforecastosntheeconomy's futureperformancev,enthoseissuedby governmenotfficialsa,requite sombera,nticipatinagriseinunemploymenatd,eclineininvestmenletvels, anda newspeculativaettackonthecurrency.
Infacta,ftertheinitiaeluphoriparoducedbythedropintheinflatiornate, thenegativesocialeffectosftheCardosogovernmentp'solicies,especially theunemploymenint theindustriaslectorthathas been increasingsince 1989,havebeguntointensifIyn.thisparticulatrh,esituatioinsgettinwgorse notjustbecausefirmasreclosingdownbutalsobecauseotherasremoderniz- ingand,as theyimprovteheirproductiviteyli,minatinjogbs.'8A goodpartof suchjoblossisduetothehighinteresrtatesw,hoseobjectistomaintainthe attractiveneossf Brazil forspeculativeinvestmenatnd therebykeep the exchangeratehigh.Thisis a policywhosemedium-teremffectasrecata-
28	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
strophice,venforthepublicdebt,andbenefitosnlylargenationaalndinter- nationablankingcapital.Evenso,thelossofforeignreserveshasalready beguntoconcernourhithertsoelf-sufficiegnotvernmenotfficialsR.ecent researchshowsthatbetween1986 and 1996 "thenumberoffamilieswith incomeslessthanfivetimesthelegalminimumwagegrew21 percenftaster thanthatoftheaverageofall incomelevels."In shortt,heReal Planhas alreadycreatedmorepoorpeoplethantheCruzadoPlan(introducebdythe governmenotfJoseSarneyin1986)(FolhadeSao Paulo,December8, 1997).Inequalityofincomedistributioanlr,eadythegreatesitntheworldi,s increasingT.hemaincarassemblyplantsinBrazilarepressurintgheirwork- erstoacceptashortewrorkingdaywithawagecut.AlthoughtheCUTis resistingth,emoreconservativFeorcaSindicalhasalreadyacceptedA.nother effecotfthecurrenetconomicpolicyisthatsectorosfBrazilian-ownebdusi- ness,includingsmallandmedium-sizefdarmerhs,avebeensufferinggreatly frombothhighinteresrtatesandthefacilitieosfferetdoimporters.
Thepicturpeointstoanextraordinawryorseninogftheconditionosflife forthemajorityoftheBrazilianpopulationT.heprospectofpresidential electionsin1998raisesthepossibilitythatsocialconflicwtillonceagain becomepoliticizede,speciallybecause,intheoryt,hechancesofa left-wing electoravlictoryhaveincreasedP.aradoxicallyt,hesechancesrepresenta,t leastforthemomentm,oreaproblemthanasolutionT.hegreatetrhechance of winningt,hegreatertheriskof "electoralism("seekingto appealto the votersi'mmediatceoncernsa)ndthereforfeluiditiyntheelectorapllatform anda tendenctyoignorethenonparliamentary-aenvdennoninstitutional- componenotfsocialconflictsIt. is notbychancethatrecentdayshaveseen thefirsptublicdisagreemenbtetweenJoaoPedroStedileandthetopleader- shipofthePT (includinLgula,whohasfinallyannouncetdhatheisrunning). Thisconcernascruciaplointintheelectoraplrogramthathepartyisabouto adopt:whatodo aboutthefinanciaslystemS.tedile'srecentassertionthata governmenotftheleftshouldpenalizethissystemandevenhavethestate takeitoverhasbeenvehementlcyontestebdyLula andbyJoseDirceu(the party'csurrenptresidentH).ereis a crucialdividingofthewaterse,specially sincetheverycooperativelsinkedtotheMST, tothedegreethatheyform partofthemarkeetconomyw,illtendtosuffetrheeffectosfapolicythat givesadvantagetsobigfinancecapital."9
As thepoetsaid,lifeis theartofagreemenatl,thoughtherearemanydis- agreementaslongtheway.TheMST iswhat,inBrazil'scurrenstocialcon- flictsh,asthemostlifeinit.Howmanydisagreemenctasnitresist?Finding outcouldcarrya veryhighpoliticaclostforallwhoareseekingtobuild,in therealworlda, platformofstruggltehatwillpromotteheagreementthatis increasinglnyeededandnow,thanksinlargeparttowhatMST hasdone,
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	29
seen to be possible-not exactlyan agreementbetweenorganizations (althoughthistoo willhappen)butone betweenthestruggleosf thegreat massofworker(semployedornot)inthecitiesandthoseinthecountryside.
NOTES
1. Atthesametime,we shouldnotignoretheseriouslimitationosfthisworkersm'	ove- ments,tartinwgithitsfailurteofreeitselfcompletelfyromtheoldcorporatilsatborunionstruc- tureinheritefdromthe1930s.Onthepoliticalevel,despiteitsextraordinairmyportanciet,was unabletobreakthehegemonoyfthebourgeoisiienthestrugglaegainsthemilitardyictatorship. RegardintghestrikeisntheABCindustrizaolneofGreateSraoPauloandtheappearancoefthe "newworkersm'ovements,e"eAntune(s1988).Onthelimitismposedontheworkers'truggle in Brazilbythetrade-uniosntructursee,e BoitoJunio(r1991).
2. WiththecreationoftheCUT in1983,a divisionwascreatedintheBraziliantrade-union movementle,adingtotheformatioonftwoothersuchfederationtsh:eConfederacaGoeraldos Trabalhadore(sGeneralConfederatioonfWorkers-CGT)in 1985andtheForcaSindicalin 1991.
3. The 1980sinBrazilareconsideredf,romaneconomicviewpoint,he"lostdecade."
4. Animportanintdicatoorfhowtheworkers'truggleisnBrazilhaveretreatedp,olitically andideologicallyi,s Lula's recentdeclaratiotnhathehasneverbeena socialist.
5. Some 264 propertieasre greaterthan100,000ha and togethermakeup a totalof 32,500,000ha.TheMST alsoargueso,nthebasisofIBGE data,that"ofallthelandsinBrazil witha legalownero,nly14%areusedforgrowingcrops,while48% areusedforpasture.T"he grazingoflivestockisoftenusedtodisguisethefacthatfarmlanidsillegallylyingfallowA.n articlein thenewsweeklyVeja (no. 1491,April16, 1997) based on data fromtheInstituto NacionaldeColonizacaoeReformAagranr(iNaationalInstitutoefAgriculturSaelttlemenatnd LandReform-INCRA)consideredit"frighteningth"at1percent(35,083)ofrecorded landholdingosccupied153,000,000ha.Evenassumingthat"eachofthesehadadifferenowtner, whichis indeedfarfromthecase,itis as ifjust35,083peoplepossessedanareaequaltothecom- binedareaofFrance,GermanyS,pain,Switzerlanda,ndAustriaI.tis uponthistrulycrazymap thathelandlessaremarching."
6. Translatorn'sote:A messianicommunitiynupstateBahia,severalthousandstrong, whosetotaleliminatiobnythefederaalrmyo,n itsthirdattemptw,as fictionalizebdyVargas Llosa inhisWaroftheEndoftheWorld.
7.ForanaccountoftheformosfstrugglaedoptedbytheMST see"Setetesesequivocadas sobreas lutassociaisnocampo,o MST e a reformagraria"(1997) andSt6dile(1997a).
8.Thedocumenmtostoftenmentioneidnfavorofthegoodperformanocfetheruraslettle- mentsisanFAOreporptublishedin1992undera formaalgreemenwtiththeBrazilianAgricul- tureMinistryW.ideinequalitiebsetweensettlemendtsuetoculturaalndgeo-economidciffer- encesanddifferenstatesofdevelopmenatrepubliclyrecognizedbytheleadersoftheMST themselves.
9. Someofthoseresponsiblfeorthisworkofeducationandtraininsgumupthis"new teaching"i:tsrootslieintheeducationamlovementthatwasbasictotheformatioonftheMST, the process wherebypeasantswho have lost theirland, isolated fromeach otherand marginalizebdothbytherighatndbymanysegmentosfthelefts,oughtobuildan identittyhat wastheirownandnew-theidentitoyflandlessrurawlorkerso,rganizedinacollectivweiththe
30	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
capacitytofight,oattainpoliticasltrengthan,d,graduallyt,odevelopa socialprojecta,niden- titywhosefoundationrsangefromdevelopingstrategiefsorthestrugglteotheconcernforthe educationofchildrenandadolescentwsithwhichtoadvancetheconquestsofthemovement (CaldartandSchwaab,1991: 113).
10.See,inthisrespectt,heMST documen"tIdleLandinBrazil,1988."
11.BetweenMarch9 andMarch10,1996,theInstitutBorasileirode OpiniaoPublica(Bra- zilianInstitutoefPublicOpinion-IBOP)carriedout,undercontracwtiththeConfederac,ao Nacionalda Industri(aBrazilianConfederatioonfIndustry-CNI),an investigatiotnhatpro- ducedresultesxtremelfyavorablteotheMST: 94 percenotfthosesurveyeadgreedthatheMST shouldstruggleforlandreform8;8 percentagreedthatthegovernmensthouldconfiscate untilledlandandgiveittothelandlesspeasants7;7percenctonsideredlandinvasiontsobean importanmteansinthestrugglea,slongastherewasnoviolenceandnodeathw,hile21percent consideretdhatlandownersshouldtrytodriveoutsuchinvasionse,veniftheyhadtousefirearms todoso.
12.Therewasa southeastermnarchs,tartinfgromGovernadoVraladares(MinasGerais),a southernmarchs,tartinfgromSaoPedro,andawesternmarchw,hichbeganinRondon6polis (MatoGrosso).OntheMST's homepage,see"WeContinuetheMarchAgainstNeoliberal- ism,"1.
13.Theconclusionthathegovernmensutffereadseriousdefeatis takenupbyVeja,which devoteditsmainarticleintwosuccessiveissuestothemarch":Amarchdaosradicais"(no.1491, April16,1997)and"Eleschegaramla; oquefazeragora?"(no.1492,April23,1997).Inthislat- terissue,itwas declared,
TheweekshowedFernandHoenriquCeardoso'sgovernmeintaseldom-seesnituation- sufferinagpoliticadlefeatb,eingforcedtoabandonpositionsa,ndtocontradicitself".It is notfittinfgorsomeoneontherunfromthepolice,accusedofmurdert,obereceivedin thePlanaltoPalaceinaudience,t"hepresssecretarlyeakedoutreferrintgothepeasant leaderJoseRainhaJuniorH.e wasoneofthe25 receivedinthePalaceonSaturday".We shallnotallowcampingintheEsplanadados MinisteriosT."hecanvastentswentupall thesameand1,500ofthelandlessmarcherssleptanddidtheircookingthereuntiMlay1. The governmenwtantedno scytheisn thedemonstratioenistherb,uttheyappeared.
Atthesametimet,heprincipaluthoritoynthelandquestioninBrazil,sociologisJtosedeSouza Martinse,xtremelryespectefdorhisstudiesandforthepracticaslupporhtehadgiventothepeo- ple'sstrugglienthecountrysidceo,nsideretdhatheMarchwasatwo-edgedswordA.ccording toMartinsi,tweakenedthegovernmenastmuchastheMSTitselff,orthelattehrad"notsoughta discussionwithgovernmenbtuthadsoughto call intoquestioneverythinagboutit,"andby makingnoconcretdeemandsi,t"mockedthegovernmenbtypresentinngoprogram.M"artins wondered"whatwasthesenseinmarchinognBrasfliaw,ithanenormoumsobilizatioonfpublic opinioni,finfactnota singleproposalwasbeingmade."ForMartins",thegroupsopposedto FernandoHenriqueCardoso,ingeneratlhegroupsontheleftl,iketheChurchandthePT,were makingexcessiveuse ofthelandreformquestionsimplytojustifytheirantigovernmepnotsi- tion,"whichwasa greatmistakeF.orMartinst,heMST hadtoreverutrgentltyo"itsgoals,its strategiesit,spracticesanditsstruggle("interviewithJos6de Souza Martinspublishedin EstudosAvanCado3s1,181-182).
14. In thiscontexta,ndalthoughtheystartfromoppositetheoreticaploliticalpresupposi- tions,theconclusionsoftheeditorialosfBrazil'smajornewspapert,heFolhadeSao Paulo, agreewiththoseofsociologisJtamesPetrasa,nenthusiasotftherevolutionarpyotentiaolfthe newLatinAmericanpeasantstruggle(sandthoseoftheMSTinparticulart)h,athegovernment
Almeida,Sanchez/LANDLESS WORKERS' MOVEMENT	31
shouldnotnegotiatweiththeMSTbut"administeitr."AmongPetras'sarticleisnthisrespectwe maycite"Asesquerdase as novaslutassociaisnaAmericaLatina"(1997).
15.AccordintgoresearchpublishedbytheFolhadeSao Paulo(June30,1996),themajority ofthoseinthemarcherse'ncampmenwtsereinfavorofprivatperopertTyh.eresearchmethodol- ogyisnotdescribedindetailh,owevera,ndtherefortehesedatashouldbeconsiderewdithsome cautionA.sidefromthequestionoftherelationshipbsetween"classconsciousnessa"nd"empir- icalconsciousnesst,"heauthorseemunawartehatallofthoseinterviewewdereparticipanitnsa movementhati,npracticatlermsm,akesrespectforprivatperopertayrelativematter.
16.InthesameinterviewSt,6dilerevealsa surprisinrgespectforownershiopflargeproper- tiesiftheyare"productive"N:ow,ifthesubjectisthelargelandowneorf,letussuppose,1,000 ha,butusesitproductiveltyh,enheis alreadyfullfillinsgatisfactoritlhyesocialfunctioonfthat property."
17.TheCMP wasformeidnthe1990sbysocialandcommunitoyrganizationtshatemerged fromtheprogressivweingoftheCatholicChurchandwereunderthepoliticalinfluencoef thePT.
18.Between1989and1996,jobs inindustrfyell34.3percentT.heservicesectorwassimi- larlyaffectede,xceptfortheperiodbetweenthebeginninogf1993andthesecondhalfof1994. Whilewewerewritintghisarticlet,heFederacaodasIndustriadseSao Paulo(Sao PauloFedera- tionofIndustries-FIESP)declared,"IndustryinthestateofSao Paulolost16,328jobs in Novembert,helargestnumbeirn 15months("Folhade SdoPaulo,December8, 1997).Theten- dencynowistowardincreasinjgoblossinallsectorsoftheconomyw,ithsevereunemployment amongthemiddleclass.UNIBANCO(theformeUrniaodeBancosBrasileirosh)asannounceda programofdownsizinwghicha,ccordingtothebankworkerst'radeunionc,ouldaffec7t50staff membersT.hebank'svicepresidenattributtehsisdownsizintgotechnologicaplrogres(sFolha deSdoPaulo,December5, 1997).OnNovembe2r6theFederalHouseofDeputiesapprovedan orderthatwouldallowtenurepdublicofficial(satfederals,tatea,ndcountylevels)tohavetheir employmentetrminateTdh.emeasurehasnowgonetotheSenate.Shouldthesenatorgsivetheir approvali,twilladditsownquotatotheunemploymefnitgures.
19.DocumentisssuedbytheMST showa clearperceptioonftheobstaclesthathecoopera- tiveswillhavetoface.Forexample,"Wearelocatedina capitalistn,eoliberaclountryoneof whoseprioritieis toremoveall subsidiestoagriculturaendonethathasnointeresitnensuring itsinhabitantrs'ightosustenanceI.tis likewiseconcernedtoallowfreeimportatiosno as to keepdownagriculturpalricesandhelpitsqueezethewagesofurbanworkersT.hismeansthat we havetoswimagainsthecurrenTt.hereis no certainttyhathepriceswe receivewillmatch ourproductiocnosts.Wehavetorealizethatmanyofthedifficultiwesearehavingtofacearethe sameas thosefacingall othersmallandmedium-sizefdarmers("Cadernode Cooperaado Agricola5, 39).
REFERENCES
AntunesR,icardo 1988Arebeldiadotrabalho0: confrontooperdrionoABCpaulista,asgrevesde1978/80. Sao Paulo:Ensaio.
Boito,Armando 19910 sindalicalismdoeestadonoBrasil:Umacriticadaestrutursaindical.Campinas: UniversitoyfCampinas/SaPoaulo:HUCITEC.,
32	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
CaldartR,oseliandBemadeteSchwaab 1991"Educac,o dascriancasnosacampamentoesassentamentosin,"S'ergioA.Gorgenand J.P.Stedile(eds.),AssentamentoAs:respostaeconomicada reformagrdria.Petr6polis: Vozes.
Femandes,BernardoMangano
1996MST:Formacdoe	Sao Paulo:HUCITEC. territorializaCdo.
IBGE (InstitutBorasileiroe Geografiea Estatistica) 1985CensoagrdrioB.rasilia.
PetrasJ,ames 1997"Asesquerdase as novaslutassociaisnaAmericaLatina,"inJ.P.St6dile(ed.),A reformagrdriaea lutadoMST.Petr6polisV:ozes.
Setetesesequivocadas 1997"Setetesesequivocadasobreas lutassociaisnocampo:o MST e a reformagraria," pp.114-117inJ.P.St6dile(ed.),Areformaagrdriaea lutadoMST.Petr6polisV:ozes.
Silva,Jos6Grazianoda 1986CaindoporterraS.aoPaulo:BuscaVida.
St6dileJ,.P. 1997a "A lutapela reformagrariae o MST,"pp. 103 ff.in J.P. Stedile(ed.), A reforma agrdriaea lutadoMST.Petr6polisV:ozes. 1997bQuestdoagrdrianoBrasil.Sao Paulo:Atual.
Veiga,Jos6Eli 1990Areformaagra'riaquevirousuco.Petr6polisV:ozes.

The MST and the Media: Competing Images of
the BrdZian Landess Farmworkem’ Movement
John L. Hammond
ABSTRACT
For social movements, coverage in the media is a mixed blessing; but like many movements, the Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Movement (MST) actively seeks it out. Treatment of the MST in the Brazilian media is analyzed here using the concept of frame. That treatment is determined by a complex interaction between media producers and movement activists.The frames adopted by those on each side influence public perception of the movement. This study identifies five such underlying frames (mostly in print media but with attention to a television soap opera based on the MST’s activ- ities) and examines the images of the movement that they present. Though the coverage often presents the MST in a favorable light, it does not necessarily encourage the goal of mobilization that the movement seeks to promote.
The Landless Farmworkers’ Movement (Mouimento dos Trabal- hadores Rurais Sem Tma,or MST) has been the most vigorous and prominent social movement in urban or rural Brazil in the last decade. During that time it has garnered significant media attention. Accord- ingly, it makes a good case study of how the interaction between social movements and the media determines media coverage and thus influ- ences the public perception of the movement itself.
The MST organizes unemployed and landless farmworkers to take over idle, absentee-owned farmland. In pushing for land redistribution, the movement challenges big landowners, traditionally one of the most powerful groups in Brazilian politics, and attempts to provide a liveli- hood for poor farmworkers and small farmers. The MST emerged from a wave of land occupations in southern Brazil that began under the mil- itary dictatorship in the late 1970s. It was formally organized in 1984 and has grown in prominence especially since the mid-1990s.
The MST has sought out media coverage and succeeded in attract- ing it. Indeed, the two most important events of the movement’s recent history can be seen as media events: the 1996 massacre of 19 demon- strating landless farmworkers by the military police in Eldorado do Cara- j5s in the state of Par& and the telenovela 0 rei do gad0 (The King of
61
62	LATINAMERICANPOLITICSAND SOCIETY	46:4
Cattle), which was the featured telenovela on the TV Globo network for several months during 1996 and 1997.
Calling the Eldorado massacre a media event does not mean to imply that it was in any sense staged for the media; fortuitously, how- ever, it was covered. The demonstrators were blocking a highway, and a television camera crew, caught in the traffic jam, filmed the police firing on them; the videotape was played repeatedly on nationwide tel- evision, bringing to this case the national attention that attacks on rural protesters normally do not receive.
The telenovela projected the situation of the landless to an even wider audience, and for a longer time. It was one of the most popu- lar novelas of recent years. Telenovelas are a prominent Brazilian cul- tural phenomenon, as general accounts and academic analyses have recognized. This novela can be regarded as one of the most signifi- cant events in the MST’s recent history because it offered a generally sympathetic portrayal (though the movement was not named) and reached well beyond the news-attentive public for several months. These two events and their repercussions are by themselves sufficient to warrant examination of the relationship between the MST and the media.
This paper will discuss several issues in the relationship between social movements and the news media: how a movement gets attention, what determines the way it is pictured, whether the picture presented corresponds to its own understanding of itself, and whether the atten- tion serves the movement’s goals. In examining these issues, the con- cept of frame is useful. This concept has been used to characterize the unarticulated assumptions with which journalists condition their pres- entation of a social movement and movement leaders’ attempts to create a favorable image. The MST’s efforts to get media coverage and the frames in which the media have presented it will be examined from this perspective. 0 rei do gado, in particular, is a special case. Although it was a soap opera, the show and the movement’s reaction to it illustrated some of the same issues.
Several Brazilian scholars have offered analyses of media treatment of the MST. Most of them describe that treatment as unequivocally hos- tile-just	as one would expect, if media coverage of the land reform movement reflects the common interests of big landowners and big cap- ital (of which the major media are part). Research for this study found, on the contrary, that media treatment has been diverse. Yet even the sympathetic treatment that sometimes emerges does not necessarily present the movement in a light that furthers its political goals. It is not only the explicit content of the coverage that matters but its tone and its effect; news reports can be sympathetic and still fail to encourage the movement’seffort to promote desired social change.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	63
This study examines these issues from the standpoint of the move- ment’s goals and tries to determine how much the movement can influ- ence media treatment and secure coverage that will contribute to its efforts to recruit adherents, win over public opinion, and promote its long-term objectives. It should be noted at the outset that this study is limited to the content of media accounts, and makes no direct estimate of their effect on the public.
MEDIAAND MOVEMENTS
Scholars of social movements in the United States have increasingly rec- ognized the importance of media to movements-as	have the move- ments themselves. In the 1990 update of his 1975 classic, m e Strategy of Social Protest, William Gamson identifies the media as the “central battleground” for challenging groups (1990, 147). They seek coverage because the media can spread a group’s message to a target public. That coverage, however, will not always present groups in a way that furthers their purposes. So fighting on the central battleground of the media offers movements both opportunities and dangers.
The “news,” rather than being a clearly and previously defined object of which the media present a straightforward, unproblematic transcription, is a construction. It is constituted by its presentation in the media. To be reported as news, actions have to be translated into events, and then into a “story.”Recognition of an issue as newsworthy, the selection of specific events and topics, the context explicitly pre- sented or assumed, and the positive or negative judgment implied by a news report all emerge from media coverage rather than being inherent in behavior and reported stenographically.
A journalist writing a news report operates on the basis of back- ground assumptions of knowledge and evaluation. Following Erving Goffman, scholars of the media have referred to that set of assumptions as the frame. Frames are “‘schemata of interpretation’ that enable indi- viduals ‘to locate, perceive, identify, and label’ occurrences within their life space and the world at large. By rendering events or occurrences meaningful, frames function to organize experience and guide action” (Snow et al. 1986, 464, quoting Goffman 1974, 21).
Using a frame, a journalist can represent events as part of a coher- ent larger reality within which readers and viewers can comprehend them. The frame adopted in a media account provides the context and largely determines the way specific details are presented. Media analy- sis usually presents a frame as taken for granted by journalists, some- thing they adopt relatively unreflectively and assume that their audi- ence shares. The frame is an organizing device for analyzing the media’s selectivity and approach to any topic; but its presence is
64	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS A N D SOCIETY	46: 4 largely invisible. Even if journalists have criteria of objectivity for rep-
resenting events,
news frames are almost entirely implicit and taken for granted. They do not appear to either journalists or audience as social construc- tions but as primary attributes of events that reporters are merely reflecting. News frames make the world look natural. They deter- mine what is selected, what is excluded, what is emphasized. In short, news presents a packaged world. (Gamson 1985,618)
Media do a double framing job relevant to the present study: they frame issues and they frame movements. We will return to this point after discussing the role of a movement in framing itself and its issues.
Movements themselves participate in the framing process, offer their own frames, and attempt to influence the frame adopted in the media. The social movements literature generally regards frames as deliberately created, “strategicefforts by groups of people to fashion shared under- standings of the world and of themselves that legitimate and motivate collective action” (McAdam et al. 1996,6). While the audiences of social movements (potential recruits, sympathizers, and the general public) are assumed to have preexisting frames within which they interpret the issues and the actions of social movements, movement leaders-as described by analysts of social movements-attempt	to construct new frames to define problems and propose solutions, modlfy frames in the mind of the public, or at least make their message appear consonant with what they believe the dominant frame to be (Snow et al. 1986; Snow and Benford 1988, 199-204; Tarrow 1994, 122-29).
The concept of frames found its way into studies of the media and of social movements separately, though both follow Goffman’sformu- lation. Frames were apparently first applied to the analysis of the news media by Gaye Tuchman (1978; compare Entman 1993; Gitlin 1980; Ryan 1991).The concept was introduced into the social movements lit- erature by Gamson, Bruce Fireman, and Steven Rytina (1982). But social movement scholars adopted it more widely following its use by David Snow and his colleagues (1986; cf. Snow and Benford 1988, 1992; Ben- ford and Snow 2000; Babb 1996; Ellingson 1995; Gerhards and Rucht 1992;Smith 1996;Tarrow 1994).
The two uses have converged as movement scholars have come to recognize the importance of the media to movements. Both media and movements frame the issues they present. They explain (or not) the com- plexities of an issue; they use language and highlight associations imply- ing interpretations of events that seem to verify or challenge a move- ment’s message; they invoke generally accepted values and portray the movement’smessage as being in accordance or dissonance with them.
Media and movement scholars usually give the term different emphases, however: for the former, frames are part of the background,
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	65
while the latter treat them as the product of active construction. Jour- nalists are portrayed as taking frames for granted; similarly, they believe that their product-a	news story in print or on the air-is	a reflection of reality rather than a constitutive part. Movement leaders, on the other hand, deliberately attempt to create or alter frames just as they hope to influence the course of events. As Gamson and his colleagues point out, the concept of frame contains a useful tension between structure and agency (Gamson et al. 1992,384).
Movements and media interact in the production of news about movements, making the media themselves an actor in social struggles (Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993). Movements care about media coverage because most people not already active in a movement do not learn about it by direct experience. Many potential recruits and, even more important, potential sympathizers among the public become aware of movements and their issues primarily through the media.’ Their attitude toward the movement and the issue, and their potential participation, may be determined largely by media presentations. These not only pro- vide the information but create for them the frame within which they perceive and perhaps assimilate the movement’s message.
The way the media frame (or ignore) a movement, then, can abet or impede the movement’sachievement of its goal. The media will provide a frame both of the movement and of the problem the movement is trying to resolve. Most of the work on frames by movement scholars has addressed the framing of the problem a movement addresses; but as Ben- ford and Snow point out, the first topic researched by scholars using the concept was how the mass media framed 1960s social movements (2000, 626). The distinction is important, because media framing of the issue can support or undercut the legitimacy of the movement’sclaim by the way it presents the issue, and media framing of the movement’s actors can like- wise affect the legitimacy of those actors to press the claim. This distinc- tion is especially important in the case of the MST. The Brazilian media often present concentrated land ownership and rural poverty as serious problems while dismissing the movement’s struggles to alleviate them.
Constructing the news about a movement and its issue is a process of collaborative, or not so collaborative, interaction between the media and the movement. The relation between the two is determined by their respective interests, which differ significantly.It is also highly asymmet- ric: movements need the media much more than the media need move- ments. This puts movements at a disadvantage when they struggle for media attention. Movement activists are an ambivalent partner, angling for coverage even as they condemn the “capitalistpress” as a servant of bourgeois hegemony, necessarily distorting coverage.
Media, on the other hand, are under no a priori obligation to cover any given movement or issue, and competition for journalists’attention
66	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
is high. Media may appreciate movements because they provide good copy. On the other hand, the media have (or are likely to assume that they have) an obligation to present the official story, sanctioned by high-level public officials and vested sources whose position is assumed to guarantee their credibility (or at least their right to access). The media generally (though not inevitably) conform to official received opinion, seek to maintain an appearance of objectivity, and emphasize spectacle and newsworthiness. The economic interests of owners, reporters’ unexamined assumptions, and newsgathering routines relying on offi- cial sources and regular contacts all mean that news reports are likely to reinforce viewpoints already taken for granted by public opinion.
By definition, the views that challengers want to promote, and even their demand for attention, go against the prevailing views. The factors governing news frames therefore work to exclude news about chal- lengers and, even more, their views; it is especially unlikely that news stories will be framed in line with their perspectives. Indeed, most treat- ments of media frames argue that they foster ideological hegemony, dis- tort movement messages, and marginalize or demonize dissent. Activists, therefore, rarely get what they would regard as fair and thor- ough coverage (Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993, 116-17; Gitlin 1980; Ryan 1991;Tuchman 1978).
Still, the media are not impenetrable. They play a double role: agents of the reproduction of culture, they are also the site of symbolic contests over meaning. In the latter respect, they offer movements an opportunity. Like the movements themselves, media are in the business of interpreting events; they are open to contestation, and they offer movements an opportunity to intrude their frame into public discussion (Gamson and Meyer 1996, 287; Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993, 117).
Few movements offering a significant challenge can afford to ignore the media or disdain their attention. A movement seeking to attract the attention of the media, however, faces a difficult choice. Even if it suc- ceeds at getting the media’s attention, it has no guarantee that a story will present its own view of its cause or of its activists. News reports center on events and individuals and rarely present the background or structural causes of problems. They often present a movement through portraits of colorful and articulate individuals. Such portrayals can fail to convey the movement’s message for at least three reasons: they may make the movement appear smaller than it is, involving only a few people; the more articulate or colorful activists-“media	stars”-may	not be representative of the constituency the movement claims to mobilize; and an account concentrating on individuals is not likely to address a problem’s systemic causes (Ryan 1991, 98-105).
When the media present a new claimant on their attention, they are likely to seek out the bizarre and curious and emphasize the deviant
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	67
aspects of movement activity. Indeed, spectacular, disruptive perform- ances are often the easiest way to offer “good copy” and get media attention, but the coverage may well produce hostility rather than sym- pathy. To challenge a dominant frame through the media, therefore, a movement must overcome an inherent inequality in access and risk frame distortion (Ryan 1991, 67). It faces
an inescapable dilemma[:l . . . marginality and political irrelevance [or,ifl it plays by conventional political rules in order to acquire an image of credibility, . . . its oppositional edge is blunted. (Gitlin 1980, 291)
One could add that marginality and political irrelevance can take two forms: the media may ignore a movement entirely, or they may triv- ialize it by emphasizing its deviant character rather than taking its action and its issues seriously.
Some movements have succeeded at using the media to convey their sense of injustice and at using disruptive actions to underline their contention that they are denied access to institutional channels. Even sympathetic coverage, however, will not always favor the movement’s goal of mobilization of the public for its cause. If an issue gets covered in purely individual terms, or if its “stars”are presented as extraordinary individuals rather than as part of the movement’s broad constituency, media accounts may not encourage potential adherents to identify with the cause or believe that it is potentially responsive to mobilization.
Because they are weaker participants in such cultural contests, movements cannot normally expect that their message will be reflected in the media’s unquestioned frame, but can only hope that it will be pre- sented at all; at best, they can hope that they will succeed in moving the discourse to a point where their frame is admitted as a contender and the dominant frame is recognized as susceptible to challenge (Ryan 1991,70).
This summary-and	this study-say	little about the audience. Dis- cussions of the relation of movements to the media tend to assume that what readers or viewers will take away from a news story can be inferred from the content. In reality, the reception cannot be assumed. Audience members decode messages; their interpretation may not cor- respond to the intended meaning (Hall 1980).This study of the MST and the media likewise examines only two vertices of the movement-media- audience triad.2
THEMST: BACKGROUND
The MST pursues land reform in the country with the second-highest concentration of land ownership in the world. Brazil has never had a significant agrarian reform, and the land question remains a major issue
68	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
economically, socially, and p~liticallyT.~hough Brazil today is highly urban, agriculture remains significant, accounting for 40 percent of Brazil’sexports and 25 percent of its employment. Living conditions are far worse in rural than in urban areas: 56 percent of the rural popula- tion, but 39 percent of the urban population, was below the poverty level in 1990, while the level of schooling averaged 2.6 and 5.9 years, respectively (ValdCs and Wiens 1996, 7, 9, 25). The modernization of agriculture promoted by the military government after 1964 deprived many small farmers and agricultural day laborers of their livelihood. Poverty impelled migration to already overcrowded cities. Despite urbanization and industrial development, landowners still exercise enor- mous political power through control of local political machines, over- representation of rural areas in the national congress and state legisla- tures, and deployment of “goon squads” to intimidate those who challenge the landowners’ control.
The 1985 agrarian reform law and the 1988 Constitution provide that farmland that is not being farmed productively can be declared “of social interest” and expropriated. Because the law is not routinely enforced, however, the MST organizes large groups of landless farm- workers to occupy farms and demand their expropriation. The move- ment also mounts steady pressure for a more general agrarian reform. It was the most consistent and active movement of opposition to the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, 1995-2003 (Ham- mond 1999a).
As the MST has grown in organization and activity since the early 1990s, it has become the most visible social movement in Brazil. Its growing prominence owes much to the weakening of the urban left; but it also coincides with the movement’s expansion, beginning in 1995, into the Pontal do Paranapanema, a vast region of western Slo Paulo State that has been cleared for ranching only since the 1950s. Acceler- ating occupations in SQoPaulo, whose capital city is the largest in the country and one of two national media capitals, brought the movement increasing attention.
Though the law provides for expropriation, authorities generally do not decree it unless direct action forces their hand. In pursuit of its strat- egy to force agrarian reform authorities to expropriate and redistribute farmland, the MST seeks out sites that it believes are eligible for expro- priation and recruits and organizes occupiers. An occupation can involve anywhere from 200 to 2,500 families. Some are recruited in the immediate vicinity and others in larger towns and cities. They meet reg- ularly for a period of months, undergoing political education and prepa- ration for the effort.
Once an occupation is decided on, several groups from various localities will be called to join it. Maintaining secrecy while planning
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	69
requires considerable effort. The occupation itself is an even more impressive feat, mobilizing thousands of people overnight, some of them from substantial distances, with rented buses and trucks borrowed from sympathetic organizations ( Veju 1994; Paiero and Damatto 1996).
After an occupation, expropriation usually requires a long legal process. The landowner (or claimant) typically responds to an occupa- tion by petitioning a local court for an order of restoration of possession (reintegru@o deposse).*Local courts, where the petition is heard in the first instance, are part of the local governing structure, which is notori- ously favorable to landlords. They usually order the eviction of the occupiers, which may be carried out with greater or lesser force depending on negotiations between the occupiers and the police. Evic- tions can become major political events, in which not only the courts and police but landowners’ organizations and politicians supporting each side become involved.
After eviction, the occupiers are sometimes resettled on land other than that which they originally occupied-state-owned or already expropriated for agrarian reform. More often, they erect an encampment of sheds or tents (burracm) somewhere in the vicinity, generally on the right-of-way of a public road, state-owned and therefore unlikely to pro- voke another eviction. Maintaining cohesion during the period of litiga- tion is an essential task. Their occupying presence is crucial to asserting the moral force of their demand to have a particular property expropri- ated. (They do not always succeed. Some families leave during the occupation period.)
Joining a land occupation entails a high commitment, as occupiers leave their entire life behind and wait to find out whether their gamble will pay off. While camped out, they live on government food subsidies, dona- tions from solidarity committees formed in unions and among other pro- gressive urban dwellers, and their own labor on rented farmland or for wages. They risk waiting for years and getting nothing in the end. They also risk repression. But if they win title to the land, the payoff is high.
Occupiers seek an inspection by the Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA) to determine whether a property is expropri- able.5If it is, compensation (indenizaCZo)for the owner is set. The owner may then go to court to challenge the expropriation or, more commonly, the value of the compensation. Some owners are happy to be expropriated; they may be able to negotiate a price better than the market value of the land (Petry 1997, 35; SEJUP 199713).
The MST often wins; that is, occupations usually lead to expropria- tion, evidently because the MST is careful to occupy land that appears to be eligible under the law. The law establishes that once a property is expropriated, it will be redistributed to people meeting certain criteria of need. Occupiers have no formal standing in the process that deter-
70	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
mines whether the property is expropriated; legally that is a matter between the owner and the INCRA. When an occupied property is expropriated, however, it is normally turned over to the occupiers.
Properties thus expropriated and redistributed are known as assen- tamentos (settlements). Once in possession of an assentamento, the occupiers turn it into a productive farm, which they usually work by some combination of individual and collective production. They must create not only a farm enterprise but a community. This process begins during the preparation for an occupation and continues in the camps and then in the legalized mentamentos. The MST gives high priority to education. The landless are generally poorly educated and often illiter- ate. The movement is committed to the education of children and adults, and has created schools in many of its camps and assentamen- tos. Its elementary education programs were recognized by UNICEF in 1993 (Caldart 1997; MST n.d.).
Landowners retaliate against occupations. In much of rural Brazil, landowners still enjoy local political monopolies, and they target occu- pations for violence, contracting paramilitary groups or individual hired guns ( j a g u n p and pistolaros) directly, or enlisting the official forces of order. Violence is most likely to be directed against occupiers at the time of initial occupation or eviction.
Violence is pervasive in the life of Brazil’s rural poor. The Catholic Church’s Pastoral Land Commission reports that 1,190 squatters, land occupiers, farmworkers’ union members, and their defenders were killed in occupations and other land conflicts between 1985 and 2000 (ComissHo Pastoral da Terra 2000). These attacks rarely get much atten- tion. The worst single incident was the massacre at Eldorado do Cara- jhs. On April 17, 1996, 2,000 farmworkers who were occupying the 5,900-hectare Macaxeira ranch blocked a highway to demand that the government expropriate the farm. Military police fired on them, killing 19. The number of victims and, even more important, the nationwide broadcast of the videotape of the massacre guaranteed public attention. More than 150 military police who had participated in the operation faced charges in the massacre, but the trials were delayed for six years through a complicated series of legal maneuvers, convictions, and rever- sals. Of the 149 military police eventually tried in 2002, only the two commanding officers were ultimately convicted (Hammond 1999b; Amnesty International 2002).
T H E M O V E M E N T M’ S E D I A P o m c s
Media ownership in Brazil, like land ownership, is highly concentrated, and big agriculture and big capital have been allied both traditionally and since the military dictatorship. The media are dominated by one
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	71
firm, the Globo network, which includes the Globo television network; the country’s largest-circulation daily paper, Rio-based 0 Globo; and interests in publishing, finance, insurance, shopping centers, and cattle ranches. TV Globo reaches almost the entire country through its affili- ated local stations (some owned by the network, some independent). Roberto Marinho is its principal owner. With the newspaper as a base, Marinho built up the television empire by acquiring station licenses through the favoritism of the military government. The officers’ rule coincided with the spread of television, and they saw it as a means to national integration (Amaral and GuimarPes 1994;Page 1995, 155-76).
TV Globo has competitors, but none of the other networks has ever had the same political pull or amassed the same number of affiliates. The network has remained by far the most important medium for both news and entertainment, partly because of the high quality of its enter- tainment programming, especially the telenovelas. Its news coverage is highly influential and unabashedly partisan, usually-though	with exceptions-favoring	conservative candidates and positions. In the first three presidential elections after democratization (1989, 1994,and 19981, it strongly opposed the progressive candidacy of the Partido dos Tra- balhadores (PT, Workers’ Party). Some observers have found its influ- ence decisive, especially in the first democratic election in 1989 (Amaral and GuimarPes 1994; Lima 1993, 102-7; Port0 2001).
This monopoly is reproduced at the state level: in most state capi- tals, one person owns the leading newspaper and the leading television station (usually affiliated with the Globo network). The owner often is also a dominant local politician (Amaral and Guimariies 1994, 30-32).
It is not surprising that a media system so concentrated in the hands of the wealthy and so tied into the dominant political system often lives up to the stereotype of the capitalist press, hostile to progressive move- ments from below. Nevertheless, the MST has found some favorable representation in the media. The MST has attempted to cultivate the media and influence the way it is framed; it has a conscious media strat- egy, which has evolved over the life of the movement. During its first decade, it maintained a certain isolation both from the media and from the rest of the political left. Since the early 1990s, it has reversed itself and more deliberately has sought to establish good relations with the media. It produces many internal publications: its own newspaper and magazine, directed mainly at members; educational materials for use in its schools; and low-power radio stations for the communities it has cre- ated on its occupied farms. A 1995 occupation was celebrated as the first to use cell phones and to issue daily reports on the Internet-two important media of internal communication, because occupiers, camped out waiting resolution of their claims, did not always have up-to-date reports on negotiations (Berger 1998,100).
72	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
The MST has also cultivated the mass media. An internal document, “For an MST Communication Policy,” of March 1995, demonstrates the movement’s concern to mobilize the media to motivate militants and to broadcast to the public its accomplishments, especially in the areas of production and education. Christa Berger, who discusses the document, does not say in what level of the movement it originated, but internal evidence suggests that it is from the state of Rio Grande do SuL6The document envisions providing technical, administrative, and organiza- tional support to the media effort but clearly dictates that it should remain subordinate to political criteria. At the same time, the document recognizes that the MST does not always convey its message success- fully, and some militants say that much more must be done for the com- munication policy to “go beyond being on paper” (Berger 1998, 111-16).
The movement’s concern for its relations with the media is also demonstrated by a letter written by MST leader Gilmar Mauro to the national Journalists’ Congress, which met a few days after the Eldorado massacre. Mauro acknowledged the importance of journalists’ work and congratulated the news team that captured the event on videotape (Berger 1998,197).
Although the MST consciously attempts to influence the media, the media remain secondary in the movement’s overall strategy. The princi- pal weapon in its arsenal remains direct action to occupy farmland, on the assumption that only thereby can it force the government to uphold its own laws and provide land to the landless. Interviewed by a media trade journal about the MST’s view of its relation to the media, MST national coordinator Joiio Pedro StCdile said,
What I can say, honestly, with open heart, is that the MST never does mass actions for the sake of attracting the press. Our goal is to do mass actions to create pressure for concrete measures to resolve the problems. (Imprensa 1998, 23)
Yet Zander Navarro (1997,120) has suggested that the massive occu- pation campaign in the Pontal do Paranapanema was undertaken with an eye to the media. The region was a target of opportunity because many ranchers had grabbed huge tracts of land illegally, and their lack of valid titles made them subject to expropriation. But large-scale actions there could also count on major media attention because, even though most of the audience for the SPo Paulo daily papers and television sta- tions (along with the majority of the state’s population) is in or near the city, the media regularly cover the rest of the state with more attention than they would give to events in the hinterland of another state. The movement’s rise in public consciousness in the 1990s,as already noted, largely coincides with the wave of occupations in the Pontal.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	73
Most coverage of the MST falls within the newsgatherers’ routine of covering the spectacular event. The great majority of news items report land occupations. Because occupations number in the hundreds, how- ever, their news value is minimal unless they have some novel element or the prospect of violence. It is violence, or the possibility of violence, that dominates coverage of the movement, Berger claims, especially if the occupiers can be described as “armed”-which, as Berger shows, usually means that they have armed themselves with shovels and sick- les, adopting a “defensive-provocative”stance. According to her study of coverage by the Port0 Alegre daily Zero Horu,
For the newspaper, the Movement belongs in the “conflicts”section and therefore should correspond to the principle that it mounts “conflictsat any cost,”guaranteeing its place in the [newspaper’s] internal news hierarchy. . . . Political conflict does not produce a headline and generates little news; institutionalconflict is news and, perhaps, a headline, but it produces few images; armed conflict is guaranteed to be news, headline, front page, and deserves a pho- tograph. (Berger 1998, 120-21)
Movement activists are resentful that the underlying problems- maldistribution of farmland, idle land stockpiled by wealthy owners, and farmworkers’ poverty-are	never news, and that the media pay scant attention to what the MST regards as its most important accom- plishments: production and education.
Even so, the MST’sfrequent appearances in the media are a sign of its success. So is the frequency with which movement leaders are quoted. Media analysts show that journalists tend to rely on regular sources; and being treated as a creditable source is itself a sign of stand- ing (Ryan 1991;Sigal 1973,123-28; Tuchman 1978).It is striking to find MST national coordinator Stkdile quoted in a New York Times article on the privatization of nationally owned Brazilian firms (Rohter 1999, C2), in a story that appeared in the business section and was not about agrar- ian reform (though, to be sure, it was written just days after a major demonstration in Brasilia of which the MST was the chief organizer, though agrarian reform was not its central theme). Stedile was quoted as if he were an ordinary cabinet minister, say, o r bank president.
The MST emphasizes the need to win public opinion, and has had some success.MST leaders like to say that the battle for agrarian reform will be won in the cities. According to a poll taken by the Brazilian Institute of Public Opinion and Statistics(IBOPE) in March 1997,52 percent of respon- dents were generallyfavorableto the MST, and 85percent approved of land occupations as long as they were not violent (SEJUP 1997a).
The movement has also worked to forge alliances with other move- ments. It has attracted attention, support, and sometimes full-time mili-
74	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
tancy from young activists, urban and, in some cases, university-edu- cated, who staff its offices and even join its occupations. It played a leading role in organizing opposition to the neoliberal policies of the Cardoso government. In 1997, on the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre, it sponsored a thousand-kilometer march to Brasilia from sev- eral points around the country and won ample participation from a broad segment of Brazil’s left. In 1998 and 1999 it was at the center of organizing major countrywide mobilizations (the March for Brazil and the March of the Excluded) that lasted several weeks, and it swelled the ranks of demonstrations in opposition to the privatization of state firms (notably the telephone system in 1998). It has taken the lead in organ- izing Brazilian opposition to the cultivation of genetically modified crops, and in 2001 occupied an experimental farm where, the MST charged, the Monsanto Corporation was experimenting with genetically modified seeds.
The MST’s centrality in organizing major demonstrations is not the only sign of its leadership role in this array of protest movements. Its very name has become a trope for movements against social exclusion. The name in Portuguese, Movimento dos TrabalbadoresRurais Sem Terra, means “movementof rural workers without land,”and people refer to the movement and its adherents in abbreviated form as 0s sem terra,those without land. The word sem (without) has become part of the names of other movements, such as the homeless (sem teto, literally, without roof). All these groups, along with the MST, are collectivelyreferred to as 0ssem, “the withouts” (Fernandes 2000, 227; Gohn 2000,6).
Pursuit of these alliances, however, has sometimes led to the sort of spectacular gesture that gets coverage but may divert attention from the movement’s message. Three examples will bear this out. In 1998, a severe drought struck northeast Brazil, the poorest section of the coun- try and one frequently plagued by drought. Many poor people were on the brink of starvation; some looted grocery stores and their delivery trucks for food. While the MST disputed assertions that it was behind the looting, it seems clear that it played some role, and the press tended to blame it completely. In April 2000, the five hundredth anniversary of the Portuguese discovery of Brazil, the MST organized indigenous and other protesters; police kept the demonstrators away from the official commemoration and arrested more than one hundred. In January 2001, the MST organized delegates to the World Social Forum in Port0 Alegre for the Monsanto occupation. Foreigners attending the forum joined them, includingJose BovC, the French farmer and leader of the antiglob- alization protest that resulted in the destruction of a McDonald’srestau- rant in France in 1999.
These incidents drew some of the most consistently negative cov- erage the MST has received in Brazilian newspapers. Maria da G16ria
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	75
Gohn argues that the incidents allowed the press to portray the MST as the “source and origin of violence . . . to create fear and insecurity in public opinion” (2000, 24). The temptation to stage spectacular events in order to guarantee coverage and draw in followers from a broad array of social movements can produce reporting that is likely to create an unfavorable image among the public at large.
FRAMINTGHE MST
This study analyzed the framing of the MST in Brazilian newspapers based on a systematic reading of online editions of two of the country’s major dailies, Estado de Sdo Paul0 and Folha de Sdo Paulo, between 1997 and 2001. It also drew on less systematic readings of other news- papers and newsweeklies and on Berger’s study of Zero Hora, and examined in detail the movement’s representation in the telenovela 0 rei do gado. The study relied primarily on print sources because, while television undoubtedly has greater reach and influence among the pop- ulation at large, this researcher unfortunately had no regular access to either television newscasts or dramas for close analysis.
News reports of a single-issue movement like the MST frame two distinct objects: the movement itself and the issue it addresses. The movement hopes to achieve coverage that will advance its policy goals and r a t e its status as the privileged interlocutor for those goals. The MST can reasonably claim that it has won the battle to frame its main issue, the land question, in the Brazilian media. The media (even, some- times, the provincial press owned by local elites) generally portray agrarian reform as a necessity and the struggle for it as just. They gen- erally acknowledge the concentration of land ownership and the prac- tices that have fostered it. They present landowners as politically reac- tionary, often violent, and economically inefficient, underproducing on their land and failing to contribute to the national economy. During the 1980s, especially during the writing of the 1988 Constitution, landown- ers organized in the Rural Democratic Union (UDR) succeeded in culti- vating a favorable image of themselves, in league with small farmown- ers, as “rural producers” (Payne 2000,140). The perception of the justice of the struggle has been heightened in recent years by two conjunctural factors: the severity of repression (especially the Eldorado massacre) and the 1988 drought in the Northeast.
It is entirely possible, however, to frame the land question by acknowledging the validity of the call for land reform and still dismiss the movement itself. Some sources that acknowledge the justice of the cause nevertheless argue that the means the MST uses invalidate its claim to legitimacy. Marking the end of a widely reported 1993 land occupation in Rio Grande d o Sul, Zero Horu editorialized,
76
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46:4
There is no one with a minimal level of information who does not support agrarian reform in this country. . . . On the other hand, the simple distribution of land does not represent agrarian reform. . . . It is appropriate that the leaders of the MST leave aside the passion of ideological positions. (Quoted in Berger 1998, 170)
Or as Jarbas Passarinho, former minister of justice, wrote in an opinion column in Estado de S6o Paulo,
Of course if someone asked me whether I defend agrarian reform, I would answer yes without blinking. But, [if they asked] whether I would approve an invasion, I would not give the same answer. Nei- ther would the respondents [in a survey in which 52 percent said they approved of the MSTI. Their support depended on there being no violence. Now, isn’tan invasion in itself violent?(Passarinho 1997)
Thus an apparent acceptance of the movement’s goals can be turned against the movement itself.
The frames found in the coverage of the MST reflect differing posi- tions on its demand for agrarian reform and the tactics it uses to pro- mote that demand. This study identified five frames in current use for the MST as a movement, each one reflected in media accounts, and some of them also in academic research. These frames were derived inductively and, as noted, primarily from print sources.
Four of these frames can be considered sympathetic in some degree. Though they overlap somewhat, each is relatively homoge- neous, and they are relatively distinct. They are targeted to different audiences. Each of them emerges in public discourse, and most are also reflected in academic production about the movement. The first two correspond in some degree to the image the movement presents of itself to internal and external audiences, respectively.’
1. “Militantmovement.”The MST applies the “militantmovement” frame to itself for internal consumption. Promoted by the leadership, in movement schools, and in political education in the camps and assen- tamentos is a view of a militant revolutionary movement using a novel strategy. Within this frame, the movement produces T-shirts and posters with images of Che Guevara and invokes a Brazilian past of agrarian resistance in the person of Zumbi, the eighteenth-century leader of the Palmares quilombo, a settlement of escaped slaves, and the rural revolts of Canudos and the Contestado at the turn of the twentieth century. Though the MST does not propose armed struggle now or for the future, the presence of these military images is striking. The U.S. sociologist James Petras (1997) presents a similar view of the MST.
2. “Solution to national problems.” For public consumption, the movement promotes a pragmatic image of itself: the MST brings idle farmland into production and thereby provides work for large numbers
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	77
of unemployed rural workers, increases the food supply, and stems the flow of urban migrants8 It gives people the chance to live from their own productive labor; it also works very hard to educate the illiterate peasants and their children. This frame emphasizes the violent repres- sion suffered by land occupiers at the hands of the state and landown- ers, whose blind self-interest causes them to obstruct the logical and vir- tually cost-free solution of major social problems.
One might call this the “saltof the earth” frame, because it portrays the rural character as reflecting the cleanliness and wholesomeness of the countryside, in striking contrast to the evils of city life. For public consumption, however, the emphasis is on the outcome: MST ussentu-
mentos practice low-cost and ecologicallysustainable agriculture to pro- duce food instead of export crops and educated children instead of beggars and delinquents. This frame, like the first, appears in the MST’s own literature and in the work of supporters, such as photographer Sebastigo Salgado (1997a; compare Salgado 1997b), but also in the media addressed to the general public. The (relatively rare) media accounts of the ussentamentos themselves give a generally favorable picture, selecting for coverage those that are highly productive rather than the many foundering ussentamentos.
Related to this frame are two interpretations present in the treatment of the MST by many Brazilian social scientists, in terms similar to those used in the analysis of urban social movements: citizenship and identity politics. The idea of citizenship, widely diffused in the contemporary discourse of popular movements in Latin America, entails both benefits and the guarantee that as a matter of right those benefits cannot be taken away; but it also emphasizes the exercise of citizenship by agents to secure recognition of their rights. The MST enables its adherents to exercise citizenship, in this view, by making possible their participation, from which their poverty, illiteracy, and subjection to powerful land- lords have excluded them (Navarro 1994; Nunes 1993). Many sources describe the personal transformation of movement activists as a result of their participation. They achieve dignity and claim rights, civil, political, economic, and social (Gaiger 1987; Lisboa 1988; Sorj 1998, 38-39).
Scholars who interpret the MST in terms of identity politics say that it and allied political movements of poor cultivatorshave labored to con- struct an identity as “rural worker,” superseding the differences that sep- arate the small landowner, tenant, day laborer (bdiufria>, and agricul- tural producers with other forms of property relationship (Gaiger 1987, 28; Gohn 2000, 3; Houtzager 1997, 127-30, 1998, 12; Medeiros 2001).
These two academic views can be placed in the “solution to national problems” frame because both portray the MST as serving con- sensually recognized goals of national institution building and agricul- tural production, downplaying the conflictual element of the struggle
78	LATIN AMEFUCAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
against landowners to achieve agrarian reform, which is a central ele- ment of the MSTs self-image.
3. “Patheticcreatures.”Thisframeissympathetic,butambiguously. Also addressed to public opinion, it is not found in the discourse of the movement itself. While it applauds the movement for solving the prob- lems of the rural poor, it nevertheless portrays them as backward and ignorant-in	a word, hicks. An article in the newsweekly V i a intro- ducing the report on the march to Brasilia in April 1997, on the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre, begins this way:
In the age of the jet plane, they go on foot. When the economy is globalizing, their ideal is a piece of land with a fence, a cow in the pasture, and a vegetable garden behind the house. The world moves at the speed of computers and high technology, and they want to work the land, spade in hand. The kids are dancing to rock, and the anthem of the Movement of Landless Farmworkers, MST, sings of a “workers’and peasants”’homeland. Representing an archaic Brazil, barefoot, rotten teeth, vermin under the skin and little schooling, the landless invade properties, disrespect the law, and confront the police. They have died and killed in these con- flicts. They look a bit like the devout followers of the messianic AntBnio Conselheiro (Veja 1997, 3419
The pathetic creatures frame suggests that the MST has its heart in the right place but that its concrete programs are inadequate for con- temporary Brazilian reality. The frame assumes that in a modem soci- ety, where agriculture requires capitalist organization and enterprise to be adequately productive, and for all the MST‘s good intentions, agrar- ian reform is not a realistic solution. Francisco Graziano Neto, whom Cardoso appointed president of INCRA, and sociologist Bernard0 Sorj make this claim more explicit. Given that there is no real possibility for agrarian reform or for a viable living derived from agrarian property, they argue, those who call for it should instead work to improve their living conditions (Graziano Net0 1998;Sorj 1998).
The implication for agrarian policy is that the issues that need to be addressed are those of employment and “access to citizenship by the unemployed,”problems which can best be solved by promoting educa- tion, according to Sorj (1398, 391, or with unemployment insurance for rural workers, according to Graziano (1998, 168). This frame implicitly buys into the conservative modernization of Brazilian agriculture pro- moted by the military dictatorship, which has been expelling peasants from the land since the 1960s. It accepts the claim that only high-input, high-productivityagricultureuses the land appropriately,in contrast to the low-cost agriculture the MST claims to favor. (It of course begs the ques- tion of whether the concentration of landholding actually favors high-pro- ductivity land use rather than speculation and leaving farmland idle.)
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	79
4. “Guerrillacapitalism.”Thefourthsympatheticframefindsitsclear- est expression in, of all places, the Latin American edition of Time maga- zine, January 1998. The cover story on the MST features mmtammtos that are notably successful in business, selling their farm goods to multi- national corporations to market under nationwide brand names and diversdying from agriculture to such activities as a clothing factory and a distillery. In “guerrilla capitalism” (the magazine’s phrase), revolutionary ideology is watered down, an exercise in nostalgia; the Che posters on display in many mmtamentos are “mere decor”; and the movement, though “stridently socialist in its public pronouncements, . , . has also become a force for corporate entrepreneurship” (Padgett 1998).’O
5. “Demonization.”The final frame presents the MST as a law- breaker and provoker of violence that prevents authorities from peace- fully carrying out their responsibility to provide land for the landless. The movement is, by definition, lawless. It does not “occupy”land; it “invades” land. The column by former Minister of Justice Passarinho (1997) quoted above is an example.
The demons of this frame are the demons of old left politics: MST leaders, beholden to an outmoded doctrine supporting centralist social- ism, struggle for power for themselves under the guise of serving the interests of the poor. An invidious distinction between leaders and land- less farmworkers is a common theme in news reports (Voese 1998). MST leader StCdile was shown on the cover of Veju in June 1998, against a bright red background, in a photograph that can only be described as Mephistophelean; the caption read, “A esquerda com raiva” (the enraged left). The movement plays a “double game,” the cover story says, talking moderately for public consumption but presenting views in its private circles that the magazine does not hesitate to qualify as “out of date” (anacrdnzco). The movement refuses to contemplate any decentralization of agrarian reform because that would mean giving land “directly [to] all those who want to enter in the distribution pro- gram, without having the MST leadership as intermediaries” (Petry and Oinegue 1998, 47). The article appeared shortly after the wave of loot- ing in response to the drought in the Northeast, which some commen- tators blamed on the MST.
The demonization frame levels two major accusations: that the movement is simultaneously out of touch with contemporary reality and diabolically clever in its tactics. Though these charges might seem con- tradictory, they appear side by side in the same accounts. On the one hand, the movement’s leaders are captives of an ideology that has been superseded by history; on the other hand, they are clever manipulators of the masses who are their foot soldiers in the battles to conquer land.
There are elements of overlap among the frames. The problem-solv- ing frame and the guerrilla capitalist frame are strikingly similar in
80	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
emphasizing the productive potential of assentamentos.The demoniza- tion frame and the pathetic creatures frame also have much in common: both view the movement’s members as objects of pity, vulnerable to manipulation by opportunistic leaders. Both depict the movement as following a hopelessly outdated doctrine and the occupiers as pitiful, if willing, victims of manipulation.
Of the five, the demonization frame appears most frequently, prob- ably accounting for more newspaper reports than the other four com- bined. It is also, evidently, the most clearly hostile to the movement. The presence of four frames that are, in varying degrees, sympathetic, by contrast, demonstrates that the movement has been able to achieve some coverage favorable to its goals and its methods of operation. But the overlap among the frames shows that frames with similar content can be enlisted to serve different purposes. The same elements can be presented to generate sympathy or hostility.
The degree of sympathy or hostility a frame shows for the move- ment may not, however, be the most important one for considering the relevance of frames to media goals. What Gamson and Modigliani say about public opinion analysis also applies to the analysis of media accounts: they criticize the methodological tradition of public opinion analysisbecause it “assumesthat the task is to array relevant publics on a pro-con dimension.”The proper task, they argue, is
to make the underlying schemata visible. . . . Only by methods that elicit more of the interpretive process will we be able to see the extent to which different media packages have become part of the public’s tool kit in making sense of the world of public affairs. (Gamson and Modigliani 1989, 36)
The differences in these frames’ underlying schemata reveal that even those that are ostensibly sympathetic d o not necessarily offer inter- pretations that are likely to promote the movement’s goals. Gamson proposes that a successful collective action frame must integrate ele- ments of injustice, agency, and identity (1992, 31-109). To the extent that a frame encourages a movement’s potential adherents to feel that they are being treated unjustly, that they have the capacity to better their situation, and that they belong to a collectivity sharing the sense of injustice and agency and opposed to another collectivity that stands in their way, they will mobilize against the injustice.
Some of these five frames clearly are more likely to have these effects than others. The pathetic creatures frame pictures the potential beneficiaries of land occupations as having limited competence; they are objects of pity rather than possessors of rights. The guerrilla capi- talism frame implies that movement members’ problems are most amenable to market-based solutions rather than political ones. Such
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	81
frames will not inspire mobilization. Nor will a frame that is not patron- izing but that idealizes the landless, as do the telenovela 0 rei dogad0 and some of the ostensibly sympathetic coverage.
THE MST ON THE HOMESCREEN
Broadcast onTVGloboin the prime eight o’clocktime slot in 1996and 1997,the telenovela 0 rei do gado presented land occupiers in a highly sympathetic light, which combined elements of the “solutionto national problems” and “pathetic creatures” frames. It is a clear example of a treatment that, while favorable, did not entirely project the image the movement holds of itself. The reaction in the movement was ambiva- lent, although in the end the movement welcomed the show.
The novela illustrates in a peculiar way some of the noteworthy issues in the relation of social movements and the media. Though it was clearly fictional, not a news story, it surely garnered for the MST more attention than any news story (and even, probably, more than all the news coverage during the months in which it ran). In addition, it per- mitted multiple interpretations, just as do news reports that claim to rep- resent straightforward accounts of reality. The show became a news event in itself, moreover, and its coverage in the media inevitably reflected attitudes toward the movement.
For a topic to be featured as the theme of a telenovela represents the pinnacle of recognition in Brazilian popular culture. The importance of telenovelas in Brazilian politics and everyday life cannot be overesti- mated. They are the most widely viewed shows on Brazilian television. A typical novela runs nightly for several months. At any time, the cur- rent novela is a frequent topic of daily conversation. Many novelas address social themes and ratify the importance of issues. In addition, television actors, writers, and production crews are reputed to be highly progressive, often lending their names to political causes.
Alma Guillermoprieto, former Latin American correspondent for the New Yorker,has characterized the presentation of public issues in tele- novelas thus:
On the news, executives are kidnapped and murdered, state enter- prises go bankrupt, drug lords wage war in the favelas, and sewer systems erupt in the streets, all of which is to say that in Brazilian terms nothing happens. In the telenovelas, executives are kid- napped and drug lords wage war in the favelas, but the kidnapper is caught, the drug lord meets a nice girl and goes straight, the crooked executive’s righteous son inherits the family business, and moral order is restored to the world. Things change. They change in precisely the same fashion in every single novela . . . viewers can fantasize that the real Brazil is not the hopeless swamp of moral
82
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY
46: 4
confusion and economic chaos that it sometimes feels like . . . but a place where family values withstand all assaults, the poor even- tually find jobs and always have enough to eat, and even the wicked can be redeemed. (Guillermoprieto 1994, 291. For further discussionsof the role of telenovelas in Brazilian life,see La Pastina 1999;Page 1996,444-65;Oliveira 1993;Port0 1998a,b)
If news reports concentrate on individuals to the detriment of struc- tural analysis, this is all the more true of telenovelas. It is inherent in the medium that social questions, if they are dealt with at all, are treated as individual problems. 0 rei do gado was no exception. The movement (which was not named) faded into the background. The central charac- ter was a heroic land occupier; one of the subplots was resolved when a beautiful occupier and a landowner fell in love, perhaps permitting the conclusion that the solution for rural poverty is not land reform but love. The program's image of conflict in the countryside did not neces- sarily reinforce the MST's position because it tempered the conflict and suggested a peaceful resolution.
The novela was nonetheless important for presenting the issue of land reform in prime time every night for six months, and it undoubt- edly drew the attention of millions of people to the plight of the land- less. It can be described as alternating between two of the frames found in news reports. Land occupiers are, on the one hand, pathetic crea- tures, poor and deserving but acting in the shadow of movement lead- ers and people of higher status; on the other hand, they offer a solution to national problems. The show's picture of the movement certainly could be expected to invoke sympathy (and it presented landowners in such a bad light that some of them threatened to sue the author). Even with sanitized politics, a dramatized story may well affect people more powerfully than an ordinary news report.
It is worth noting that the show appeared at what was probably the movement's highest point of popularity in public opinion: it premiered two months after the Eldorado massacre. (It was already on the draw- ing board at the time of the massacre, although the scripts for later episodes were completed only during the run of the program.) The media had been drawing daily attention to the movement's Pontal cam- paign. Brazil, moreover, had enjoyed two years of price stability after a decade of vertiginous inflation, and it may be that the sense of pros- perity made urban Brazilians more willing than usual to recognize the plight of the rural poor."
The series itself made news on several occasions. Editorial and opinion columns referred to it; President Cardoso visited the set during taping and was shown on the evening news meeting actors in costume. One of the characters, a senator who defended agrarian reform, was killed, and two real-life PT senators, Benedita da Silva and Eduardo
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	83
Suplicy, made cameo appearances as themselves at his funeral. (In the present context, any distinction between a telenovela character and “real-life”senators can only be relative.) Their appearance in itself occa- sioned a flurry of public comment: while a columnist for Estudo de S2o Puulo huffily complained that “taxpayers have a right to believe that the representatives they elect use their time parsimoniously in their bene- fit,” the television critic of the newsweekly Vejurejoined that “theBrazil that telejournalism tried to hide winds u p appearing in its entirety in the novela. . . . When two senators agree to make an appearance in 0 rei do gudo, reality presents itself through the telenovela” (La Pastina et al. 1999;Reis 1997;Bucci 1997).
TeoriuGDebate,the PTs theoreticaljournal,covered the telenovela. In a long interview, MST leader StCdile criticized the show for being “romanticized,”for showing “a half-messianic leader who decided by himself” instead of democratically run ussentumentos,and for trimming its politics under pressure from the network. He nevertheless acknowl- edged that on the whole, the movement thought that the show had a positive impact because it brought the land question into prime time and presented important themes, such as the farmworkers’encampments and the movement-run schools. StCdile also revealed that movement leaders met with the writer during the show’srun and persuaded him to broaden his treatment of the movement. Finally, he said, the novela raised the status of occupying farmworkers in their communities; other viewers treated them with more respect (Azevedo and Sottili 1997, 32-33, 39).
The “coverage”of a movement in fictional representation necessarily departs significantly from its treatment as a news item. Still, the telenov- ela merits the extended treatment given here because it drew more atten- tion to the movement than news coverage ordinarily attracts. It paralleled straight news reporting of social movements in many respects: it was important simply for garnering attention; it acknowledged-even as it called into question-the	movement’sstanding to speak for itself; it per- sonalized a problem, obscuring its social dimensions; those in the move- ment regarded it as a distortion of their reality; but even so, it served their purposes at least partially. Of course, it was only a soap opera.12
CONCLUSIONS
The treatment of the MST in the Brazilian media is diverse, presenting a mixture of sympathy and hostility. The sympathetic coverage itself varies, moreover, in acknowledging the movement’s political significance.
Most movement activists and sympathetic media critics who have studied the coverage of the MST, however, argue that such coverage is uniformly hostile (with some exceptions; for example, Berger 1998; Gohn 2000). They see demonization in virtually all coverage, even if
84	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
they do not use the term (although Maschio 2000 refers to the “Sataniza- tion” of the MST). They do claim to find systematic distortion in media accounts. Maisa Mendonga, for example, analyzes headlines from three hundred articles about the MST in the four major Brazilian dailies (Estado de Sa’o Paulo, Folha de Siio Paulo, 0 Globo, and Jornal do Brasin between April and August 1999. She concludes,
A large part of these articles characterize the landless as aggressors, potential guerrilla fighters, obsessed [obsecadosl with the seizure of power or violent. On the other hand, the police are presented as defenders of order, although statistics of violence in the countryside demonstrate the opposite. The government, for its part, is seen as negotiating agent, which supports and invests a large amount of resources in agrarian reform. (MendonCa 2000)
Many other critics point out that reports regularly use the term inua- sion rather than occupationand identify an “invasion”ips0 facto with vio- lence, without regard for whether people have been injured or property has been damaged. Several Brazilian media critics emphasize that the term invasion, found in many media reports, is explicitly condemnatory (Baccega and Citelli 1989;Marambaia and CPmara 2000; Voese 1998).
The coverage is, in reality, more complex. Though the demoniza- tion frame is most common, this study has found four other frames, all of which show some sympathy for the MST and its goals. The MST must regard the attention it has enjoyed from the Brazilian media as a mixed blessing. Though the MST has won considerable attention, it has not been able to dictate the content of that attention. Still, the achievement of getting attention itself may be as important as the exact way the movement is framed. The MST has won significant public support and maintained a high level of mobilization, which appears to demonstrate that the movement has, on the whole, benefited, even with the media’s mixed treatment. The movement’s complaints about that treatment appear to have been balanced by a recognition that even mixed cover- age serves it better than none at all.
NOTES
This is a revised version of a paper presented to the Columbia University Seminar on Brazil, April 1999; the International Rural Sociological Association, Rio de Janeiro, July 2000; and the Seminar on Contentious Politics, Columbia University, April 2001. I appreciate the helpful comments of Laura Kramer, Gabriel Ondetti, and Wendy Wolford, as well as Charles Tilly and the other par- ticipants in the contentious politics seminar.
1. Media are more important for appealing to sympathizers than for recruiting active participants because joining a collective action is often deter-
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	85
mined at least in part by personal contact with others who are already active (Snow et al. 1980).
2. La Pastina (1999) conducted an original and interesting study of audi- ence response to the telenovela 0 rei do gado, based on participant observation. 3. The term land question is used here as it is in Brazil, shorthand for the complex of issues regarding concentration of land ownership, agricultural pro-
ductivity, and rural poverty and unemployment. 4. Ownership of rural property is often poorly defined, readily permitting
fraudulent title claims. James Holston argues that the land grab (srilagem) is a normal feature of the Brazilian legal system, not an exceptional violation. The grileiro “pretendsto have legitimate title to the land through a vast repertoire of deceptions” (Holston 1991, 700). Holston is writing about land grabs on the recently urbanized peripheries of expanding cities, but they are most common in rural areas. New roads and the conversion of huge virgin forests to cultivation or pasture since the 1964 military coup have produced innumerable opportunities for fraudulent property claims (compare Hall 1990, Maybury-Lewis 1994).
5. Between 2000 and 2002, hoping to discourage occupations, the Car- doso government decreed that it would not inspect occupied properties (Ondetti 2002, 175).
6. It refers to emu mate, a favorite drink in Rio Grande do Sul (Berger 1998, 112).
7. The labels given to each frame (except the fourth) are the author’s, chosen to characterize the frames succinctly without necessarily drawing on the language of those who employ them.
8. There are doubtless some citizens who believe that the movement is keeping potential criminals out of the cities and who therefore support the movement as a form of social cleansing.
9. AntBnio Conselheiro was the leader of Canudos, a nineteenth-century community of rural withdrawal that was wiped out by the Brazilian army. Con- temporary Brazil learned about Canudos from Euclides da Cunha, whose first- hand account appears in the book translated as Rebellion in the Backlands (1944); Mario Vargas Llosa’s novel m e War of the End of the World (1984) is based on the episode. Among the many accounts of Canudos by Brazilians and foreigners, the diversity of interpretations parallels that of other “prepolitical” movements, such as the Luddites; to some, the movement symbolizes fanatical primitive rebellion or a movement of withdrawal attempting to recover a myth- ical lost past, while for others it is the epitome of rural resistance to the oli- garchical power of landed property.
10. This account appears to rely mainly on one of the most successful assentamentos in Rio Grande do Sul, the state where assentamentos are more prosperous in general than elsewhere in the country.
11. The success of the fight against inflation also won its architect, Fer- nando Henrique Cardoso, election to the first of two terms as president in 1994. 12. WithoutapologiestoGamson,whoconcludeshisdiscussionofthefilm
TheChinaSyndromeandtheanti-nuclear powermovementbysaying,“But,of course, it was just a movie” (1988, 234).
86	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4 REFERENCES
Amaral, Roberto, and Cesar GuimarPes. 1994.Media Monopoly in Brazil.Jour- nal of Communication 44, 4 (Autumn): 26-38.
Amnesty International. 2002. International Secretariat. News Release. AMR 19/ 008/2002, June 13. (Reprinted in SEJUP, News from Brazil, 471, June 17, 2002.)
Azevedo, Ricardo, and RogCrio Soaili. 1997. Maledetto latiftindio. Teoria G Debate 34 (March-May):	32-39.
Babb, Sarah. 1996.A True American System of Finance: Frame Resonance in the US. Labor Movement, 1866 to 1886. American Sociological Review 61, 6 (December): 1033-52.
Baccega, Maria Aparecida, and Adilson Odair Citelli. 1989. Ret6rica da manipulagilo: 0s Sem-Terra nos jornais. Comunicapjes e Artes 20 (April): 23-29.
Benford, Robert D., and David A. Snow. 2000. Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment. Annual Review of Sociology 26: 611-39.
Berger, Christa. 1998. Campos em confronto: a terra e o texto. Port0 Alegre: Edi- tora da Universidade.
Bucci, EugCnio. 1997. FiccPo C ignorar a novela. Veja 30, 4 Uanuary 29): 16. Caldart, Roseli Salete. 1997. EducaGdo em movimento:formapio de educadoras
e educadores no MSI: Petr6polis: Vozes. ComissPo Pastoral da Terra. 2000. Assassinatos no campo: Brasil 1985 a 2000.
<www.cptnac.com.br> Cunha,Euclidesda. 1944.RebellionintheBacklands10ssertdes].Trans.Samuel
Putnam. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ellingson, Stephen J. 1995. Understanding the Dialectic of Discourse and Col-
lective Action: Public Debate and Rioting in Antebellum Cincinnati. Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 101, 1 (July): 100-44. Entman, Robert M. 1993. Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured Paradigm.
Journal of Communication 43, 4 (Autumn): 51-58. Fernandes, Bernard0 Mancano. 2000. A forma@o do MST no Brasil. Petr6polis:
V ozes. Gaiger,Luiz InPcio German. 1987.Agentes religiosose camponesessemterra no
sul do Brasil:quadro de interpreta@o sociol6gica.Petr6polis: Vozes. Gamson,WilliamA. 1985.Goffman’sLegacytoPoliticalSociology.Theoryand
Society 14, 5 (September): 605-22. -.	1990. TheStrategyofSocial Protest.2nd ed. Belmont: Wadsworth. -.	1992. Talking Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gamson, William A., and Andre Modigliani. 1989. Media Discourse and Public
Opinion on Nuclear Power: A Constructionist Approach. AmericanJournal
of Sociology 95, 1 uuly): 1-37. Gamson, William A,, and David S. Meyer. 1396. Framing Political Opportunity.
In Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings, ed. Doug McAdam, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 275-90.
HAMMOND: MST AND MEDIA	87
Gamson, William A., and Gadi Wolfsfeld. 1993.Movements and Media as Inter- acting Systems. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 528 (July): 114-25.
Gamson, William A,, Bruce Fireman, and Steven Rytina. 1982. Encounters with Unjust AuthoriQ. Chicago: Dorsey Press.
Gamson, William A., David Croteau, William Hoynes, and Theodore Sasson. 1992. Media Images and the Social Construction of Reality. Annual Review of Sociology 18,373-93.
Gerhards, Jurgen, and Dieter Rucht. 1992. Mesomobilization: Organizing and Framing in Two Protest Campaigns in West Germany. AmericanJournal of Sociology 98, 3 (November): 555-96.
Gitlin,Todd.1980.n eWholeWorldIsWatching:MassMediaintheMakingand Unmaking of the New Lejl Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis. New York: Harper Colophon. Gohn, Maria da G16ria. 2000. Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra no Brasil e a Midia, 1997-2000. Paper presented to the World Congress of
RuralSociology,RiodeJaneiro,July30-August 5. Graziano Neto, Francisco. 1998. A (dificil) interpretacko da realidade agr5ria. In
0sassentamentos de reforma agraria no Brasil, ed. Benicio Viero Schmidt, Danilo Nolasco C. Marinho, and Sueli L. Couto Rosa. Brasilia: Editora Uni- versidade de Brasilia. 153-69.
Guillermoprieto, Alma. 1994. 7be Heart that Bleeds: Latin America Now. New York: Vintage Books.
Hall, Anthony L. 1990. Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil. In Agrarian Reform and Grassroots Development: Ten Case Studies, ed. Roy L. Proster- man, Mary N. Temple, and Timothy M. Hanstad. Boulder: Lynne Rienner. 205-32.
Hall, Stuart. 1980. Encoding/Decoding. In Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972- 79.London: Hutchinson. 128-38.
Hammond, John L. 1999a. Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farm- workers' Movement. Bulletin of Latin American Research 18, 4: 469-89.
-.	1999b. [Impunity. . .I Lives On in Brazil. NACLA Report on the Americas 33 (November-December): 1-2.
Holston,James. 1991.The Misrule of Law: Land and Usurpation in Brazil. Com- parative Studies in Society and History 33, 4 (October): 695-725.
Houtzager, Peter Pim. 1997. Caught Between State and Church: Popular Move- ments in the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1989. Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley.
-.	1998. State and Union in the Transformation of the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1979.	Latin American Research Reyiew 33, 2: 103-42.
Imprensa ( S oPaulo). 1998.Jo20 Pedro Stkdile: o lider dos sem-terra ataca jor- nalistas e empresarios d e comunicac2o. No. 11 (August): 21-26.
La Pastina, Antonio C. 1999. The Telenovela Way of Knowledge: An Ethno- graphic Reception Study Among Rural Viewers in Brazil. Ph.D. diss., Uni- versity of Texas, Austin.
La Pastina, Antonio C., Joseph Straubhaar, and Heloisa Buarque de Almeida. 1999. Producers, Audiences, and the Limits of Social Marketing on Televi- sion: The Case of 0 Rei do Gado, a Telenovela About Land Reform in Brazil.
88	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
Paper presented at the 49th Annual Conference of the International Com-
munication Association, San Francisco, May 27-31. Lima, Venicio A. de. 1993. Brazilian Television in the 1989 Presidential Cam-
paign: Constructing a President. In Television, Politics, and the Transition to Democracy in Latin America, ed. Thomas E. Skidmore. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press. 97-17.
Lisboa, Teresa Kleba. 1988. A luta dos Sem Terra no oeste catarinense. Flori- an6polis: Editora da UFSC.
Marambaia, Hudson Passos, and AntBnio da Silva CBmara. 2000. 0 MST e a imprensa na Bahia: o caso do a tarde. Paper presented to the World Con- gressofRuralSociology,RiodeJaneiro,July30-August 5.
Maschio,Jost. 2000. Brasil: La satanizaci6n del MST en 10s medios de comuni- cacibn. Servicio Informativo alai-amlatina Agencia Latinoamericana de Informacion. Email list, <alai-amlatina@quito.ecuanex.net.ec>
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn. 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 19541985. Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press. McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald. 1996. Introduction:
Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Framing Processes--Toward a Synthetic, Comparative Perspective on Social Movements. In Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Ofportunities, Mobilizing Struc- tures, and Cultural Framings, ed. McAdam, McCarthy, and Zald. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. 1-20,
Medeiros, Leonilde Servolo de. 2001. Sem Terra, assentados, agricultores famil- iares: consideragees sobre 0 s conflitos sociais e as formas de 0rganizar;iio dos trabalhadores rurais brasileiros. In iUna nueva ruralidad en Am&ica Latina? ed. Norma Giarracca. Buenos Aires: CLACSO. 103-28. <www. clacso.org/libros/rura~ruralh. tml>
Mendonca, Maisa. 2000. 0 MST na midia. <www.mst.org.br/biblioteca/textos/ midiahstnamidia.html>
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST). n.d. 0 MST e a edu- cacPo. <www.mst.org>
Navarro,Zander. 1994.Democracy,Citizenshipand Representation:Rural Social Movements in Southern Brazil, 1978-1990. Bulletin of Latin American Research 13, 2: 129-54.
-.	1997. Sete teses equivocadas sobre as lutas sociais no campo, o MST e a reforma agriria. In A reforma agraria e a luta do MST, ed. JoPo Pedro StCdile.Petropolis:Vozes. 111-32.
Nunes, IvBnio Barros. 1993. Reforma agraria, p’ra que? In Zntroducdo crftica ao direito. Brasilia: Centro de Educaciio Aberta, Continuada, a DistPncia, Uni- versidade de Brasilia. 40-42.
Oliveira, Omar Souki. 1993. Brazilian Soaps Outshine Hollywood: Is Cultural Imperialism Fading Out? In Beyond National Sovereignty: International Communication in the 1990s,ed. Kaarle Nordenstreng and Herbert I. Schiller. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 116-31.
Ondetti, Gabriel A. 2002. Opportunities, Ideas, and Actions: The Brazilian Land- less Movement, 1979-2001. Ph.D. diss., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
-. -.
tial Election. Communication Review 2, 4: 433-59. 1998b. Telenovelas, Politics, and National Identity in Brazil. Paper pre-
sented to the Society for Cinema Studies conference, San Diego, April 4-7. 2001. Mass Media and Politics in Democratic Brazil. Paper presented at the Conference “15 Years of Democracy in Brazil,” Institute of Latin American
HAMMOND:MSTAND MEDIA	89
Padgett, Tim. 1998. Brazil’s Landless Rebels. Time, Latin American edition, Jan- uary 19: 12-17.
Page,Joseph A. 1995. TheBrazilians. Reading: Addison-Wesley. Paiero, Denise, and Jose Roberto Damatto, Jr. 1996. Foices e sabres: a hisMria
de uma ocupaGao dos Sem Terra. Siio Paulo: Annablume. Passarinho, Jarbas. 1997. A fibula se inverte. Estado de Siio Paulo, March 25.
<www.estado.com.br> Payne, Leigh A. 2000. UncivilMovements: 7heArmed Right Wing and Democ-
racy in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Petras, James. 1997. Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left. New Left Review
223 (May-June):	17-47. Petry, Andre. 1997. Parado por 500 anos. Veja 30, 17 (April 16): 50-51. Petry, Andre, and Eduardo Oinegue. 1998.0que eles querem. Veja31, 22 (June
3): 4248. Porto, Mauro P. 1998a. Telenovelas and Politics in the 1994 Brazilian Presiden-
Studies, University of London, February 15-16. Reis,Leila.1997.FiguragiiodesenadoresCoassuntodasemana.&ado deSao
Paulo,January 24. <www.estado.com.br> Rohter, Larry. 1999. Politics Threatens Brazilian Utility Sales. New York Times,
October 9: C2. Ryan, Charlotte. 1991. Prime Time Activism: Media Strategiesfor Grassroots
Organizing. Boston: South End Press. Salgado, Sebastiiio. 1997a. Terra:Struggle of the hndless. London: Phaidon Press. -.	1997b. The Dispossessed. Photo essay. New York TimesMagazine, April
20: 40-47. ServiCo Brasileiro de JustiCa e Paz (SEJUP). 1997a. Land Issues: Widespread
Approval of Land Occupation Tactic of MST. NewsfromBrazil 268 (April
3). <www.oneworld.org/sejup> -,	1997b. Land Issues: Government Pays Over 24000% More for Land Than
It Received for It. Newsfrom Brazil 293 (November 20). Sigal, Leon V. 1973. Reporters and Ofliciak: 7he Organization and Politics of
Newsmaking. Lexington: D.C. Heath. Smith, Christian. 1996. Resisting Reagan: The U S . Central America Peace Move-
ment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Snow, David A,, and Robert D. Benford. 1988. Ideology, Frame Resonance, and
Participant Mobilization. International Social Movement Research 1:
197-2 17. -.	1992. Master Frames and Cycles of Protest. In Frontiers in Social Move-
ment Theory,ed. Aldon D. Morris and Carol McClurg Mueller. New Haven: Yale University Press. 133-55.
Snow, David A., Louis A. Zurcher, Jr., and Sheldon Ekland-Olson. 1980. Social Networks and Social Movements: A Microstructural Approach to Differen- tial Recruitment. American Sociological Review 45 (October): 787-801.
90	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	46: 4
Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Ben- ford. 1986. Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation. American Sociological Review 51 (August): 464-81.
Sorj, Bernardo. 1998. A reforma agrziria em tempos de democracia e globaliza- GPO. Novos Btudos CEBRAP50 (March): 23-40.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1994. Power in Movement: Social Movements, CollectiveAction and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tuchman, Gaye. 1978. Making News. New York: Free Press. Valdks, Alberto, and Tom Wiens. 1996. Rural Poverty in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Unpublished mss. Washington, DC: World Bank. Vargas Llosa, Mario. 1984. 7be War of the End of the World [Guerra del fin del
mundol. Trans. Helen Lane. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Veja (SPo Paulo). 1994. Olhai as foices dos pobres da terra. June 1: 70-75.
-.	1997. A longa marcha. 30, 15 (April 16): 34-35. Voese, Ingo. 1998. 0 movimento dos Sem-Terra na imprensa: urn exercicio de
anilise d o discurso. Ijui: Editora Unijui.

JCEPS:Vol. 3 No. 2 (October 2005)
[print now]
Teacher Education for Social Transformation and its Links to Progressive Social Movements: The case of the Landless Workers Movement in Brazil[1]
Júlio Emílio Diniz-Pereira[2]
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil
Citation information
URL:
<http://www.jceps.com/?pageID=article&articleID=51>
author:
Júlio Emílio Diniz-Pereira[2]
Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies
Volume 3, Number 2 (October 2005)
ISSN 1740-2743
Abstract
This paper discusses the experience of a teacher education program that has been developed by the Landless Workers Movement (MST), one of the largest and most important social movements in contemporary Latin America. The MST has struggled for agrarian reform as well as social and economic justice in Brazil. One of the lessons that the MST has learned from its history in Brazil is that it is not enough to struggle only for land. Education is also a quite important dimension of the MST's struggles. The MST's pedagogy is linked to collective work and the construction of humanist and socialist values. The movement has established pre-service and in-service teacher education programs for those who teach at schools in its settlements and encampments. This paper discusses, then, the challenges and possibilities of teacher education programs linked to progressive social movements in their attempts to implement an effective social justice agenda.
Keywords: Teacher education; social justice; progressive social movements; Brazil

Introduction
The Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Workers Movement), or simply the MST, is one of the largest and most important social movements in contemporary Latin America and one of the most successful grassroots movements in the world. In its twenty years of existence[3], the MST has struggled for agrarian reform as well as social and economic justice in Brazil, achieving quite impressive results.
The movement is made up of people from some of the poorest segments of Brazilian society[4]. It mobilizes what Bales (1999), in the context of the current global economy, calls "disposable people."[5] The landless people are peasants whose lands have been expropriated and who have been excluded from other basic rights of citizenship. They are also rural workers and unemployed people who struggle to be reintegrated into the labor markets and social arenas from which they have been expelled as a result of the unequal process of capitalism development (Fernandes, 2000; Wright & Wolford, 2003).
The landless people in Brazil struggle not simply for land but for all the basic conditions of human existence. The Landless Workers Movement has three main goals: 1) to redistribute land to those who work it; 2) to achieve agrarian reform - which the movement considers to be much broader and more complex than land redistribution, and which must entail the attainment of the full scope of social rights that define full citizenship; 3) to build a socialist society.
The utopian vision of building a different society, a socialist society[6], is indeed in the mind of many MST's activists, as can be seen through one of my interviewees' statements: "We, who are from the MST, would like to show we want to construct another society. This is our utopia: to construct a different society."[7]
Actually, for the women and men who participate in the MST, there is no other alternative but to struggle for deep, structural transformations in Brazilian society. It is clear to them that the simple "reforms" of the current capitalist model of society would only postpone their suffering to some point in the future, leading them once again to the same situation of exclusion that first impelled them to establish this mass social movement.
The exclusion of the landless rural workers is the result of a history of huge inequalities generated by the development of capitalism in Brazil. Even facing huge difficulties and serious challenges, the landless people resist exploitation and expropriation and have been contributing to the transformation of social and economic reality in Brazil. They have developed and expanded by making mistakes, overcoming problems, and dealing with different issues as the political landscape changes.
Although conservative groups and the mainstream media in Brazil accuse the MST of being a major threat to Brazilian democracy, if one conceives of democracy in terms of social justice, equality, and shared power, "one could argue that the sort of revolution the MST supports is exactly what Brazilian democracy needs in order to become truly democratic" (Wright & Wolford, 2003, pp. 314-315).
Finally, the landless people are not only excluded from their lands, but also from other basic rights of citizenship. In order to conquer these rights, they have understood that the struggle for land is linked to the struggle for living with dignity. Through their struggles, they seek to trample other fences beyond those of the latifundium. Knocking down the invisible yet powerful fence around knowledge, through an ambitious educational project, is another challenge facing the MST. This specific topic - the MST's educational work - will be briefly discussed in the next section.
An Overview of the MST's Educational Work
One of the principal lessons that the Landless Workers Movement has learned from its history in Brazil is that it is not enough to struggle only for land. Education is another central dimension of the MST's struggles. Due to the high rates of illiteracy and low rates of schooling in the acampamentos (encampments) and assentamentos (settlements), the landless families consider formal education and schooling crucial. However, for the MST, education is not restricted to school and classroom. One's involvement with the entire movement is already considered the greater "school."
The MST's pedagogy, closely linked to a collective work ethic and the construction of humanist and socialist values, has been developing since the 1980s when the MST's education committees began discussing educational issues with the landless communities. The movement has also established pre-service and in-service teacher education programs for those who teach at schools in its settlements and encampments.
The educational principles of the MST have emerged from its praxis (practice and theory combined)[8]. They have been established collectively through what the movement calls "método de princípios" ("method of principles"). The main purpose of this method is "to transform the accumulated lessons of all prior experiences and discussions into pedagogical principles that could lead (without prescribing) the educational work in all encampments and settlements in the country" (Caldart, 2000, p. 166).
The MST does not follow a unique pedagogy or an educational theory developed by a specific thinker. It constitutes itself as a pedagogical subject that incorporates various pedagogies and elements from many educational currents, adapting and modifying them according to people's needs in each settlement and encampment (Caldart, 2000; Harnecker, 2002).
A crucial aspect of the MST education project is that landless people must become subjects of their own pedagogy. The process of transforming people into educators who reflect upon their own education takes place through a permanent relationship between theory and practice. It is also a direct consequence of the "fact that people are part of a social movement." Thus, "the landless people of the MST are not only the subjects of an educational experience and human development, but also challenge themselves to become the subjects of theoretical reflection upon the pedagogy that they live" (Harnecker, 2002; Caldart, 2000, p. 54).
As mentioned above, although this pedagogy goes beyond the school, it also passes through the school. However, in order that the school incorporates the MST's pedagogy, there has to be a process of what the movement calls "school occupation."
The MST uses the term "school occupation" because the strategy landless people employ to force the state or the municipality to provide schools for their children is very similar to the one they use in order to get land. By occupying the school, the movement means "establishing the school first, beginning the work and the formal enrollments that they know are mandatory, despite precarious material conditions, and thus initiating the negotiations with the government in order to legalize the school." The movement knows that if it starts first negotiating with local governments, the process of establishing a school may take months or even years (Caldart, 2000; Harnecker, 2002).
One of my interviewees told me about her experience of helping to establish a school in one of the MST's encampments, more specifically, in an old stable, by following the movement's strategy of "occupying the school:"
It was amazing! I've learned a lot from this experience. I had learned from my participation in the union and the party that we should first negotiate in order to win something. However, in the movement, the logic is just the opposite. First we conquer, we do something and so we start negotiating in order to keep that conquest. And in these terms, the establishment of the school wasn't anything different. We cleaned up the whole stable, decorated it, and so established the school there. So, we registered and enrolled all the kids, who were living in the camp, at the school. After doing that, we started negotiating the formal establishment of the school with the authorities in the town. But again, we did that after the school was already functioning.
[...]
I was trembling. I had never participated in a negotiation like this before. So, I said to the Municipal Educational Secretary: "I don't know how to use beautiful words, but I am really excited about seeing the kids studying at the school. We have already started planting a beautiful garden over there. They are learning Math through the lettuce and onion gardens. It is amazing! Madam, this experience has to go on."
Caldart (2000; 2003b) discusses three other meanings of "school occupation" in the movement. First, because, as mentioned above, the landless families have mobilized themselves in order to struggle for the right to attend school, "school occupation" means the process of ensuring the extension of the social right to attend school to landless people. Second, the movement has taken on the task of organizing and articulating this mobilization in an organic way, producing a specific pedagogical project in the schools that have been conquered and training educators in a way that they can work toward this perspective. Thus, "school occupation" also means a planned and systematic process of incorporating the school into the movement's dynamic. Third, because the school is also seen as a political matter, "school occupation" means that the school is part of the strategy of struggling for agrarian reform, linking the movement's general concerns to its participants' political development.
There are tensions and conflicts in this process. As other interviewees argue, the "school occupation" process is more complex and longer than the process of occupying latifundia. According to these educators:
It is easier to knock down a latifundium fence than to overcome the invisible fence around knowledge.
It is very easy to knock down a latifundium fence. However, it is very difficult to knock down the other "fences" of exclusion. For instance, the "educational fence" is very hard to knock down. Knowledge has been very concentrated...
Caldart (2000) states that traditional schooling and the movement demonstrate logics that contradict one another. Their identities are usually conflicting identities. On the one hand, as mentioned above, the MST, as a progressive social and cultural movement, increasingly insists upon humanist and socialist values in education. On the other hand, traditional schools usually subordinate themselves to the immediacy of market demands. For instance, in her research, Ribeiro (2001) found that parents and teachers in some settlement schools seemed to agree that it is really difficult to introduce cooperative relationships in teaching, even in the MST's schools, because school tends to promote competition, individualism and submission.
As also mentioned above, in the MST's educational work, the children and the teachers are conceived as "pedagogical subjects." They are seen as privileged links in the dialogue between the movement and the school (Beltrame, 2000).
The active participation of the MST children, who are also called the Sem Terrinha (little landless ones)[9], is a crucial element in the movement's educational work. Although the movement wishes to avoid transforming the pupils into premature adults, the MST strongly supports its children's active participation in the movement and, more specifically, in their schools. There have been different ways for children's participation in the MST. As one of my interviewees puts it:
The Sem Terrinha is in the MST because of her/his father and mother... The children are there for the occupation, they are there when evictions occur, they are there when the Sem Terra [the adult] is arrested, and for the mobilization... so, they are together and the little kids also participate in this process. The little kids are not appendages; they are an important part of the process and they have to be understood as subjects in this process, while recognizing that they have a different role... So, it is really important that the kids realize they are part of a struggle and this is one of the reasons that their school has to be different...
Caldart (2000) states that, since the very beginning, the children have been an important part of the movement's dynamic through their participation, with their parents, in important MST actions such as mobilizations, demonstrations, and even land occupations. Moreover, the author argues, children have also been able to create their own space in the movement. They have organized themselves in order to demand their rights and make negotiations in their own communities.
Harnecker (2002) states that in settlements where work is organized in a collective way, the children often feel motivated to create their own organization. The author cites one settlement where "the children got used to holding weekly assemblies to analyze their daily problems and distribute the tasks they could take on in the settlement" (p. 92). In her opinion, these experiences make it easy for the school to be a miniature organization of the committees and work teams in the encampments and settlements.
Children's active participation also takes place at their schools. For instance, they may put pressure on teachers to change the curriculum to connect it more closely to their lives and realities. In Caldart's opinion, the children "are ready to assume their condition as subjects and, who knows, lead themselves in the process of occupying the school" (2000, p. 173).
Since 1996, the MST has organized an annual meeting - the Encontro dos Sem Terrinha (meeting of the little landless ones) - which, according to Wright and Wolford (2003), "brings together the children of MST settlers and educates them about the ongoing struggle for the land" (p. 333).
One of my interviewees told me a bit about the entire process of organizing the Encontro dos Sem Terrinha in the state of Pernambuco. According to her, one topic is chosen each year and the children work on this topic at the schools, writing essays, drawing pictures, doing research, and discussing the subject with their classmates. At the end of the year, usually in October, the kids attend this meeting and share their ideas and their opinions. She assessed how this process has taken place in the movement. She explains:
Of course there is a purpose to this activity. All of our activities have intentionality. When we think about this meeting, we think about what we have to do before, during, and after it takes place. The "before," which is the preparation process, and the "during," which is the three-day meeting, have been very rich; however, we have had problems with the "after." Unfortunately, the teachers have not been able to explore and take advantage of the experiences which the kids have had during these three days.
The MST also emphasizes the importance of teachers' participation in the movement and their active involvement in the community. Caldart (2000) states that the MST's history of schooling has had the transformative effect of giving these teachers a specific collective identity that goes beyond their profession without abandon it. To be a Sem Terra teacher, as Caldart argues, means to have "an identity that has been constructed simultaneously with the MST's progressive 'occupation' of the school" (p. 187).
According to the author, "Sem Terra teacher" is the name that can be given to an MST character who within herself[10] combines three different identity components: "first, the condition of being a woman and the whole grid of meanings that this implies from a human, social, political, and historical point of view; second, her professional identity as an educator; and third her participation in an organization that struggles for land and that, in turn, produces new meanings for her condition as both a woman and an educator" (p. 187).
Caldart argues that at the same time that the MST is able to shape the educator's new identity, the emergence of the Sem Terra teachers leads to new characteristics for the movement's identity as well. One of the results of the construction of this new collective identity for teachers has been a significant increase in women's participation in the MST (see also Diniz-Pereira, 2005).
The teachers - more specifically, the female teachers - who began to participate in the MST as the wives of landless rural workers, brought a serious concern about the teaching profession to the larger struggle over land. According to Caldart (2000), "In the same sense that, earlier, [they] were important actors pressuring the MST to struggle for schools, [they] continue on the stage today, pressuring the MST to create more space for education on its agenda" (p. 186).
McCowan (2003) states that although the MST's national education committee formulates the principal orientations of the movement's educative work, and coordinators at the state and regional levels play the chief role in enforcing them, "teachers do have influence on pedagogical and organizational decision-making in schools" (p. 8). He argues that teacher participation seems to have a dual function in the MST: "firstly the 'organizational' aspect, creating a cooperative and efficient body of workers, and secondly to increase their identification with and commitment to the community and the movement" (p. 8).
At the beginning of the MST's history of education, there was a tendency to have tensions and conflicts concerning "inside" teachers versus "outside" teachers. The movement soon realized that the inside/outside difference should not be seen in absolute terms. The point was not to exclude all those teachers who did not live in the settlements or encampments, but to demand that each teacher - no matter where s/he came from - be truly engaged with the children and the community (Harnecker, 2002).
As mentioned above, the movement has highlighted teacher education as another crucial activity and strategy within its educational work. This topic, as the main topic of this paper, will be discussed separately in the next sections.
The MST's teacher education program
Among the MST's educational actions, teacher education is indeed one of its priorities. In the MST's view, teacher education should not be restricted to attending a training program[11]. Actually, the movement considers its "teacher education program" as a set of several strategies and educative practices that includes attendance in a "pre-service" teacher-training program. Similar to its entire educational project, the MST's teacher education program is also politically committed to a broader strategy of social transformation.
The MST's educational and teaching principles are presented in the three main dimensions of its teacher education program:
	•	Technical and professional preparation: It promotes scientific and practical knowledge, skills, behavior, care, and ethical attitudes regarding thinking and doing education, with special attention to the needs of rural areas, agrarian reform and social justice;
	•	Political preparation: It entails the development of an historical and class consciousness to help educators understand that their practices are linked to a larger purpose of positive social transformation;
	•	Cultural preparation: It emphasizes being able to creatively organize and build a culture of cooperation and solidarity (Caldart, 1997).
From these three dimensions of its teacher education program, it is possible to discern the MST's political and ideological intention toward a structural transformation of Brazilian society. Actually, it is difficult to separate the major goals of the movement, in terms of promoting agrarian reform and social justice, from its educational objectives. They are completely interwoven. Even the technical and professional dimension of this program has a clear connection to its broader political purpose. In an attempt to overcome the isolation and apolitical character of schoolteachers, the MST also tries to promote collaborative teacher research in its schools. Grounded in Freirean ideas, research is conceived here as a mutual process for students and teachers to question existing knowledge, power, and conditions[12]. Thus, community research by teachers, with students as co-investigators, establishes a student-centered, democratic process through which curriculum is built from the bottom up rather than from the top down[13].
Therefore, the MST intends to construct a teacher identity that is not neutral. It is rather a professional identity that is explicitly committed to social justice. Rather than reinforcing individualism in teaching, this professional identity is developed through experiences of solidarity and collective work.
In the MST's teacher education program, there is a multiplicity of initiatives that take place at the local, regional, state, and national levels and that represent fundamental spaces both for the pedagogical and political growth of the teachers and for the acquisition of knowledge to be socialized in the classroom (Beltrame, 2000, p. 139).
As I will discuss below, there are many strategies and activities that the movement considers to be part of its teacher education program. Examples include: participation in the collective struggles of the MST's education committees; systematization of pedagogical practices; participation in collective production and socialization of materials for the MST's educational project; attending and participating in meetings, seminars, workshops and short courses; and so forth.
MST's "pre-service" teacher-training programs[14]
There are two different types of formal "pre-service" teacher-training programs in the MST. Both are responsible for preparing and certifying elementary schoolteachers for the movement. One of these programs, the Magistério, is taken at the high school level; the other one is called Pedagogia da Terra, and it is taken at the college level. Both programs are divided in two parts: Tempo Escola (School Time) is the period of time when the student teachers get involved in academic and political discussions about teaching and education, take several academic courses, participate in political discussions, and study the movement's materials; and Tempo Comunidade (Community Time) is the period of time when the "student teachers" stay at a school in one of the MST's settlements or encampments and become involved with a set of activities in the community.
1.The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério)
The MST's teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério) has been developed since 1990. Its main goal is to train and certify elementary schoolteachers and educators who are teaching at schools in the MST's encampments and settlements.
In terms of its legal situation, this teacher-training program is a high-school level adult education program that provides an elementary teacher certification for the attendees.
The total duration of this program is two and a half years. As mentioned above, it is split in two parts: In the first part, or what the MST calls Tempo-Escola (School Time), the student teachers must attend classes (six hours a day) during the school vacations[15] and get involved in many other pedagogical activities, including participation in the self-management of the program. Portuguese, mathematics, and methods are among the required academic courses. The structure and dynamics of Brazil's political conjuncture and the history and goals of the movement are some of the political issues that are debated. According to Caldart (1997), the Tempo-Escola (School Time) is divided in three smaller "tempos" ("times"):
	•	"Times" linked to the official curricular development of the program: attending classes (six hours a day); attending and participating in seminars for the studying and discussion of specific topics (two or three hours per week); individual and collective reading (around 30 minutes a day); keeping a diary (20 minutes each day); and physical education activities (also 20 minutes a day).
	•	"Times" linked to the self-management of the program and the development of specific skills: working in the committees created to manage the program; attending workshops and short courses for developing specific skills needed for the self-management of the program; attending and participating in meetings and assemblies which are part of the collective administration of the program.
	•	"Times" linked to the cultural development of the group: celebration of the mística (spirit or spirituality/dramatization)[16]; individual and collective entertainment; keeping informed through the news; attending parties; visiting other places in the region; artistic workshops and so forth.
In the second part of the program, or what the movement calls Tempo-Comunidade (Community Time) the student teachers develop interdisciplinary activities that are socially useful to the community. Drawing upon Caldart (1997), the Tempo-Comunidade (Community Time) is divided into the following five smaller "tempos" ("times"):
	•	"Time" to continue the work they have been doing for the community, but now reflecting upon their pedagogical actions and taking notes about their practices (keeping a journal);
	•	"Time" for putting into practice different pedagogical activities, experiencing methodological challenges in each of the MST's educational frentes (fronts);
	•	"Time" to begin to do research activities that will culminate in a Trabalho de Pesquisa-Ação (Action-Research Project), the TPA. Student teachers will then write a final report (Monografia) on their research and present it to their teacher educators and classmates in the program.
	•	"Time" to develop additional involvement in community activities in order to deepen their knowledge about the broader reality of the settlement or encampment and to cultivate "an ethic of engaging, commitment, and solidarity."
	•	"Time" to apply the collective self-management logic that they have experienced during the Tempo-Escola (School Time) to their schools.
The main purposes of the MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level (Magistério) are: 1. to train agrarian reform educators[17] with technical skills to work in the MST; 2. to train and certify teachers to teach in settlements and encampments schools; 3. to continue the construction of the MST's educational project and a specific pedagogy for the schools in the Brazilian countryside.
The MST's educators who attend this program are chosen through a selection process that takes place at the state level and adheres to certain criteria, such as: candidates be at least eighteen years old and have graduated from elementary school[18]; they must be involved in developing some educational activity in settlements or encampments; they must be recommended by the community or any other level of the MST organization; and finally, they must be committed to the continuation of their educational work in the settlements or encampments after graduation.
2. The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra)
Like the high-school program, the MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra)[19] is divided in two parts: Tempo Escola (School Time) and Tempo Comunidade (Community Time). Besides taking academic courses, the "student teachers" also discuss political issues and study the MST educational materials during the Tempo Escola (School Time). In the Tempo Comunidade (Community Time), they read other materials, do "concrete activities" at the schools, keep a journal and participate in an action-research project. The program was established in order to deal with both rural education and the movement's specific needs.
MST participants from different Brazilian states have attended this program. They are selected by the MST national education committee following recommendations that come from the education committee at the state level and which meet some political and ideological criteria. For instance, the attendees of this program have to be "politically committed people," that is, people who are very active in their communities. They must be involved with educational tasks in the encampments or settlements and must return what they learn in the program to the community. Besides holding a secondary school diploma, they should have already demonstrated some "aptitude" for academic matters. Finally, they have to be people who hold an "advanced critical consciousness."
The MST's "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level (Pedagogia da Terra) has been developed through a partnership between the movement and certain public and private Brazilian universities[20] Although it is not an easy task to find teacher educators from the university who are willing to teach in this program, the MST counts on those who have some political and ideological affinity with the movement. Moreover, some of the teacher educators who teach in the program come from the MST.
MST's in-service teacher education activities
As part of its teacher education program, the MST also develops a set of activities for certified teachers who have been teaching at schools in the MST's settlements and encampments.
These teachers regularly receive pedagogical materials, which are produced with great care, involving input from educators, professionals with expertise in specific areas, and MST leaders. The language is very accessible to teachers and members of the community. The teachers, who must discuss these materials in the local education committees, generally report that the materials are very helpful for developing a better understanding of the MST's educational and political purposes.
Teachers' participation in local education committees is one of the most effective activities in terms of their in-service education. Once a week, they study the MST educational materials, discuss the school curriculum, and plan lessons together. Students and members of the community also participate in these committees. As one of my interviewees remarks,
We have worked really hard on the organization of these committees... as well as the necessity of teachers continuing to study and the importance of the pedagogical committees...
However, it is not enough to simply set up these committees at the local level and to send the MST's materials to the schools. The teachers request and receive support in terms of discussing and analyzing these materials. Thus, teachers' pedagogical support is also integrated with the MST's in-service teacher education program. This is one of the activities developed by the MST education committee at regional or state level (Beltrame, 2000).
One of the strategies to provide pedagogical support to the teachers comes through the oficinas de trabalho (training workshops). These workshops have become privileged spaces for the teachers who teach at different schools to discuss and share their practices and experiences. Practical activities are emphasized in these workshops. Celebration of the mística is another pedagogical activity developed during the workshops.
According to Beltrame (2000), while the activities developed during these workshops attempt to value the group's knowledge and culture, they also offer elements to help teachers rework and improve their teaching practices[21].
Another activity in the MST's in-service teacher education program is participation in meetings at regional and state levels for teachers who work at schools in the MST settlements and encampments. These meetings usually take place monthly during a whole weekend. MST members from the regional or state education committee help set up and coordinate these meetings. Discussions about the teachers' pedagogical practices in the settlement schools are emphasized in these meetings. Participants discuss issues such as life in the Brazilian countryside, the teaching profession, and political participation in the MST.
However, during these meetings educators not only discuss their practices and other pedagogical issues and attend workshops in order to learn different activities to be developed in their classrooms, but they also intentionally do "ordinary things." As one of my interviewees says,
We organize these meetings as we do any other MST educational event. The teachers have to do the dishes, clean up the restrooms, the courtyard... We organize the meeting splitting people in groups ("núcleos" ou "brigades") and splitting up the tasks among them... This is very important for their coexistence. It is from these groups that they are going to learn to listen to each other, respect each other's opinion, to work as a team... So, more than talk about the MST pedagogy, what we do during these meetings is to give them the opportunity to live the MST pedagogy... For us, it is crucial not only "knowing how to do" but also and mainly "knowing how to be."
They also celebrate the mística, plan the political actions that are scheduled for that month, discuss how to organize events in their local communities, and choose representatives to attend other MST meetings at the state and national levels.
The main purposes of the MST's events on education at national and state levels are to provide spaces for sharing experience, to allow educators to develop the critical distance with which to view their own school reality and, at the same time, to motivate teachers in transforming their practices. According to Beltrame (2000), these events count on expressive attendance of teachers and constitute important spaces to reflect upon and redefine their educational practice.
Other MST's teacher education strategies
Teachers' political participation in different social spaces in their local community is also another very important strategy of the MST's teacher education program. The movement considers teachers' involvement in political demonstrations, protests, marches, land occupations and public building occupations crucial.
Attending and participating in MST political events is integrated into its teacher education program. These events are quite important because they are able to reinforce a sense of belonging to the movement among the teachers and educators (Beltrame, 2000).
In considering other teacher education strategies, my interviewees also mentioned the Sem Terrinha meetings, which comprise meetings for pupils between eight and fourteen years old in the MST encampments and settlements and the MST Youth meeting which is for adolescents from the movement between fifteen and seventeen years old. During these meetings, the children study and discuss humanist and socialist values, their constitutional rights as children and adolescents, and problems that they have in their communities. After three or four days discussing these issues, the children and adolescents bring this discussion to their communities and schools.
According to my interviewees, the pupils who attend these meetings are more assertive and challenge their teachers and principals, demanding a space at the schools to discuss the meeting issues. They believe that this kind of behavior also has an impact and influence on the teachers' education.
Finally, there have been many problems and challenges in establishing the MST's teacher education program, as well as in putting the MST's educational principles into practice at schools in the settlements and encampments. I briefly discuss this topic in the next section.
Problems and challenges
The MST has a political commitment to struggle for the establishment of public schools in its settlements. Most of the schools in the MST's settlements are municipal schools. The movement believes in and agrees that public education should be a task that is performed by the state and one that should remain a state task. Thus, the MST does not want to replace the state in accomplishing this social responsibility.
The fact that the municipal or state government has financial or administrative responsibility for the schools represents a problem and a contradiction for the movement: the MST has no fiscal or administrative control over these schools. For instance, the teachers who teach at schools in its settlements have to be hired following the same rules as any public school. Consequently, most of the teachers who teach in the MST's settlements are non-activist teachers who have been assigned by the official system to teach in these schools. According to Beltrame (2000), most of them "assume these positions against their will and, in some cases, hold a prejudiced view of the MST's educative work" (p. 46).
Many of these "outsider" teachers are unable to grasp the specific issues confronting rural education or to understand education as part of the MST project for social transformation. It has not been an easy task to make the schools and the teachers follow the movement's educational principles. As one of my interviewees puts it,
Our first challenge is to win over the teachers or bring them closer to the movement. This is a tough task because the mainstream media, the government, and the local powers help keep them far from the movement. So, our challenge is to bring these people closer to the movement in order to make them realize how the movement conceives of education...
This same problem is a rarity among educators who teach at the Escola Itinerante (Itinerant School)[22] in the MST's encampments, or who teach literacy for adults both in camps and settlements, or for those who work with early childhood education. These educators are able to understand the specificity of the MST schools because most of them are from the movement and live in the same communities as their students do, and because the movement has invested in their political and professional training.
Another challenge for the movement is the turnover of non-activist teachers at schools in the MST settlements. There is a high dropout rate among the teacher cohort in the settlement schools. Due to bad working conditions[23] and difficulties in access to the settlements, many schoolteachers teach at these schools only because they are obligated to do so. They leave these schools as soon as their probationary period ends. Moreover, because of their low salaries, the teachers have to teach at two or even three schools on the same day. One of the interviewees in my research also mentions this problem in the MST settlement schools:
The teachers don't like to work at rural schools. They teach at rural schools only until the end of their probationary period. After that, they ask to be transferred to schools located in the town. As a consequence, every year we have new teachers teaching at our schools and we have to re-start the whole educational process again and again... So, it is terrible because it is hard to concretize or move forward with this work.
Indeed, as Cleonice observes, in terms of the movement's teacher education strategies, this is a serious problem because the movement "invests" in the education of teachers who end up staying at the school only for a short time.
Another problem for the movement is the still-existing gap between MST pedagogy and its practical implementation in the classrooms. The relationship between the MST and the school has been a conflictive one. There remains a power conflict between the "legitimate" knowledge transmitted by the school and the knowledge constructed through social struggles and practices, which is considered either marginal to worthless or dangerously "subversive and opposing the established order" (Ribeiro, 2001; Harnecker, 2002).
Moreover, there is an antagonism between cooperative work, which as previously mentioned is a central MST educational principle, entailing values of cooperation, solidarity and autonomy, and those the school usually transmits to the children - values of competition, individualism, dependence - which are characteristic of capitalism and which are daily incorporated into people's lives in various venues including their schooling (Ribeiro, 2001).
Thus, to break with people's individualism and start working toward a notion of cooperativism is also a very difficult task even in the MST's settlements. As one of my interviewees says:
When people come to the movement, they are interested first in their own plot of land, in their houses, in their own business... So, it takes time to work toward a cooperative mentality. The agrovila is a very important educational space in order to achieve this goal. As I said before, to conquer the land is easy. The whole educational process is much harder and takes years or even generations to change...
Another challenge is to ameliorate the school-community relationship. The MST strongly believes that school has to be conceived as part of the whole community. As the research developed by Ribeiro (2001) shows, although settled farmers recognize the importance of school for their children, "they criticize the traditional teaching that does not include in its activities either the culture or the values linked to agricultural work" (p. 33). Another critique from the community studied by Ribeiro is the mismatch between the agricultural and school calendars. The later is guided by an urban reality and, as a result, many farmers' children have to miss classes during harvest time. Members of the movement communities also complain about the discrimination their children suffer in the school.
In some states, the organization of local education committees is another challenge to the movement. For instance, in the southern state of Santa Catarina, where Beltrame (2000) did her research, "the movement has not developed any routinized contacts in the schools, such as visits or support for teachers. The contacts [between the movement and the teachers] take place in the training workshops, in the monthly meetings or in the big political events" (p. 65).
In fact, the movement faces challenges specific to each Brazilian state. As one of my interviewees points out that in the Northeast region, for instance, the main challenge is to overcome the inherited cultural background of subordination among poor people:
In this part of the Brazilian Northeastern region, named Zona da Mata, the patriarchal relationship is still very strong. The patriarchal inheritance is very strong... The coronelism[24] is still very strong. The culture of the sugar cane plantation owners, who are called Senhores de Engenho, is still here. According to this culture, ordinary people cannot get involved with political issues. They have only to obey. The town is considered a kind of extension of the sugar cane plantations - Engenho. (...) In order to give you a better idea about what I am talking about, there is a town close to here where everyone called the mayor's wife "mom." Can you believe that? So, it is really hard to break with this culture of subordination.
Finally, the lack of formal education among landless people in the MST's settlements and encampments, the precarious structure of rural schools and perennial funding shortages also remain major obstacles the movement must overcome.
Tendencies and possibilities
Despite the existence of the various problems the MST confronts in its educational project, it has also won important educational battles, both from a quantitative and qualitative point of view. It has consolidated its efforts to define a proposal for education - in a critical and participative way - that aspires to the development of new women and men. As a result of all of its efforts, MST communities tend to have markedly better schools than other comparable rural communities in Brazil (Harnecker, 2002; Wright & Wolford, 2003).
Caldart (2000) discusses certain educational tendencies and possibilities for terms of education in the MST. One of these tendencies is the movement ability to overcome traditional separations among education, schooling and training. She argues,
...training in the MST is no longer only the political and ideological training of the young and adult landless activists; education is no longer only schooling of the camped and settled children; training can also take place in the school; education does not take place only in the school; training and education are historical tasks, in a long term, that have in common not only the preparation of people for immediate action but also an horizon of generations (p. 179).
At the same time that the school has no pedagogical power to guarantee the development of the "keepers of the struggle" and the school is not the sole place for the development of the Sem Terra subject, as Caldart argues, "in its relationship with a social movement such as the MST, the school represents much more than an educational institution centered upon itself" (2000, p. 180).
The movement has been working increasingly with the idea that "the MST school" is also a rural or country school. Thus, "the MST school" can contribute to "the construction and recovery of the identity of rural schools. In the same way, rural schools can help construct the identity of Brazilian public schools" (p. 182).
The author also refers to a new emphasis in the pedagogical discussion that integrates the MST's educational project. "The initial discussions of the MST's educational project were focused on more traditional schooling matters such as, what to teach and how to teach it, highlighting the classroom" (p. 183). The emphasis today, according to Caldart, has been on the cooperative school, the necessity of cultivating the MST's mística (spirit or spirituality), the importance of teachers becoming activists, the importance of planning lessons collectively, and the students' involvement in the political activities of the MST. Caldart writes:
As reflections upon the school style begins to combine with a concern on the part of the movement for cultivating the Sem Terra identity, and the values and the stance of the "keepers of the struggle," the emphasis moves from the school toward the subjects of the pedagogical process (p. 184).
These new subjects, among them the Sem Terra teachers and the Sem Terrinha, each with their own specific identity marks - gender, age cycles, type of actions and activities that they get involved, styles of participating in the movement - participate in the construction of the Sem Terra identity as a whole.
Implications for a socially transformative teacher education
In this part of the paper I briefly discuss some implications of the major aspects of the MST experience on the teacher education field and, more specifically, what I call "teacher education for social transformation." While the term "teacher education for social justice" has been increasingly adopted by the specialized literature in the United States, instead, I prefer to use the term "teacher education for social transformation." Thus, before focusing on the implications themselves, I would like to briefly explain the reasons for this semantic and political choice.
Zeichner (2004), drawing on literature from the U.S. during the last 75 years, states that social justice teacher education has now become a slogan that has been used to describe the orientation of many teacher education programs throughout the world. The author argues that, as was the case with "reflection" in the 1980s, we have come to a point where it is difficult to discern, beyond the "social justice" refrain, what actually goes on in a teacher education program. Although the conceptions and practices that fall under the umbrella of social justice oriented teacher education vary greatly, he states that there has been little discussion of this variation in the literature.
Zeichner suggests that it is necessary to unpack the slogan of social justice in teacher education. He examines a variety of ways that it has been conceptualized and implemented, discusses some contradictions between rhetoric and practice, and provides an assessment of what has been achieved through these efforts.
"Social justice" is a term that has been used by progressive people, social movements and organizations for a long time and has recently been co-opted and rhetorically adopted by conservative individuals and institutions. For example, "neoliberals" have rhetorically expressed a commitment to "social justice." However, for its neoliberal advocates, "social justice" means "the equality of opportunity" for "citizens" (conceived largely as "consumers") to compete in the global marketplace. The fact that "opportunity," freedom and choice in other spheres of most citizen-consumers' lives are increasingly diminished, subject to the demands of corporate needs, is not part of the neoliberal sales pitch.
For me, being committed to "social justice" is a political position, which unlike the neoliberal view, explicitly opposes the status quo and attempts to promote deep changes in terms of power relations at the personal, local, national and international levels. Opposing the status quo means to be simultaneously anti-capitalist (against class exploitation) and anti-imperialist (against old and new forms of economic, symbolic, and cultural colonization), anti-patriarchal (against gender inequality), anti-racist (against race oppression and "White supremacy"), anti-homophobic (against sexual orientation discrimination) and, anti-ableistic (against the social exclusion of people with disabilities).
Even attempting to be as clear and explicit as I can about the meaning of "social justice," I prefer to use the term "social transformation." Although, it may seem that I am constructing a false dichotomy, in my view, the emphasis on "social transformation" differs conceptually and politically from the emphasis of several educational programs, including teacher education programs, concerning the issue of "social justice" and/or "social inclusion;" the latter has been more frequently used in Brazilian educational programs. I believe that an educational program and, more specifically, a teacher education program that is committed to promoting profound social transformation is also necessarily committed to "social justice" and "social inclusion." However, I believe that using the term "social transformation," instead of the "social justice" or "social inclusion," may avoid intentional co-optation by the right in the case of the former and, in the case of the latter, it reminds us that "social inclusion" may be seen as an end in itself, leaving unquestioned the actual sources of inequalities.
The assumption here is that a capitalist society (which is also patriarchal, racist, homophobic, and ableistic) is predicated on exclusion. In this sense, the conquest of little packages of "social inclusion" or "social justice," or things wrapped and presented as such, should not be prematurely and naively celebrated. This is because such "inclusion" or "justice" is co-optive. Besides being bestowed by those who rule (the oppressors) as a way to minimize certain social tensions and, consequently, to maintain their privileges, such "justice" usually takes place in a marginal and temporary way. In other words, subjects who are socially, racially, culturally, and economically excluded and segregated (the oppressed) must be the principal agents of social transformation. They must be able to conquer, through social collective struggles, their own freedom. As Freire (2000) states, freedom "is acquired by conquest, not by gift. It must be pursued constantly and responsibly" (p. 29).
Allow me to focus now upon some implications of the MST experience for what I call "teacher education for social transformation." This experience has shown that the MST teacher education program is likely more effective, if it is combined with the attendees' involvement with the movement as a whole. In turn, the impact of progressive social and cultural movements and organizations on teacher education programs for social transformation can be tremendous.
However, the existence of teacher education programs that are directly ruled by progressive social and cultural movements and organizations is rare[25] Therefore, one needs to ask: how can we transform a teacher education program, which is held by universities and higher education institutions, usually conservative but contradictory institutions, into a teacher education program for social transformation? There is no simple answer to this question and it is not my intention to provide a recipe for "how to develop a teacher education program for social transformation."
On one hand, if a teacher education program has a true commitment to social transformation, those who participate in this program - student teachers, staff, and teacher educators - should be able to find solutions for their specific problems and design a curriculum for that purpose. In addition, I would say that possibilities depend on the level of autonomy that each program has - which in turn depends on continuous struggle - in order to transform them into teacher education programs for social transformation.
On the other hand, I believe that we can learn important lessons from the MST experience concerning the development of teacher education programs for social transformation. In my view, one of the main challenges in developing teacher education programs for social transformation is the challenge of building links to progressive social and cultural movements and organizations which are involved with actual transformations of society[26]. In addition, there are at least four other aspects of these programs to which we should pay close attention.
First of all, it is impossible to think about the idea of developing a teacher education program for social transformation if we do not have a cohort of teacher educators who truly believe that "another world is possible." Thus, it is crucial that the teacher educators involved with this program share similar dreams and a political commitment to social transformation. Instead of a preoccupation with their individual careers, these teacher educators should demonstrate, through their praxis, a commitment to the program and its students and to their development as activist educators.
In addition, because there is no recipe or magic formula for developing a teacher education program for social transformation and designing its curriculum, the teacher educators involved in this program should be able to create spaces for reflecting collectively upon and making collective decisions about the program as well as for sharing and discussing their practices as teacher educators and the challenges of developing new activist educators.
The second aspect is the selection of the participants. Traditional teacher education programs usually draw only upon academic standards in order to define those who will attend these programs. Teacher education programs for social transformation should also take into consideration the experiences that the candidates bring to the programs and their ability to reflect upon these experiences - even if this reflection is still embryonic. Because, as Freire (2000) argues, reflection "cannot be purely intellectual but must involve action," (p. 47) these programs should privilege candidates who have been involved with collective social struggles, and, more specifically, with progressive social and cultural movements and organizations.
Ideally, the new student teachers should arrive to the program with at least a sense that there is something fundamentally wrong with society in terms of justice and equality. Therefore, the program should privilege candidates who come from disenfranchised backgrounds (those who come from working class families independent of their gender, race and sexual orientation; women; people of color; homosexuals; and people with disabilities). The assumption here is this: while it is easier for the disenfranchised to understand the basic principle that "there is something fundamentally unjust about society," privileging the attendance of college by people from disenfranchised backgrounds is already helping to promote change in society. Candidates who come from privileged backgrounds can, of course, also be accepted to teacher education programs for social transformation but they should be able to show that they have already begun Freire's process of "dying in order to be reborn" - again even if this process is still very embryonic. In this case, autobiographies and interviews would be crucial instruments for this selection process[27].
A third important aspect is the active participation of the student teachers in making decisions about the curriculum during their trajectories in their teacher education programs for social transformation. Although the MST "pre-service" teacher-training programs are similar to traditional ones, at least in terms of their formal structure, the attendees are quite active and very willing to participate in the construction of the curriculum. According to their accounts, my interviewees wanted to negotiate every single step in their programs and refused to accept a prepackaged education from their teacher educators or from the university. It would be essential that the program itself not only allow but encourage this type of participation in designing the curriculum. In this sense, the previous aspect (the selection of program attendees) would help to foment the participation of the student teachers in the program. As in the case of the attendees of MST teacher-training programs, the selected candidates will not likely accept a "prepackaged education" from the program.
Finally, it is also crucial to pay attention to the practical experiences (practicum and student teaching) that a teacher education program for social transformation provides to its participants. It is important to select schools[28] and other educative placements which have been involved in collective social struggles as well as schoolteachers and other educators who identify themselves as activist educators.
As mentioned above, it is important to emphasize that all these aspects will depend on the level of autonomy of the program: to hire teacher educators, through taking into account political and ideological criteria rather than pseudo-neutral academic criteria by itself; to define the criteria and the instruments for the selection of its students; to allow and encourage student teachers' active participation in making decisions about the curriculum of the program; and finally, to decide about the most progressive placements for the students to have their practical experiences.

Notes

[1] This paper was presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting in Montréal, Québec (Canada), on April 15th, 2005.
[2] Professor at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil. E-mail address: juliodiniz@fae.ufmg.br
[3] The MST was officially established on January 20, 1984.
[4] The MST is basically made up of poor people (peasants) from Brazil's rural areas. In Brazil, poverty remains more acute in rural areas than in urban areas. However, since only 21% of Brazilians live in rural areas, the urban share in the composition of poverty is higher. Moreover, poverty varies markedly across regions, with the Northeast and the North reporting higher poverty rates than the Southeast or the South.
[5] This expression is used as the title of Bales' book about new slavery in the global economy. In order to discuss new forms of slave labor in global capitalism, the author does comparative research across five different countries - Thailand, Mauritania, Brazil, Pakistan, and India. In his chapter about Brazil, although Bales does not mention the MST, he cites the Comissão Pastoral da Terra (the Pastoral Land Commission), the CPT, as an antislavery movement in the country.
[6] Paulo Freire, a well-known Brazilian educator and one of the most important theoretical references for the landless movement, also criticizes capitalism and "its intrinsic perversity, its antisolidarity nature" (1997, p. 88). Freire states that capitalism is absolutely insensitive to the ethical dimension of human existence. As for alternatives, he says "I have no reason to admit that a truly democratic socialism is an impossible proposition" (1997, p. 49).
[7] This paper draws on the author's Ph.D. dissertation which discusses the identity construction of activist educators through an analysis of life stories (testimonios) of women educators who have participated in the Landless Workers Movement. These testimonios, collected through semi-structured interviews, sought to uncover the main elements that account for the development of their identities as activist educators. In addition to the interviews, documents of various kinds - books, booklets, magazines articles, journal articles, dissertations - about education in general and, more specifically, about its teacher education programs that have been published by people working with or in the MST since the late 1980s - have been collected and analyzed.
[8] Paulo Freire defines praxis as "the unity between action and reflection." He argues that "one cannot change consciousness outside of praxis. But it must be emphasized that the praxis by which consciousness is changed is not only action but action and reflection. Thus there is a unity between practice and theory in which both are constructed, shaped, and reshaped in constant movement from practice to theory, then back to new practice" (1985, p. 124).
[9] This nickname identifies the children as Sem Terra subjects and an effective part of the MST dynamic. Sem Terrinha has at least three identity components: their condition as children, as students, and their participation in the movement which, in turn, changes the meanings of their childhood and school experience. As Caldart (2000) states, "For the children, to participate in the MST has represented the possibility to live the childhood in a different way" (p. 195).
[10] Most of the teachers who teach at schools in the MST's settlements and encampments are women of different ages and multiple ethnic origins. At the beginning of the MST's history, the movement reproduced the tradition that education is something for women and female teachers Education was not deemed important enough in order to become an issue that the leaders and the landless men should bee interested in (Caldart, 2000, pp. 186-187).
[11] Freire (1998) agrees that "Teacher preparation should never be reduced to a form of training. Rather, teacher preparation should go beyond the technical preparation of teachers and be rooted in the ethical formation of selves and of history" (p. 23).
[12] The most widespread teacher education approaches in Brazil are those related to the model of technical rationality (Schon 1983). According to this model, also known as the positivist epistemology of practice, there is a hierarchical division between research and practice which is also reflected in the normative curriculum of the professional school. The normal course of events is to first teach the relevant basic and applied science, and second, to apply the findings to real-world problems of practice.
[13] Freire (1996) argues that "all teaching implies research and all research implies teaching. There is no real teaching in which one does not find research, as questioning, inquiry, curiosity, and creativity; just as there is no research in which one does not learn why one knows" (p. 132).
[14] Most of the attendees of these programs are people from the MST's settlements and encampments who have taught in one of the educational frentes (fronts) - adult education (literacy), childhood education, elementary education - and/or professores leigos (uncertified teachers) who have also taught in settlement schools. Thus, since most of the attendees of these programs are people who have already been teaching and working in other educational activities in their communities, the term "pre-service" is not quite appropriate in this case. I have decided to keep using this term only for facilitating the readers' comprehension.
[15] In Brazil, the school vacations are in the months of January and February (Summer vacation) and July (Winter break).
[16] The word mística has two main meanings in the landless movement: "spirit or spirituality" and "dramatization." First, the MST mística (spirit or spirituality) is what Caldart (2000) calls "the spice of the struggle" or "a passion that stimulates the activists." According to Caldart, "It is not simple to define mística because its definition is not expressed through words but through gestures, symbols, and emotions. The limit to understanding it is rooted in the word itself: mística (spirit or spirituality) means 'mystery,' that is, if it is completely revealed it loses the essence of its meaning" (p. 134). Mística in the movement stems from the Christian traditions of liberation theology (Wright & Wolford, 2003). Second, mística (dramatization) has also become a cultural act where the landless people use different language forms - theater, songs and dances - in order to portray their struggles and their hopes as well as to facilitate discussions of difficult issues such as the FTAA (Free Trade Area of the Americas). Thus, in order to explain what might be difficult concepts, to present information and to inspire people, MST activists employ what is called mística (dramatization).
[17] Agrarian reform educators are all of those people who struggle for land and social justice in the Landless Workers Movement (MST), including schoolteachers (Caldart, 1997).
[18] As an adult education program the Brazilian educational legislation only allows that people who are eighteen years old or older and hold an elementary school diploma are eligible for attending the MST's teacher-training program at high school level (Magistério).
[19] The MST established its first "pre-service" teacher-training program at the college level in 1998 through a partnership between the movement and a private university - the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS) - in the state of Rio Grande do Sul.
[20] The Federal University of Espírito Santo (UFES) and the Federal University of Mato Grosso (UFMT) are two public universities that have participated in this partnership with the MST. In the state of Rio Grande do Sul, a private institution, the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS) has also developed a program along with the movement. The federal government has provided funding in order to cover the expenses of these programs.
[21] Most of these activities come out of the experience of some progressive groups associated with the Catholic Church and are also used by other popular groups and progressive social movements in Brazil (Beltrame, 2000).
[22] Escola Itinerante (Itinerant School) - "a school that goes wherever the camp goes in its struggle for the land" - is a successful experience that has been developed in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, through which the educators try to bring the school close to the movement's logic.
[23] In general, teachers' working conditions at Brazilian rural schools are not good. There are many difficulties for the teachers who teach in these schools: precarious school buildings usually far from the students' houses, multiage classrooms, children who have neither notebooks nor pencils, and teachers without formal training who earn a small salary and do not have many opportunities for attending in-service teacher-training programs (Beltrame, 2000).
[24] The term "coronelismo," meaning "despotism or tyranny," stems from the agricultural elites in Brazil's Northeast, which were represented by the iconic colonel, a typical figurehead of the agricultural sector.
[25] It is important to clarify that the MST "pre-service" teacher-training programs at the college level are not "directly ruled" by the movement. The MST has to negotiate with the universities in order to bring these programs as close as possible to the aims of the movement. The landless movement has more autonomy to develop its "pre-service" teacher-training program at the high-school level though.
[26] There have been some examples of teacher education programs in the United States such as, the "New College" at Teachers College Columbia University in New York City (see Liston & Zeichner, 1991) and the Putney Graduate School of Teacher Education (see Rodgers, 1998), which have been linked with broader social movements for social transformation.
[27] One of the first tasks of teacher education programs for social transformation should be to promote a critical analysis and a collective reflection upon the attendees' experiences, using their autobiographies, toward building a feeling of indignation against social and economic injustice.
[28] Ideally, teacher education programs for social transformation would favor working with "democratic schools," as those described in the book edited by Apple and Bean (1995), or, through their partnerships with schools, help these schools to help themselves to become more democratic and committed to social transformation.

Bibliography

Apple, M.W., & Bean, J.A. (Eds.). (1995). Democratic schools. Alexandria: ASCD.
Bales, K. (1999). Disposable people: New slavery in the global economy. Berkley: University of California Press.
Beltrame, S.A.B. (2000). MST, professores e professoras: Sujeitos em movimento. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universidade de São Paulo.
Caldart, R.S. (1997). Educação em movimento: Formação de educadoras e educadores no MST. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Caldart, R.S. (2000). Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Caldart, R.S. (2003a). Movimento Sem Terra: Lições de Pedagogia. Currículo Sem Fronteiras, 3 (1), 50-59.
Caldart, R.S. (2003b). A escola do campo em movimento. Currículo Sem Fronteiras, 3 (1), 60-81.
Diniz-Pereira, J.E. (2005). "How the dreamers are born." The identity construction of activist educators: Life histories of women educators from the Landless Workers Movement in Brazil. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Fernandes, B.M. (2000). A formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Freire, P. (1985). The politics of education: Culture, power and liberation. Westport/London: Bergin & Garvey.
Freire, P. (1996). Letters to Cristina: Reflections on my life and work. New York/London: Routledge.
Freire, P. (1997). Pedagogy of the heart. New York: Continuum.
Freire, P. (1998). Pedagogy of freedom: Ethics, democracy, and civic courage Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. (20th-anniversary ed.). New York: Continuum.
Harnecker, M. (2002). Landless people - Building a social movement Havana: Research Center Latin-American People's Memory (MEPLA).
Liston, D.P., & Zeichner, K.M. (1991). Teacher education and the social conditions of schooling New York: Routledge.
McCowan, T. (2003, March). Participation and education in the Landless People's Movement in Brazil. Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, 1 (1), Article 5. Retrieved April 2, 2003, from http://www.jceps.com
Ribeiro, M. (2001). Trabalho cooperativo no MST e ensino fundamental rural: desafios à educação básica. Revista Brasileira de Educação, 17 (1), 20-39.
Rodgers, C.R. (1998). Morris R. Mitchell and the Putney Graduate School of Teacher Education, 1950-1964 Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.
Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the struggle for a new Brazil. Oakland: Food First Books.
Zeichner, K.M. (2004, July). Educating teachers for social justice in an era of accountability. Keynote address presented at the Annual Meeting of the Australian Teacher Education Association, Bathurst, Australia.

Correspondence
juliodiniz@fae.ufmg.br

JCEPS:Vol. 1 No. 1 (March 2003)
[print now]
Participation and Education in the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil
Tristan McCowan
Laboratory of Public Policy, University of Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil
Citation information
URL:
<http://www.jceps.com/?pageID=article&articleID=6>
author:
Tristan McCowan
Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies
Volume 1, Number 1 (March 2003)
ISSN 1740-2743
Abstract
This paper analyses the significance of participation in the educational work of the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil (MST), a social movement for agrarian reform that has established a network of schools in its communities. In contrast to the tokenist approaches of many government and supranational agencies, the MST’s view of participation is rooted in principles of radical democracy and social justice. The movement aims not only to enable the landless to participate fully as citizens in society, but also to be active in challenging and reformulating societal structures. Education in the MST is related to participation in two ways: firstly the education system itself is participatory, allowing the involvement of all stakeholders in planning, implementation and evaluation; secondly, education is a means by which landless people can develop the skills and knowledge to participate more effectively in the wider society. While there are certain areas, such as gender, where the MST is still developing an effective strategy, the movement displays high levels of internal participatory equality, and has developed a pedagogy designed to enable transformatory participation in the political, economic and cultural spheres.  [Note [1] ]

The Landless People’s Movement of Brazil (MST[2]) fits uncomfortably into any simplistic categorization of contemporary society. It is a political organization engaged in the struggle for land reform, while at the same time developing radical new forms of grassroots democracy, environmental care and co-operative production. It is a constant foe of the government[3], implementing an almost unending series of occupations of land and public buildings, and yet runs its settlements and schools in partnership with state bodies. It has a strong hierarchical structure and at the same time a deep involvement of all members in short and long term policy making. While having an atavistic and romantic attachment to the land and traditional agriculture, the movement is committed to a modern progressive education for all in the communities.
Perhaps it is this unusual combination that explains its remarkable success. Starting in the early 1980s from a unification of various landless people’s mobilizations in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, the movement has grown into a vast national enterprise. Through its non-violent land occupations[4], intended to pressurize the government into fulfilling its constitutional obligations as regards the redistribution of idle farmland, the MST has won 15 million acres for land reform (an area almost the size of the Republic of Ireland), and created 1,500 agricultural communities, settling over 250,000 families (Brandford and Rocha 2002; Landless Workers Movement 2002; MST 2003)[5].
Its achievements have been no less remarkable in the area of education. Recognizing the needs of the many children in the new settlements, a series of makeshift ‘itinerant’ schools were established, led by the few qualified teachers from among the landless and by committed educators from the nearby towns. As the settlements became permanent communities, these were gradually converted into officially recognised public schools. In light of the specific needs of the rural world and those of a radical social movement a new pedagogy and philosophy of school organization emerged, based on the movement’s principles of social justice, radical democracy and humanist and socialist values (MST 1999a)[6]. The movement now runs over 1,200 schools, educating approximately 150,000 children, as well as 25,000 young people and adults in literacy courses (Brandford and Rocha 2002).
An area in which the work of the MST is of particular significance to social movements worldwide, and to public policy in general, is that of participation. Almost all the landless joining the movement come from a state of acute exclusion: the task of the movement is to enable them to participate in the different spheres of society - political, economic and cultural - and to exercise their full rights as citizens. However, in addition to this, the movement aims to enable a still deeper form of participation, one in which the individual and the community have a real influence on the formation of those societal structures in which they are participating.
Frameworks of participation
Participation is now so widely accepted as an essential feature of governance and policy formation that even unconstitutional dictators can hardly omit it from their manifestos. The understandings and practical applications of the concept are, however, startlingly diverse.
Participation has been defined as the principle that:
those who will be substantially affected by decisions made by social and political institutions must be involved in the making of those decisions. (EEC, quoted in Bullock et al. 1988: 630)
All democracy requires some participation, yet levels of political involvement in contemporary democratic societies are most often limited to voting in national and local elections (with a limited selection of viable candidates). According to Barber (1984) our representative democracies have a combination of authoritarian, juridical and pluralist approaches, none of which provide a genuine opportunity for citizens (with the exception of politicians) to be active politically. Only participatory democracy (in its strong and not unitary form) is seen to provide an adequate model.
While models of participatory democracy have been developed since the time of Rousseau, it is only since the 1960s that the concept has gained real prominence, with growing demands for participation in decision-making in the work place, universities and local administration, as well as national government.
The growing movement for participatory democracy today is largely a response to globalization, neo-liberal economic policy - and the consequently increasing concentration of wealth and power - and the disproportionate influence of multi-national corporations and unelected supranational bodies such as the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Trade Organization (WTO). Neo-liberalism is characterized by a conception of the individual as consumer, participating ‘freely’ in the market, rather than as a citizen achieving freedom through active participation in the political sphere.
Even elected democratic governments, while using the rhetoric of participation, are seen to provide few real opportunities for involvement in decision-making. Gentili (1998) describes the falsification of consensus[7] whereby neo-liberal policies are implemented on the basis of processes that are apparently democratic, but which deny the majority a genuine opportunity to consider alternatives and make choices. It is not only neo-liberalism, however, that is seen to be lacking: the centrally-planned socialist governments, and even the social democracies of the twentieth century rarely showed evidence of true participation by all members of society.
Participation, and lack of it, is today seen as a key indicator of quality of life. The oppressed suffer not just from poverty, but from exclusion, which can involve economic, political and cultural arenas. Social policy, therefore, must aim for the inclusion of all in society. As well as individuals within a society, whole countries and regions can be seen to suffer from exclusion. This has made the participation/exclusion rhetoric central to international development and the work of the large NGOs and transnational aid agencies. Increasing resistance has emerged to outside modes of development being imposed on communities without their active involvement. In addition to this, participation of local communities is also seen as leading to more effective implementation of development projects. All areas of development from the 1960s onwards began to consider participation as a vital ingredient.
One of the high gurus of participation in international development is Robert Chambers (1997), who has written extensively on the subject in the context of rural communities. He was closely involved with Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) in the 1990s, which aimed to harness rural people’s skills in order to plan, implement and evaluate their own development projects. These approaches are, without doubt, an improvement on externally planned development, but it is important to identify the exact nature of the participation involved. Are people able to define the structures of their participation for themselves, or are they participating in arenas that have been defined by others?
With PRA, although the villagers are strongly involved in the projects, there is little attention paid to their general ability to participate as citizens in society, or to challenge existing societal structures. Participation for Chambers is mainly technical, focusing on the geographic and economic without great emphasis on the political or the historical. Archer and Cottingham (1996) describe his view of culture as static and unproblematized and contrast it to the more dynamic approach of Paulo Freire.
One of the most scathing of attacks on the empty rhetoric of participation is made by Rahnema (1992). Opposing the forms of participation advocated by Chambers, he analyses the contradictions, dangers and hypocrisy associated with the term. Participation has universally positive connotations, but in reality people can participate in organizations that are harmful, or have a harmful effect on beneficent organizations. He shows how what was initially a radical proposal has been co-opted by governments and other powerful agencies. Far from being a threat to the state, participation is increasingly seen as an economically efficient and politically attractive form of governance.
Since the 1980s a major force in developing new forms of participatory politics (and a strong influence on the MST) is the Brazilian Worker’s Party (PT[8]). Rebecca Abers’s (2000) study on the PT in the Southern Brazilian city of Porto Alegre explores the decision-making process known as the participatory budget, which allowed widespread involvement in expenditure as well as local voting on neighbourhood improvements. The study seeks to show why the PT succeeded in mobilizing and empowering the poor where many other institutions have failed, defining as key elements of empowering participatory policy that it must be open to those hitherto excluded, involve discussion rather than just implementation, and involve effective citizen control.
Abers makes the distinction here between instrumental and empowering participation. The former is where participation is used as a means of implementing policy more efficiently, with no real desire for any power to be devolved to the participants. With the latter, people have genuine influence on decision-making and develop their own personal capacities in the process.
This instrumental participation is evident in many neo-liberal policies in the field of education. Researchers, such as Apple (1999) and Gentili (1998), have identified contradictions between elements of centralization and decentralization. While neo-liberalism is normally characterized by the latter, control over the content of education has actually been centralized in the form of national curricula and standardized assessments. Decentralization is often financial, and used by the state as an opportunity for abdication of responsibility. The individual is seen to be participating not as a citizen involved in policy formation, but as a consumer in the education market.
Hawes and Stephens (1990) in their research on primary schools in Africa found that in practice participation was often limited to financial or labour contributions with little local influence over the content or nature of schooling, raising suspicions that governments were more interested in reducing expenditure than decentralizing decision-making.
Apple and Beane agree:
Moreover, much of the talk about ‘site-based’ management, while appearing to reverse such centralization, actually amounts to little more than localising struggles over limited resources and accountability for policy and programme decisions made in different places. (Apple & Beane 1999: 21)
However, there are signs of hope. Gandin and Apple’s (2002) study on the ‘Citizen Schools’ in Porto Alegre shows radical new forms of participation in education, with community members having influence over school organization, curriculum and choice of staff, with no extra financial burden. Other inspiring examples are presented in Apple and Beane (1999). The MST, in a different context, is aiming to achieve a similar degree of radical democratic participation.
Research
Research into the educational work of the MST consisted firstly of interviews conducted with teachers and educational co-ordinators[9] in April and May 2002. These interviews (ten in total, with numbers varying from one to four interviewees) were carried out in six different communities - four assentamentos, one acampamento [10] and the building site of the new MST national school - in the states of Espírito Santo, Bahia and São Paulo.
The second main source of information for the research was official MST educational material. These pamphlets are written by the movement’s National Education Sector, are published centrally and distributed to all the communities. They are intended to act as teaching guides, to aid educational workers in establishing new schools, and to inform community members about the movement’s general principles of education. Six of these pamphlets were used for analysis.
These sources provide different perspectives on the educational work of the movement: while the latter give a theoretical outline of its organization and principles, the former consist of personal experiences and views of the work in practice. The research in general did not attempt to determine the ‘results’ or ‘effects’ of education in the movement, but to identify principles and understandings.
The MST is unusual among social movements in having a large and well-developed system of schools, providing an education that is directly linked to the aims of the movement. While the MST considers all movement activity as educational, this study will focus primarily on participation in the school system.
Understandings of participation in the MST
If it is to be part of the movement, a school must have the involvement of all, in an organised, participative and democratic way. (MST 2001b: 73) [11]
MST understandings of participation in education go beyond the involvement of parents in the schooling of their child, or pupil choice in curriculum matters (though these elements are also present). Participation in the MST is based on the movement’s ideal of radical democracy.
[F]or us democracy is not just a detail, a word. It is one of the fundamental pillars of our pedagogical framework and our plan of social transformation. (MST 1995: 8)
To consider democracy a pedagogical principle means, according to our educational framework, that it is not enough for students to study or discuss it; they need also, and most importantly, to experience an arena of democratic participation, educating themselves for social democracy. (MST 1999a: 20)
In other words in order to prepare people for democracy and participation through education, the educational system itself must be run on the democratic principles it is trying to promote.
The MST believes that socialism is only possible with grassroots participative bodies, rather than a centralized decision-making structure. For this end, each camp or settlement has elaborate systems of democratic representation, feeding information up to local, state and national levels who are intended to act as co-ordinating and not directing entities.
The relationship between the participative groups is that of ascending and descending democracy. That is to say the issues are discussed in the grassroots nuclei and then approved in the general co-ordinating body. They are then implemented with a distribution of responsibilities. (MST 2001b: 34)
The co-ordination has a part, but decisions in the MST are really taken by the people. (João, Acampamento Boa Vista [12])
Participation is seen here to be closely linked to the idea of the collective, a fundamental principle of the movement. Firstly, the educational work itself must be carried out collectively:
The big and even the little activities of day-to-day life in the school must be planned collectively…. Where the planning is concentrated in a few heads (from top to bottom) there is no democracy…. (MST 1995: 8)
The document is clear to point out that collective planning does not mean the involvement of all people in all decisions: there must be a combination of participation and division of tasks (MST 1995: 8).
Education must then prepare people for living collectively. Effective participation is usually seen as occurring via a group or collective, rather than as isolated individuals. This has implications in terms of the ability of members of the MST to participate in society outside of the movement, an important issue that will be discussed further below. Nevertheless, despite the emphasis on collectivism and rejection of the cultural legacy of individualism, the MST stops short of discarding the individual altogether:
However, this does not mean sidelining the person: on the contrary all the pedagogical principles that we are dealing with here have the person as their central focus; not the isolated individual, but the subject of relationships, with other people, with collectives and with a particular social and historical context. (MST 1999a: 23)
The individual that the MST theory of participation is built around, therefore, is not the homo economicus of neo-liberal development programmes, but one who exists in a particular historical and political context and as part of a collective identity.
Education must aim to promote amongst students the idea of participation itself. The values transmitted must be concerned with:
the collective production and appropriation of the material and spiritual goods of humanity, justice in the distribution of these goods and equality of participation in all these processes. (MST 1999a: 9)
The concept of citizenship was raised a number of times by the teachers and co-ordinators without prompting by the interviewer. This suggests that despite being part of a social movement with strong boundaries, they consider participation as something that must extend to society in general. While criticising the present government and politico-economic system they do not reject the idea of the state and the need to be a citizen within it. The comments on citizenship must be seen in the light of the fact that many people in Brazil, while nominally citizens, are not able to claim their rights and fulfil their duties, and therefore have been denied true membership of society.
Our schools work directly with the idea of the citizen…. We need the idea of a citizen so people don’t feel inferior to others. They have to learn their rights and respect those of others. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
With education a person becomes a citizen, becomes human…. People leave school and they say, ‘Look I’m a person too, I’m a citizen’. After that they have no difficulty with learning. The people in the settlements come from a complex poor background. Without school they can’t really be part of society on an equal footing. (Joana, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
It is interesting to observe here that as well as citizenship being enabled by education, it is seen to facilitate further learning.
Firstly, children need to have their constitutional rights to schooling met.
The movement…also needs a legalized school, so that the children of this struggle can exercise their rights as citizens…. (MST 2001b: 73)
This educational citizenship is by no means guaranteed in Brazil. Official figures show net primary enrolment to be 96%, although nearly half of these will repeat at least one year. Only 25% go on to secondary school, and 11% to university. Illiteracy nation-wide runs at 12.8%, with the figure much higher in rural areas, and there are many more who are only semi-literate (IBGE 2001). The first aim of the movement, therefore, is to obtain basic access to education for the landless. The practice of demanding government funding for their schools rather than seeking independent sources is an indication of the movement’s desire to claim for its members their rights as citizens of the state.
Yet these basic rights are not enough: participation must be taken to deeper levels. In Escola Itinerante: uma Prática Pedagógica em Acampamentos (2001) one of the stated aims of education is:
To awaken the organizational consciousness and spirit of leadership of the children, adolescents, educators and community, with political clarity in order to exercise citizenship. (MST 2001b: 72)
This suggests that true citizenship requires an element of conscientization, an idea that will be developed further below.
Citizenship is therefore seen to be an essential pre-requisite for effective participation. There are two stages: claiming one’s fundamental rights and then extending one’s own capabilities for exercising those rights.
There also appear to be two aims of participation in the MST. The first is organizational, contributing to the effective running of the community and the movement; the second is the conscientizing effect that the process can have on the participant. The ‘organizational consciousness’ described above is a bridge between the two, allowing the conscientizing process to feed into more effective organization. Ideally the organizing and conscientizing elements - both essential for a social movement - can co-exist, although they may be in conflict.
This, therefore, is the theoretical framework of participation in the MST; the implementation in practice will now be discussed. It is important to note that the movement freely admits that its ideals have not all been realised, and that their achievement is a long, slow process.
Participation within the MST education system
As with all aspects of MST organization, the education system has an elaborate series of structures designed to ensure the participation of all. This occurs at the level of the individual community [13] as well as in terms of the decisions made by the movement at the regional or national level.
The following entities are found in the communities:
The general assembly is composed of all the members of the community, meets once or twice a year and discusses and approves the overall plan for the school as well as other significant or controversial matters.
The education team[14] is composed of a representative number of teachers, pupils and community members and meets monthly. Here the details and implementation of the overall plan are discussed. Like all MST nuclei, the community representatives are chosen by direct vote by the community as a whole and are accountable to the general assembly. The pupils are generally chosen by their classmates, and all the teachers are normally represented.
The teachers’ collective involves all the teachers, and customarily meets once a week to organise the day-to-day running of the school, including lesson-planning, special activities and the ‘generative themes’ (cross-curricular topics of study).
The pupils’ collective organizes those tasks for which the pupils have responsibility, such as the school pharmacy, meals or assemblies. It also provides suggestions on the general plan of the school as it affects the students. The age of the representatives and the selection procedure depend on the individual community. (MST 1995: 8-9; MST 1999b: 19)
These bodies are intended to give all those with a stake in education the chance to contribute and have their voice heard. There are efforts to make the national co-ordination equally participative. Teachers from the different regions and states meet periodically to exchange ideas and to train; co-ordinators also meet to discuss progress and problems. The National Education Sector is comprised of representatives from each of the states, and elected by the co-ordinators, who pass on the experiences of the individual schools in their area. In this way decision-making at the national level is intended to emerge form the experiences on the ground. The same is true for the movement’s educational publications. However, while the pedagogical principles do without doubt emerge from practical experience, their formulation and expression in practice is the work of a core group, in particular the educationist Roseli Caldart[15].
The interviews provided a number of perspectives on participation within the communities, concerning parents and other community members, pupils and teachers.
i) Community
In educational work worldwide there is little argument that the involvement of parents and the local community in the schooling of children is beneficial to the general efficiency of the school and to pupil’s learning (Hawes and Stephens 1990). The MST shares this view, but extends it in significant ways.
Community members are seen to be able to participate in the following ways:
	1.	Being part of school council or educational team
	2.	Working on projects for school improvements
	3.	Helping to maintain the memory of the struggle
	4.	Inviting teachers to take part in community events
	5.	Giving technical help to the school
	6.	Contributing their skills to the learning in school
	7.	Using the school space for meetings and courses
	8.	Adopting the school as part of the community
(MST 1999b: 18)
There is therefore a two way process: involving the community in the activities of the school and giving the school a more active role in the community.
Parents were seen to be closely involved:
Whenever a decision needs to be made about the school, it’s always parents, pupils and teachers together: in all the schools there’s this concept. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
To organise you have to evaluate. The parents come in every month and say what was good, what helped and what didn’t help. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
They are also seen to be prepared to mobilize in support of the school:
Here the government can’t just decide to remove a teacher. I for example don’t have pedagogia, just magistério[16], but the governor won’t get rid of me because the families would react and he’d have to put me back. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
However, some teachers had reservations about the extent to which parents actually involved themselves.
There are some families that send their children to the school in town. It’s a democracy, everybody chooses: some choose not to send their children to the MST school. Some don’t like the alternância[17]…. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
This is particularly true for families that have come into the settlements from outside the movement:
Because people who come in from outside don’t have any identification with the schools or the movement or anything. We did some research to find out about the families: some didn’t even respond, they had no interest in the school whatsoever. (Paulo, Assentamento Marajó)
This shows how community participation is dependent not only on concern for children’s schooling but also on an identification with the body running the school.
In contrast to the community consultations of many development programmes, members of the MST communities are seen to have a real influence on the running of the school, particularly since in most cases it was they who built it, set it in motion and fought for state funding. The extent of involvement in day-to-day management and curriculum decisions, however, will always depend on the capacities and inclination of the individual community members.
ii) Students
We understand by self-organization the right of pupils to organise themselves into collectives, with their own space and time, to analyse and discuss their own issues, to elaborate proposals and make their own decisions with a view to participating as subjects in the democratic management of the educative process, and of the school as a whole. (MST 1999b: 14)
In addition to community members, students are also intended to participate in the development of their own education and the running of the school in general. ‘Student self-organization’ is one of the thirteen pedagogical principles of the MST, intended to help young people develop skills in leadership, co-operation, problem solving and critical thinking (MST 1999a: 21).
When people are given everything, dependence is reinforced and the person never becomes a subject. It is part of the process that people wanting to become literate organise themselves to achieve this objective. (MST 1994: 15)
This statement refers to adults: clearly the nature of participation for younger children is going to be different. The interviews, however, revealed strong perceptions of pupil involvement at all levels:
The teachers decide the themes, but it is the children who elaborate, fill out the content. (Daniel, Assentamento Marajó)
Researcher: Do pupils also have involvement?
Renata: Yes, they do in the making of the rules: there are rules, duties and rights that the pupils have in the school….
Alexandre: We normally put them in groups and they debate problems and proposals. This can change things in the school.
(Assentamento Marajó)
This is contrasted with the attitude of pupils in government schools:
I arrived in the middle of the year as a supply teacher. Some of the pupils had already got the grades they needed so they weren’t interested in the work any more. Learning’s not important to them, just passing.(Paulo, Assentamento Marajó)
Evaluation is an important area for participation:
Together with them we evaluate the work, through dialogue. In this evaluation everyone gives their opinion, teachers, pupils, other staff, some people from the community. Everyone can get involved in order to improve things. (Wagner, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
There are also efforts to increase participation within the classroom itself, by encouraging students to express themselves and organizing seating arrangements to encourage contributions from all (MST 1999b: 39). The classes observed during this research generally had the chairs arranged in semi-circles rather than the traditional rows.
Good examples of student participation in the MST are the teacher training courses, described in detail by Caldart (1997), where course management and organization are the responsibility of the students and not the trainers.
Efforts to encourage student participation in the MST are clearly oriented towards the conscientization of the individuals and community. These types of involvement are seen to enhance the school learning of the pupil, as well as provide opportunities for learning not normally present in school. The participation of children in decision-making will always be limited to a certain extent by their age: however, a genuine commitment to listening to and acting on their views can be seen.
iii) Teachers
Thirdly, it is necessary to assess the organization of the teachers themselves. The Principles of Education in the MST (1999) goes as far as to say that:
Without a teachers’ collective there is no real educative process. (MST 1999a: 21)
These relations between teachers are encouraged to ensure that all have a stake in the management and success of the school. Assentamento Chico Mendes did not have a headteacher at all: the staff organised themselves in an entirely horizontal manner, supported by MST co-ordinators. During the time I spent at the school they were discussing plans to create the position of organizer to co-ordinate school activities, rotating between the different members of staff.
Teachers frequently emphasised the involvement they themselves had in the community, particularly in contrast to those in government schools.
There’s a huge difference. Teachers outside [in non-MST schools] are just worried about their salary: they teach their lesson and then off they go. They don’t worry about what the child is doing at home, what he or she ate. The link with the family isn’t there. At least we are trying to do it. We have a great concern for these things. (Nara, Assentamento Chico Mendes)
Here we’re always involved in the community. We know everyone, we know all the parents. When we have parents’ evenings we send out invitations and everyone comes. (Mercia, Assentamento 1 de Maio)
It must be noted that this level of involvement is present in those teachers that are part of, or sympathetic to, the movement; there are some teachers in MST schools that have simply been allocated by the state and do not have a strong connection to the community.
Teacher participation seems to have a dual function in the MST: firstly the ‘organizational’ aspect, creating a co-operative and efficient body of workers, and secondly to increase their identification with and commitment to the community and the movement. Although the fundamental orientations are formulated by the National Education Sector and enforced by the co-ordinators, teachers do have influence on pedagogical and organizational decision-making in schools.
iv) Gender
Finally, there is the question of the extent to which other factors affect an individual’s participation in the education system, most importantly that of gender.
This kind of exclusion exists in Brazil. Recently in the movement it is getting better, but it still exists. Now you see a group of boys playing football, but there is a girl with them, or girls playing in a ring but with a boy. We have our Gender Sector and women’s groups to debate all of this. (Maria, Assentamento Caraiva)
Why should men’s work be valued more? There’s a great difference in the job market…. So we work with these issues in the camp, women and men being valued equally for going out to the fields. So this way we break what the media has been giving us since the time of our ancestors. (Olga, Acampamento Boa Vista)
It is clear that there are efforts to change the arenas of participation of both genders, and to change attitudes. However, despite the positive impressions, the official rhetoric and the prominent role of some women in the movement, there is undoubtedly survival of traditional machista attitudes and exclusion of women. Further research would be necessary to determine the exact extent of women’s participation in the movement.
Some mention was also made of racial discrimination:
Despite the ending of slavery years ago, Black people are still the objects of prejudice. So this is brought out in the classroom and the camp in general. (João, Acampamento Boa Vista)
There is also some concern for other types of exclusion:
We need, as educators, to keep an eye on each child, since in the games, an overweight girl couldn’t participate in the race and gave up. That is to say, she was excluded. We really have to work with this. (MST 2001c: 21)
However, there is not as yet any significant provision for students with disabilities or special educational needs. These elements of exclusion that occur within a system of full enrolment have yet to receive full attention in the MST, which, for obvious reasons, is still primarily concerned with the extension of schooling to all.
Participation in society
These, therefore, are the ways in which the MST perceives and practices participation within the movement and its schools. However, the influence is not mono-directional: the movement creates the schools in its image, but the schools in turn create the movement of the future. The effect of education on the ability to participate in the movement and the wider society will now be considered.
It can be seen that there are two processes necessary to enable participation: firstly the transformation of external factors - such as discriminatory legislation - and secondly that of internal factors - such as literacy, self-confidence and other personal qualities needed to be able to take advantage of opportunities.
In terms of the former, the MST organises a range of mobilisations to pressurize the government into fulfilling its constitutional duties. The most prominent of these are the land occupations, but there are many concerning education.
This school is the product of the struggle. It’s not here because the government wanted it here; it’s here because the families marched in Salvador and struggled and finally got it. Everything you see in the settlement is the product of the struggle.(Claudia, Assentamento Caraiva)
Researcher: Do all the funds for an assentamento school come from the local council?
Claudia: Yes, apart from the actual structure…. It was marches in São Paulo and Salvador that won grants from the state to put the buildings up.
Researcher: Does the community make a contribution?
Maria: Their contribution is mobilizing, marching.
(Assentamento Caraiva)
Literacy courses for adults are also won only after long battles with the authorities.
Yet once the government has been forced to fulfil its constitutional duties or make legislative changes, reducing the structural influences affecting participation, there are still significant internal factors. Effective participation cannot simply be granted to an individual or community: it depends on a gradual process of human development.
Our experiences have demonstrated that the structures of participation of students, teachers, parents and administrative staff do not in themselves guarantee the process. (MST 1999b: 20)
A vote in a national election, for example, cannot be taken advantage of if the voter does not have the skills and knowledge to access and analyse information about candidates. Education is a key factor here. This is not a question of educational qualifications - which, after all, are only removing external barriers to participation - but of personal capabilities. Literacy, knowledge, analytical skills, self-confidence and communication are all essential if an individual is to be able to use the participative opportunities available. [18]
The aim [of literacy] is to give workers marginalized from academic life access to the knowledge accumulated by humanity.… Grasping this will make them individual and collective subjects of the historical process of which they are a part. (MST 1994: 9)
Without this access it is not possible to participate in society, since participation depends on having particular knowledge about the functioning of one’s own social context and the wider world. MST efforts to implement a politicized and conscientizing pedagogy based on the ideas of Paulo Freire are directly linked to this ability to participate.
There is a final important question. The MST prepares its members for participation, but is this participation confined to the movement? Participation within the education system is fundamental, but is not meaningful unless it is contributing to an increasing ability to participate in society. It is necessary to assess the ways in which the MST empowers its members to participate individually and collectively in the political, economic and cultural spheres.
While not participating in electoral politics as a movement, the settlements do put forward candidates (landless people themselves) for positions as local councillors. MST sympathisers from outside the movement stand for election at all levels under the aegis of the PT.
However, political activity in the MST generally involves pressurising the government and forming strategic links with parties such as the PT, rather than standing for office directly. For Sem Terras, political participation is a part of everyday life from the time they enter the movement. The MST aims to enable people to participate more effectively in elections - by having a more critical perspective on candidates - and by taking direct political action through mobilizations and occupations. The participatory democratic structures of the schools - described above - while valid in themselves, are also a preparation for political participation in the wider society.
A large part of the work of the MST is to enable landless people to participate effectively in the economy: exclusion form this sphere was, after all, the main impetus for the founding of the movement. The main means of achieving this was originally, and still is, the acquisition of land for families; yet the failure of many government-led land reform programmes convinced the MST that this was not enough. Newly settled families needed financial support to get them started and training to increase their skills.
One way of supporting this is the alternância system, where pupils spend alternate weeks at school and at home. In this way children can put into practice the technical skills they have learnt, and are also able to help their families. They attend double the amount of classes in the week they are at school. The movement has the one proviso that contributing to family income must never take precedence over participation in school activities (MST 1999b: 37). While some parents are opposed to the alternância format, it is widely implemented in settlements.
The formal school system is intended to provide for agricultural life, but there are also specialist courses for adults, particularly those who have missed the opportunity of conventional schooling. Most important of these is the TAC[19] (co-operative administration) course in Rio Grande do Sul.
The MST does not intend to prepare young people for work in the cities (in fact it is looked on as something of a failure if a young person leaves the settlement). There is no desire for a neo-liberal conception of participation consisting of entry into the job and consumer market, which for the landless will almost invariably mean exploitative and precarious work. However, the completion of primary education - and the chance of further education - which the MST can guarantee to nearly all of its children, is clearly allowing them the opportunity of participation in the labour market beyond that of the rural environment.
Cultural participation is also a concern of the MST. This is strongly linked to the idea of dignity and the valuing of the rural world from which the majority of the members come.
Perhaps the central part of the movement’s cultural work is the promotion of the Sem Terra (landless) identity. This, however, while intending to combat exclusion, can cause problems in terms of integration. While the cultivation of this identity helps achieve movement aims, it also creates a distance between the members of the movement and the rest of society. Ironically it might be seen that while valuing citizenship, the movement is encouraging participation in society as Sem Terras and not as ordinary citizens. The difference of identity can be difficult for young people: some teachers referred to their students’ shyness at admitting to living in a settlement.
The MST is trying to transform the whole of society and not create an isolated enclosed world of its own. The concern with citizenship seen above also seems to show a commitment to integration into society. Yet, some people might question the degree to which the MST is really preparing people for participation outside the movement. The residents of camps and settlements are not restricted in their activities, nevertheless the vast majority of arenas in which members participate are mediated by the movement, and the education is intended to prepare for participation in society via the movement.
However, the movement as whole is becoming progressively less insular and increasingly linked to the larger movement for social justice. Caldart (2000) describes the stages of historical development, from a local to a national movement for land reform, and gradually towards incorporation in a wider project for popular national development and social justice. Events such as the World Social Forum, and the anti-capitalist/globalization movement in general, have introduced the MST to an even larger world platform.
*
Nancy Fraser has as one of her axes of social justice the Principle of Participatory Parity.
According to this principle, justice requires social arrangements that permit all (adult) members of society to interact with one another as peers. (Fraser 2001: 6)
This is dependent on two factors: distribution and recognition. The former, the ‘objective’ factor, requires that participants must have the material resources to ensure their independence and access to goods. The second, the ‘intersubjective’ factor, requires that cultural values express respect for all members of society and do not discriminateagainst some because of their ‘difference’.
The MST appears to have gone a considerable way in ensuring equal interaction of individuals as peers according to this conception. The movement is attempting to bring social justice to society as a whole in terms of Fraser’s factors of distribution - by providing stable livelihoods for landless people - and recognition - by building a positive identity of the Sem Terra.
As has been seen above, there are some limitations of MST participation, particularly in terms of the extent to which its members are able to participate in the wider society. In addition, further research will be necessary to show the extent to which participation is hindered in subtle ways by factors such as gender and race. However, on the whole the movement shows considerable depth in its understandings and implementation of democratic participation.
Participation in the MST is based on direct and not representative democracy, and is empowering rather than instrumental, in that it leads to an increase in control over decision-making rather than more efficient implementation of externally-formulated policies.
The act of participation itself is seen to lead to further conscientization, leading to a cyclical process of development. This process is described in the context of children in the acampamentos:
With time these children gain a greater consciousness of the struggle: this happens…where they have the right to speak, to sing. They have a strong desire to participate, they have pleasure in contributing to the assemblies, meetings, celebrations, building toys and the school tent…. It is this space for participation that makes the children critical, so they don’t accept things as they are…. (MST 2001b: 26/27)
One of the central aims of the MST is to enable its members to become subjects and not objects of historical events (the fundamental base of conscientization as described by Freire). The end of the process - becoming a subject of history - is nothing more than participation itself, in its truest sense. This is not just appearing in consultation groups, or even deciding how an international agency’s money will be spent in the village, but the ability to have a deep and lasting influence on society and history.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dave Hill for his comments on a draft of this paper, Elaine Unterhalter for orienting the original research, and the numerous teachers and co-ordinators of the MST who assisted me in the field.

Notes

[1] This paper is based on research conducted by the author in 2002 for the dissertation of the MA in Education and International Development, Institute of Education, University of London.
[2] Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra
[3] At the time the research was carried out, Fernando Henrique Cardoso was in power; the relationship of the MST to the new government, led by Luis Inácio Lula da Silva, should be considerably more amicable, although the movement has stated that land occupations will continue.
[4] At the first National Conference in 1984 the significant decision was made not to co-operate with the newly elected government which had succeeded the military dictatorship. Since then the following strategies have been used: land occupations, road marches, hunger strikes, occupation of public buildings, urban camps and public demonstrations (MST 2001a: 199-203). The use of violence is not sanctioned by the movement.
[5] Of all nations, Brazil is second only to Paraguay in terms of unequal distribution of land. 1% of owners control around 50% of the agricultural land (Brandford & Kucinski 1995). An estimated 60% of the productive agricultural land in the largest farms in Brazil is lying idle. At the same time there are about 25 million agricultural workers in precarious and poorly-paid temporary jobs.
[6] A fuller description of the general aims of the movement is presented in Como Fazer a Escola que Queremos: o Planejamento (1995):
	i.	To build a society without exploitation where labour has priority over capital.
	ii.	To ensure that the land is at the service of all in society.
	iii.	To guarantee work for all, with a just distribution of land, income and wealth.
	iv.	To constantly strive for social justice and equality of rights, whether economic, political, social or cultural.
	v.	To encourage humanist and socialist values in human relations.
	vi.	To combat all forms of social discrimination and promote equal participation for women.
(MST 1995)
[7] A similar concept, described as the ‘engineering of consent’, is analysed in Graebner (1987) with reference to US national governance in the 20th century.
[8] Partido dos Trabalhadores
[9] These co-ordinators provide pedagogical support for teachers and carry out general administration at the local and state level.
[10] Assentamentos are permanent settlements; acampamentos are temporary camps of landless people who have made an occupation and are waiting to be settled.
[11] All the quotations found in this study, both from the documents and the interviews, are the author's translations from the original Portuguese.
[12] Pseudonyms have been used for individuals and communities.
[13] The structures are usually more clearly defined and energetically implemented in the acampamentos than in the assentamentos, as the former have a greater degree of communal living and a greater necessity for co-operation.
[14] This is known as a school council ‘in those places where collective management of the school with the participation of pupils and the community is legally possible’ (MST 1995: 10). In this case it is an officially recognised body: examples of these are found in the PT-run schools in Porto Alegre described by Gandin and Apple (2002).
[15] Caldart is an activist of the movement and the most important writer on MST education. An academic from the South of Brazil, she has published two books on the subject as well as a number of articles, and is a major contributor to the official MST publications.
[16] These are teacher-training qualifications: magistério is a secondary school course, and pedagogia a university course. The government is proposing to ensure all teachers have the full university teacher training by 2005: this will be difficult to achieve in rural areas.
[17] A system in which pupils spend alternate weeks at school and at home.
[18] Gandin and Apple (2002) found that the most important variable affecting the extent to which individuals contributed in public meetings was not gender or class, but number of years of involvement. This indicates that the act of participating itself provides the required training for effective participation. The same argument is also given by Taylor (1998) in her research on political participation in Chile and Argentina.
[19] Técnico em Administração de Cooperativas

Bibliography

Abers, R. (2000) Inventing Local Democracy: Grassroots Politics in Brazil. London: Lynne Rienner.
Apple, M. W. (1999) ‘Rhetorical Reforms: Markets, Standards and Inequality’, Current Issues in Comparative Education 1(2)on line at http://www.tc.columbia.edu/CICE/articles/ma112.htm
Apple, M. W. and Beane, J. A. (eds.) (1999) Democratic Schools: Lessons from the Chalk Face. Buckingham. Open University Press.
Archer, D. And Cottingham, S. (1996) Reflect Mother Manual: a New Approach to Adult Literacy. London: ActionAid.
Barber, R. (1984) Strong Democracy : Participatory Politics for a New Age. University of California Press.
Brandford, S. and Kucinski, B. (1995) Brazil: Carnival of the Oppressed. Lula and the Brazilian Workers’ Party. London: Latin American Bureau.
Brandford, S. and Rocha, J. (2002) Cutting the Wire. London: Latin American Bureau.
Bullock, A., Stallybrass, O. and Trombley, S. (eds.) (1988) Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought. London: Fontana Press.
Caldart, R. S. (1997) Educação em Movimento: Formação de Educadoras e Educadores no MST. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
Caldart, R. S. (2000) Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra: a Escola é Mais que Escola. Petropolis: Editora Vozes.
Chambers, R. (1997) Whose Reality Counts? London: Intermediate Technology.
Fraser, N. (2001) ‘Social Justice in the Knowledge Society’. Paper presented at the conference of the Heinrich-Boell Foundation, Humboldt University, Berlin.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Sheed and Ward.
Gandin, L. and Apple, M. W. (2002) ‘Challenging Neo-Liberalism, Building Democracy: Creating the
Citizen School in Porto Alegre, Brazil’, Journal of Education Policy 17(2), pp. 259-279.
Gentili, P (1998) A Falsificação do Consenso Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
Graebner, W. (1987) The Engineering of Consent. Democracy and Authority in Twentieth-Century America. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Hawes, H. and Stephens, D. (1990) Questions of Quality: Primary Education and Development. Harlow: Longman.
IBGE (2001) ‘Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística’ on line at http://www.ibge.net (updated 2003).
Kaufman, M. and Alfonso, H. D. (1997) Community Power and Grassroots Democracy: the Transformation of Social Life. London: Zed Books.
Landless Workers Movement (2002) on line at http://www.mstbrazil.org (updated October 2002).
MST (1994) Alfabetização de Jovens e Adultos: Como Organizar (Caderno de Educação no. 3). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1995) Como Fazer a Escola que Queremos: o Planejamento (Caderno de Educação no. 6). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1999a) Princípios da Educação no MST (Caderno de Educação no. 8). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1999b) Como Fazemos a Escola de Educação Fundamental (Caderno de Educação no. 9). Veranópolis: ITERRA.
MST (2001a) Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra; Acompanhamento às Escolas (Boletim da Educação no. 8). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (2001b) Escola Itinerante: uma Pratica Pedagógica em Acampamentos (Coleção Fazendo Escola). São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (2003) ‘Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra’ on line at http://www.mst.org.br/ (updated February 2003).
Rahnema, M. (1992) ‘Participation’ in Sachs, W. (ed.) The Development Dictionary: a Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed Books.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1993) The Social Contract London: Dent.
Taylor, L (1998) Citizenship, Participation and Democracy. Changing dynamics in Chile and Argentina Basingstoke: Macmillan

Correspondence

Tristan McCowan Laboratório de Políticas Públicas Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524 Pavilhão João Lyra Filho - 2º andar - Sala 2001 - Bloco B Maracanã Rio de Janeiro - RJ Brasil
tristan@lpp-uerj.net


 Copyright © 2006 by the University of Texas Press. All rights reserved.
Latin American Research Review 41.1 (2006) 198-210

 







Access provided by University Of Chicago Libraries







[Access article in PDF]
Movement Histories
A Preliminary Historiography of the Brazil's Landless Laborers' Movement (MST)
Cliff Welch
Grand Valley State University
[Erratum]
Brava Gente: A Trajetória Do Mst E A Luta Pela Terra No Brasil. By João Pedro Stédile and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. (São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1999. Pp. 167.)
A Formação Do Mst No Brasil. By Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. (Petrópolis: Editora Vozes, 2000. Pp. 319.)
A História Da Luta Pela Terra E O Mst. By Mitsue Morissawa. (São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2001. Pp. 256.)
Sin Tierra: Construyendo Movimiento Social. By Marta Harnecker. (Madrid: Siglo XXI, 2002. Pp. 124. Also available in English as Landless People—Building a Social Movement at http://www.rebelion.org/harnecker/landless300802.pdf [accessed November 1, 2004])
Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. By Sue Branford and Jan Rocha. (London: Latin American Bureau, 2002. Pp. 305.)
To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. By Angus Wright and Wendy Wolford. (Oakland, CA: Food First Books, 2003. Pp. 365. $15.95 paper.)
La Scelta Della Terra: Studio Di Un Insediamento Rurale Del Movimento Sem Terra In Brasile. By Luca Fanelli. (Torino: Silvio Zamorani Editore, 2002. Pp. 169.)
Like many politicians, Brazilian president Luis Inácio Lula da Silva identified himself with different citizens by dressing like them. He seemed to delight in donning an Indian headdress or squeezing into a hard hat. Such images fit the populist message of this remarkable man, a man who rose from poverty to become leader of the labor movement that challenged the military dictatorship and helped restore democracy to Brazil, the world's eighth largest economy. But in July 2003 when [End Page 198] Lula placed the bright red cap of the Landless Laborers' Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra [MST]) on his head, all hell broke loose. Subsequent editions of nearly every news vehicle in the country featured alarmed criticism of this fateful act. Words like "rebellious," "revolutionary" and "irresponsible" characterized the reaction as dozens of reporters were sent to the field to document the dangers posed to the country by the MST. The controversy reached the United States, where concerns on Wall Street and in Washington threatened to undermine Brazil's fragile credit rating and international standing. By 2004, the Lula administration had carefully finessed most of the criticisms, supporting the right of the MST to mobilize and pressure the government while simultaneously investing in a conflicting agribusiness development scheme.
What is the MST? In contradistinction to the image projected by the Brazilian press, the collection of recently published books reviewed here describe it as an institutionalized social movement of unprecedented significance for Brazil and the world that does not pose an immediate revolutionary threat to society. On one book's jacket, Eric Hobsbawm, a frequent traveler to Brazil, validates the MST as "the most ambitious social movement in contemporary Latin America" (Branford and Rocha 2002). On another's cover, journalist Studs Terkel describes the MST as "a million or so ordinary people fighting for the right to live ordinary lives" (Wright and Wolford 2003). Founded in 1984, the MST fights for radical agrarian reform—that is, state intervention to reverse historic land concentration trends, distribute good agricultural land to needy workers, and reallocate resources to support small and cooperative farming as fundamental to the development of a stronger, more democratic and just society.
Today, the MST boasts a membership of more than 500,000 families—at least two million people—and has a presence in every state and more than 700 municipalities. The MST runs some 500 farm co-ops in the areas of production, marketing, credit, and technical assistance. It trains most of its own technicians, militants, and leaders. It has succeeded in redirecting government funds to support its administration of 1,800 elementary schools with more than 160,000 students, teaching basic literacy to 30,000 teenagers and adults, and operating a college. In the meantime, some sixty members are studying in Cuba to be doctors (MST 2004). In twenty years, the MST has become a vast and varied organization with many plans for growth and diversification.
A handful of foreign and many domestic analysts have been following the MST's development since its earliest days. With significant methodological variations, each of the books reviewed contributes to the institutional history of the MST. The first is based on a 1998 conversation between the MST's founding national coordinator João Pedro [End Page 199] Stédile and MST consultant Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, a geographer. The second is Fernandes's doctoral dissertation. Morissawa's A história da luta pela terra e o MST is a pictorial history published by the MST. Harnecker, a Chilean-Marxist and scholar living in Cuba, completed the third account. The fourth book, written by English journalists Branford and Rocha, promises to be a favorite for the university market. The historian Wright and geographer Wolford teamed up to produce an innovative book that emphasizes themes important to U.S. college curricula, such as gender and the environment. Luca Fanelli's small, carefully researched book is a fine example of the many monographs the movement has inspired. All the authors but Fanelli historicize the MST by beginning their books with a chapter or two intended to document the roots and origins of the movement. The next chapters recount the MST's formation and consolidation on a national scale. Remaining chapters analyze key features of the MST, such as the practice of land occupation, educational programs, and strategies of production once land is acquired. Concluding chapters evaluate the movement and comment on its future prospects.
Origins
Each of the books describe Brazil's southern-most state of Rio Grande do Sul as the cradle of the MST. A common narrative links the rise of the MST to dramatic changes in the primary sector initiated by the agricultural policies of the military regime that took power in 1964. With a commitment to national development, the military sought to "modernize" agricultural production. Rio Grande do Sul was an important setting for the introduction of mechanized soybean production. Credit structures and clientelism led to land concentration, forcing thousands of small and medium farmers off the land to make way for soybeans and other export crops. The displaced farmers had three alternatives: life in cities, looking for work in a saturated labor market; immigration to Paraguay; or migration to subsidized colonization projects designed to develop frontier areas in the central-west and northern Amazon regions of Brazil. The enterprising gaúchos (people born in Rio Grande do Sul) tried all of the strategies, yet the cards were stacked against them.
What many really wanted was land to farm in Rio Grande do Sul. A number of families, encouraged by the military, invaded a Kaingang Indian reservation (Nonoaí) but were forced out when conflicts resulted. Trying to decide what to do next, some families followed the advice of Stédile, an economist who was then working with a rural labor union. They organized and occupied an unproductive farm called the Fazenda Macali. This 1979 occupation resulted in the expropriation of the land, encouraging a number of copycat land [End Page 200] occupations and public manifestations by landless workers and sympathizers between 1980 and 1982.
While the books agree on the structural conditions and regional context for the birth of the MST, they differ in the attention given to its roots in historic rural social movements. Fernandes approaches the roots question with the most radical argument of the five histories. He says the MST must be seen as a "historic struggle" in the context of five centuries of a "busca continua da conquista da terra de trabalho, a fim de obter condições dignas de vida e uma sociedade justa" for and by rural workers (25). Thus, A formação do MST no Brasil begins with a chapter on the rural struggles that he believes contributed to the eventual formation of a self-conscious peasantry in Brazil. The sense of continuity expressed by Fernandes comes up again in Morissawa and Harnecker. Morissawa uses images and text to argue that the MST is something of the highest stage of peasant struggle against a long and continuous history of resistance by slaves, Indians, and Messiah-led peasants. Harnecker claims the MST "hereda una prolongada lucha por la tierra" (10) going back to the beginnings of Portuguese colonization.
Such continuity is not corroborated by the other histories. Each mentions most of the movements Fernandes describes but they are discussed explicitly as "invented traditions," regional cultural inheritances intentionally revived as such by MST militants to help organize landless workers. For instance, Branford and Rocha describe how MST organizing proceeded slowly in the northeastern state of Alagoas, "working within the cultural traditions of the people" (43). It proved wise there, the authors report, to stimulate militancy among the landless by organizing a pilgrimage to the ruins of Palmares, the seventeenth-century setting of Brazil's most famous runaway slave community, which was led for a time by a warrior named Zumbi. "The families paid homage to Zumbi, promising to carry on his struggle," the authors write (43). Wright and Wolford refer to the history of resistance in a six-page section of chapter 2. For them, too, the historic struggles have been used by MST militants to "contextualize the contemporary struggle for land" (124). Militants recall Zumbi's struggle, they argue, partly to project an anti-racist image to help build unity among Brazil's racially diverse population. Author Wolford has elsewhere rejected what she calls the "Official Genesis Story" and demonstrated how MST origins differed from place to place depending on local conditions and personalities (Wolford 2003).
Stédile refers to the list of conflicts assessed by Fernandes in the context of a discussion about historical and theoretical references for the MST. Peasant education is more successful, he says, when examples rather than theories are used. The details of historic struggles have influenced the ideological construction of the movement and its militants, Stédile says. He denies most direct or explicit connections, however. [End Page 201] Even in the case of the Landless Agriculturists' Movement (Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra [MASTER]), which operated in Rio Grande do Sul from 1958 to 1963, Stédile emphasizes change rather than continuity. "O MST . . . não tem muito a ver com a memória histórica do MASTER," he says (17). Rather than seeing these other movements as roots of the MST, he sees them as examples of related struggles to be examined for lessons. Stédile argues that the specific roots of the MST are to be found in the Catholic and Lutheran Churches which together formed the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra [CPT]) in 1975 (19). On this point, all authors agree. Dedicated as it was to applying liberation theology to the problems of the rural poor, the CPT united priests, ministers and laymen working all over the country on the question of land access and control. Many of these people were strong advocates and steady supporters of the MST from its inception.
The authors tend to differ in the emphasis they place on another oft-cited MST origin, Brazil's rural labor union movement (Movimento Sindical dos Trabalhadores Rurais [MSTR]). On this score, Stédile is unambiguous: "O início da minha militância política foi nos sindicatos. Na época da ditadura militar [1964–1985], era o sindicato que fazia a luta pela reforma agrária" (29). But Fernandes shows how some unions offered explicit help while the resistance of others forced the landless to form separate organizations that would later unite in forming the MST. The sense of frustration some militants had with the unions receives emphasis in Wright and Wolford's interpretation (62–66). The books by Harnecker and Branford and Rocha document, however, that rural labor union leaders constituted more than 80 percent of the delegates who participated in founding the MST.
Founding
In gripping narrative style, Branford and Rocha open their book with a story of the initial meeting of peasant movement representatives that marked the beginnings of the MST. In 1982, Stédile and ten other gaúchos crammed into a VW bus to meet with about a hundred landless militants from neighboring states at a remote Lutheran church. Many had suffered displacement just like the Rio Grande do Sul farmers, but others were victims of the military's ambitious energy development projects that damned rivers and flooded huge agricultural zones, forcing many to flee. Branford and Rocha use the 1982 meeting to depict the semi-clandestine nature of the organizing effort, adding a certain tension to the story. In his effort to be comprehensive, Fernandes discusses the meeting itself in greater detail and also touches on a series of additional organizational meetings held outside Rio Grande do Sul over the course of the next two years. In less rigorous form, Stédile describes what he derived from each [End Page 202] of the intermediary regional meetings that culminated with the MST's founding at Cascavel, Paraná (PR), in 1984. Harnecker and Wright and Wolford neglect earlier meetings and start with the Cascavel encounter.
In her preface, Harnecker represents herself as interested in reconstructing the past, but on the question of founding the MST, her book provides the sketchiest of accounts. Wright and Wolford, on the other hand, insert historical background where it seems convenient to what is, in many respects, a compelling travelogue of the movement in three parts of the country, the south, northeast, and the Amazon region. We learn from the other authors, however, how various meetings contributed to building new regional relationships and provided insights that ultimately proved extremely important to the MST's success and longevity. A September 1982 meeting in Goiânia, Goiás, for example, formally brought together the landless and CPT apparatus. Among the CPT members was Brazilian sociologist José de Souza Martins, whom Stédile credits with inspiring the formation of the MST as a mass political organization with a national presence. (In the 1970s and 1980s, Martins worked as a consultant to the CPT while carrying on his duties as one of the University of São Paulo's most prolific scholars.) The Goiânia group formed a national organizing committee to assess the land struggle around the country, contact local leaders, and plan the Cascavel meeting.
The Cascavel encounter united representatives from agrarian reform movements in thirteen states, produced a number of mandates that continue to guide the movement and, as all of the books agree, debated and settled on the MST name. Responding to Fernandes's interrogation, Stédile describes the ideological discussions that went into the decision to adopt the name (46–49). It included both a process of elimination and profound search for an identity that could unite similar movements from such dissimilar places. The books also describe with relative consistency a number of other crucial decisions reached at the meeting, including a national presence, autonomy from other organizations, independence from political parties, open membership with special emphasis on women and families, and a participatory, democratic organizational structure, a revolutionary anti-capitalist ideological perspective. Branford and Rocha succeed in capturing the moment, concluding that "with hindsight today, it is evident that, if the participants had taken a different decision on any one of the key questions—and, at the time, it was by no means clear which was the better route to follow on all issues–-the dynamic of the movement would have been stalled" (24).
Consolidation
In 1984, the military regime was in its final year and dozens of popular meetings around the country contributed to organizing the [End Page 203] MST's first national congress. At the beginning of the next year, some 1,500 representatives from twenty-three states attended the congress in Curitiba, PR. In addition to the farmers, landless laborers and MST militants, congressional delegates also came from civil organizations such as the Brazilian bar association (Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil), the black movement, and the upstart national labor movement (Central Única dos Trabalhadores). With the presence of Workers' Party president Lula, the congress signaled the broad reach of the MST and the weight that would be given to building alliances. Representatives of peasant movements from other Latin American countries also participated, foreshadowing the global projection the MST was to pursue in the 1990s. Fernandes gives detailed attention to the event, which Stédile, Branford and Rocha, and Harnecker also highlight. Only Wright and Wolford, preferring a grassroots approach, mention it in passing.
While the history of the MST cannot be reduced to meetings, these first encounters deserve special attention because they established the basic structure and the guiding principles of the movement. Stédile and Fernandes's Brava gente proves insightful about the internal logic of the meetings, at least from his perspective. Fernandes's book is useful because it includes lists of participants and large segments of the concluding platforms. Branford and Rocha provide a vivid summary of the meetings as events and turning points. In the case of the congress, they turn to Stédile and Fernandes's book for several ideas, principal among them the organizers' decision to develop a direct-action approach to agrarian reform and not become dependent upon the new civilian government, despite pressure from some allies to simply support the government and follow its lead. This was a crucial decision, Harnecker emphasizes, as the new president soon revealed his opposition to the MST, working behind scenes to scuttle his government's own national agrarian reform plan. Anticipating trouble, delegates at the first congress coined the phrase, "sem reforma agrária não há democracia," Fernandes reports (90).
Fernandes uses the national congresses as periodization, organizing his chapters in five-year blocks. This is one more way in which his account remains uniquely loyal to the movement. While the book includes analysis and applies the discipline of geography in innovative ways, it comes close to being a MST publication. To write about the consolidation of the MST in the years following each congress, Fernandes traveled to almost every MST state headquarters to interview movement militants and structures his chapters around brief reports from each state or region. The congresses established a "word of order"—in 1990, it was "ocupar, resistir e produzir;" in 1995, it was "reforma agraria, uma luta de todos"—and Fernandes recounts what militants told him about the implementation of these mandates. [End Page 204]
The word of order emanating from the MST's first congress that had the most resonance for the consolidation of the movement was: "ocupação é a única solução." The phrase confirmed participants' lack of confidence in government support for land reform. It also underscored the direct-action approach that united the disparate movements in Curitiba. Through the occupation of unproductive land, the sem-terra family could become a com-terra family (with land, landed). While this is fairly obvious, the authors relate how occupying land became significant for the movement in other ways as well. In ideal circumstances, the process of building the movement began with consciousness-raising meetings with the poor about the injustice of Brazilian society and the role of land concentration in solidifying inequality. Organizers introduced land occupation as a collective act that could begin to resolve these problems, as an action that could build solidarity and contribute to a sem-terra identity among participants. Ironically, while the MST goal was land distribution, leaders wanted members to preserve a sem-terra identity until land reform had been exhausted as a solution to the profound misery of Brazilians.
Harnecker devotes her second chapter to land occupation, summarizing a seven-step procedure leading to a successful seizure. For her, the occupation is like a strike, a way of applying pressure to negotiate land distribution. In Brava gente, Stédile and Fernandes explain how significant occupations were to the birth and existence of the MST. Wright and Wolford also capture the centrality of the occupation to the MST, providing a comparative legal context for them. This seems to be designed to convince skeptical undergraduates, nonplussed by moral economy arguments, that MST occupations are a legitimate form of protest. "The Occupation" serves as the title of Branford and Rocha's fourth chapter. They introduce a number of personal histories about the transformative power of occupations by writing, "For the MST the act of occupying land . . . is the cornerstone of their movement" (65). The process of land occupation infuses Fernandes's book. Land occupation is key to the "socio-territorialization" concept he uses to analyze the MST's national consolidation.
No matter their approach, the books agree that the movement really took off in 1996, more than ten years after its founding. On April 17, in the Eldorado dos Carajás region of the Amazonian state of Pará, military police murdered nineteen militants. Stédile called the massacre one of the "maneiras . . . involuntárias" that attracted public support for the movement and forced the government to make agrarian reform a higher priority (143). Bar graphs that Fernandes reproduced from CPT sources show how the number of occupations and families involved more than doubled in this context, jumping from 146 occupations in 1995 to 398 in 1996, involving an increase of 30,476 to 62,880 participating [End Page 205] families (260). Wright and Wolford place the event in context and comment on the irony of how a thousand previous murders of militants "had never succeeded in seriously arousing the national conscience as El Dorado dos Carajás did" (209). Like the authors of To Inherit the Earth, Branford and Rocha devote a chapter to struggles in the Amazon and use the massacre as a starting point, offering the most detailed account of the event itself, its aftermath and implications. Polls conducted after the massacre showed soaring public support for agrarian reform and classified the MST as the fifth most esteemed institution in the country (Coletti 2002).
Organization
MST popularity peaked in 1997 with a cross-country protest march that brought thousands to Brasília on the anniversary of the Carajás massacre. But this seeming success inspired a negative reaction on the part of the landed classes and the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso. As the books recount, landlords organized armed groups to defend their property rights while the government sought to isolate the MST with an agile divide-and-conquer strategy. On the one hand, the government aggressively promoted land distribution and settlement projects with an array of groups while isolating the MST and criminalizing the tactic of occupation. In the eyes of the mainstream, the Cardoso government redistributed more land and settled more families than any in history (Martins 2003). To MST militants and sympathizers, however, the late 1990s brought little more than hard times. The authors are divided in their explanations of how and why the MST survived this period but united in emphasizing the movement's unique organizational agility.
Rare is the "movement" that lasts twenty years or so. By definition, movements come and go but not, it would seem, the MST. Stédile comments that organizational durability may be the MST's "grande contribuição histórica" (81). The secret for Stédile has been the MST's ability to balance mass-based movement practice with a flexible, non-partisan organizational structure, an institutionalized-movement, at one and the same time political and apolitical. He warns fellow travelers: "Vocês não têm futuro se não aplicarem princípios organizativos" (82). These principles involve the devolution of power to numerous thematic collectives that exist at local, regional, state, and national "instâncias," as Fernandes relates in detail (245–56). With fluctuating titles, the MST is awash in "secretariats," "setores" and "frentes" of production, communication, education, gender, health, mass organization and so forth. Periodic national and state meetings help coordinate the activities of these bodies. History has shown that the structure functions and that [End Page 206] its impersonal and decentralized characteristics have helped the movement weather tremendous challenges, from the assassination of important militants to persecution by the government.
Harnecker devotes the bulk of her book to organizational questions. Reading her admiring analysis of the MST's dedication to collective leadership, participatory democracy, and financial autonomy, one has to wonder if she was thinking about Castro's Cuba, Allende's Chile, or both as she wrote Sin tierra. Fernandes maps the spread of settlements linked to the MST as a means of demonstrating the formation and national consolidation of the movement as opposed to some seventy additional groups organized in the 1990s. Branford and Rocha include a chapter on the settlements and another on the movement's sustainable and organic production projects.
Wright and Wolford, in contrast, use the settlements they visit as a point of departure for their analysis of the MST. Using a case study approach, Luca Fanelli's La scelta della terra examines a single settlement in Paraná to evaluate the movement's fascinating and ultimately problematic experiment with collectivization, al modelo cubano. From both books, one gets a wonderful sense of place, a sense of the land and its value for the peasants. On the Palmares II settlement in the Amazon, Wright and Wolford met with several settlers and recount their experiences and make observations. "Everyone we spoke to, even those who were otherwise unhappy, agreed that producing enough food for the family was easy," they report (244). The MST placed a big emphasis on organization in the settlement, and it helped improve the quality of life and productivity, but some rejected movement pressures to live in villas—where movement theorist argued that class consciousness could be kept alive—rather than spread out on their individual plots, where many actually preferred to live. Fanelli documents the tension between collectivist ideas and individual desires in his detailed account of the Santa Maria settlement in Paranacity. The collectivist approach to production, which emphasized equal participation and profit-taking, did not sit well with the majority of peasants and was thus abandoned as a national model. Peasant resistance within the movement taught national coordinators that "as formas [of production] não podem ser rígidas, devem ser variáveis," Stédile writes. "Aprendemos que as formas de aplicação da cooperação agrícola deveriam ser flexíveis" (100–101).
Prospects
Perhaps the single most important question the various authors assess is whether the MST has succeeded in making agrarian reform in Brazil the political, even revolutionary, issue many think it must be in order for radical change to come about. The authors ask if the MST has [End Page 207] the potential for moving the question from one of social dimensions (land reform as one way of ameliorating but not ending Brazil's poverty problem) to one of political dimensions (land reform as socialism). The important distinction between agrarian reform as a social or political problem has been examined systematically by USP sociologist Martins (1989; 1997; 1999; 2000). He has praised the MST not as a revolutionary organization but as "o mais consequente movimento de modernização e ressocialização das populações do campo que já houve na história do Brasil" (Martins 1997, 59–60). In other words, it serves as an outside mediator to help resolve the social problem of a portion of Brazil's huge marginalized population by assisting their integration into capitalist society. The first historians of the MST disagree on these questions: some side with Martins, others endorse the organization's revolutionary self-image.
As a founder and chief strategist, Stédile offers something of an official assessment. Responding to a series of questions from Fernandes, Stédile differs with Martins on several crucial points without using the word revolutionary or denouncing capitalism. The MST supports reform in the social sense, Stédile says, but sees it as only the most basic of steps in a larger transformative process. The strategic objective of the MST is to end rural structural problems that contribute to poverty and social inequality. To do this, the first step is to distribute land titles, the second is to ease access to capital and the third is to facilitate educational access. From a pragmatic perspective, this cannot be accomplished by openly opposing capitalism and supporting socialism but only by organizing "milhões de pobres do meio rural para que lutem pela solução de seus problemas" (163). The step of land distribution aligns with government social policy but the MST must struggle to expand agrarian reform so that settlers contribute to "um acúmulo de forças para a continuidade da luta pela reforma agrária mais ampla" (163). Thus, Stédile and Fernandes's book supports the argument that the MST has a broad political mission to radically alter property relations and thus class relations in Brazil.
Writing as advocates, Fernandes and Morissawa offer a rallying cry for readers who probably are neither peasants nor outside mediators. The summary theme for both is "a luta continua." These authors see the MST not as the last but as the most recent organizational form the peasantry has taken to resist extinction, an end foretold for centuries by thinkers left, right and center. Fernandes underscores Martins's argument that characterizes the movement as an important means of economic integration for the rural poor. But he adds to this hypothesis the argument that the movement creates and recreates the peasantry in Brazil and that peasant insertion into the capitalist economy is counter-hegemonic because the peasant mode of production is essentially non-capitalist. Peasant [End Page 208] family labor and an emphasis on reproducing the family and the family farm withdraws the peasantry from expected market laws. Harnecker shares this assessment, describing the MST as a skillfully crafted social justice movement. It uses Marxism to evaluate capitalism, confront it, and construct sustainable systems for fighting poverty. The basis of the new society is not a grand socialist dream, writes Harnecker, but a family where patriarchy is banished by the empowerment of women. For these authors, then, the MST is not a reformist or revolutionary organization but a peasant resistance movement.
An emphasis on the politics of personal transformation summarizes fairly well the final assessment provided by Wright and Wolford. The MST is a pragmatic organization, they argue, and experience has taught militants to distrust theories of rapid and dramatic change and to endorse an eclectic array of ideas that extend from Mao to Gandhi to Chomsky, with Brazilian references such as the educator Paulo Freire prominently in the mix. But the authors come full circle: none of these limitations on the revolutionary prospects of the organization prevents it from having a dramatic impact on people's lives. "But just doing these things, things that we might take for granted [like having money to buy an appliance or a new pair of shoes], should be seen as revolutionary given where most of these people were coming from," they conclude (313).
Branford and Rocha end their book by placing the MST in comparative historical perspective with English Diggers, American Populists, Mexican revolutionaries, and Italian peasant leagues. The authors reject Martins's pessimism about the movement's ability to pursue revolutionary change. "The movement's hope," they note, "is to create an alliance of 'excluded Brazilians,' rural and urban, who favor radical change" (281). In their conclusion, they raise the MST from its national context to the international context of the broad-based anti-globalization movement where they see potential for a revolutionary reversal of the Green Revolution, recently re-energized by genetic engineering and relaxed trade rules. "The MST is well placed to join such a global revolution," they write. "As some sem-terra themselves are realizing, their future is not as economically unviable peasant communities living in a time warp but as modern, sustainable, green communities" (282). They admit to being idealistic but affirm their belief in the MST's potential to reinvent itself and play a role in realigning not only Brazil but the global economy as well.
The vehement reaction of the Brazilian media to Lula's symbolic support for the MST reflected ruling class concerns about potential threats as much as current ones. After twenty years, the MST has become part of the Brazilian socio-political landscape. Opposition to it remains great but its resilience has proven stronger. Few doubt that the [End Page 209] organization is here to stay. That it has transformed the lives of hundreds of thousands of Brazilians, empowering them to uplift themselves with comforts and hopes long buried in the mire of savage capitalist development, is unquestionable. As the authors of these books show, however, there is reason to question what the MST is now and what it will become in the short and long term. Its relationship with the Lula administration has tended to consolidate its role as a social service agency for the rural poor and small farmers. But its relationship with this dubiously working-class administration also has the potential for launching the movement on a broader and more radical mission. The sense of threat expressed by the mainstream press was not unfounded nor is the hope expressed by the authors of these books for the MST to help bring about a better world.
Cliff Welch has been teaching history at Grand Valley State University in Michigan since he received his Ph.D. from Duke University in 1990. From 2003 to 2005, he was a Visiting Foreign Professor of Social Sciences, Geography and History in the graduate schools of the Pontifícia Universidade Católica of São Paulo and the Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP) in Presidente Prudente. He is currently visiting research fellow at UNESP's Núcleo de Estudos, Pesquisas e Projetos de Reforma Agrária. Among his major publications are The Human Tradition in Modern Brazil (Schoalrly Resources, 2004), and The Seed Was Planted: The São Paulo Roots of Brazil's Rural Labor Movement, 1924–1964 (Penn State Press, 1999). His documentaries include Latino Voices (1998), Grass War! (2001) and Sonhando com futebol (2004). He is currently working on a book about land conflict in Brazil from 1959 to 1999.
References Cited
Coletti, Claudinei  2002 "Ascensão e refluxo do MST da luta pela terra na década neoliberal." Idéias 9 (1): 49–104.
Martins, José de Souza  1989 Caminhada no chão da noite: Emancipação política e libertação nos movimentos sociais no campo. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  1997 "A questão agrária e o papel do MST." In A reforma agrária e a luta do MST, edited by João Pedro Stédile and Frei Sérgio, 11–76. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.  1999 [1994] O poder do atraso: ensaios de sociologia da história lenta, 2. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  2000 Reforma agrária: o impossível diálogo. São Paulo: Editora da Universidade de São Paulo.  2003 "A reforma agrária no segundo mandato de Fernando Henrique Cardoso." Tempo Social—USP 15 (2): 141–75 (novembro).
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST)  2004 Quem Somos: 1984–2004, MST 20 anos de lutas, conquistas e dignidade! 24 de junho 2004. MST. http://www.mst.org.br/historico/historia.htm (accessed November 2, 2004).
Wolford, Wendy  2003 "Families, Fields and Fighting for Land: The Spatial Dynamics of Contention in Rural Brazil." Mobilization: An International Journal 8 (2): 201–215 (June).

















 

THE LANDLESS RURAL WORKERS MOVEMENT AND DEMOCRACY IN BRAZIL
Dr. Miguel Carter School of International Service American University
Final Draft Version April 17, 2009 International Peasant Day
Author’s contact: carter@american.edu
On the night of October 29, 1985, more than 200 trucks, buses and cars converged from 32 different municipal districts in Brazil’s southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul to occupy a mostly idle, 9,200-hectare cattle ranch known as the Annoni estate. Over than 6,000 people participated in what was then the largest and most thoroughly planned land occupation in Brazilian history. By morning they had erected a sprawling village of black-tarp tents and organized a security team to prevent police eviction. In a matter of days, the peasants established an elaborate internal organization: a network of family groups, a variety of task teams, a coordination council and a leadership committee. Everyday life at the encampment was a busy hive of activities and meetings. Next to a patch of dense forest, the landless gathered daily by a large cross for prayers, religious and protest songs, announcements and hearty words of encouragement from an array of supporters. A vast solidarity network was established to further the cause of the peasants at the Annoni estate. Shortly after the occupation, the local Catholic bishop and 80 priests showed up at the camp to bless the landless struggle.
Approximately 1,250 families obtained a landholding from the concerted pressure and long-sustained mobilization which followed the Annoni occupation. This involved a broad range of essentially non-violent collective action measures, varying from countless lobbying efforts with government officials, including three trips to meet with national authorities in Brasilia, and an array of high-profile protest tactics. The statistics of the struggle undertaken by the Annoni occupants are quite revealing. In the eight years it took to settle all these families, landless people from the Annoni estate were engaged in 36 land occupations; at least 30 major protest rallies; nine hunger strikes; two lengthy marches, including a 450 km, 27-day march to Porto Alegre, the state capital; three road blockades; and nine building takeovers, six of these at National Land Reform Institute (INCRA) and three at the State Assembly. Ten human lives were lost in these struggles, including seven children who died from precarious health conditions at the landless camp. Of the adults, two were peasants and one was a police officer killed
1
during a protest melee in Porto Alegre. The piecemeal settlement of all the Annoni families was completed only in 1993.1
Here stands a founding moment of one of the most important and long- lasting grassroots movements for land reform in world history: Brazil’s Movement of Landless Rural Workers, best known by its acronym MST (in Portuguese, Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra). By all accounts, the MST is nowadays Latin America’s premier social movement.
This article is written in the context of today, where the MST is often portrayed as a menace to Brazil’s democratic institutions. It thus seeks to address two basic issues: how does the MST relate to Brazil’s political process? And, what is the MST’s impact on democracy in Brazil? These queries, however, beg an initial question: what is the MST? Hence, this study begins with a contextual and historical overview of the MST. It then examines the movement’s main sources of endurance and power. The following two sections review the multifarious ways in which the MST engages the broader political process and affects democracy.
Influential Brazilian intellectuals like José de Souza Martins, Zander Navarro, Francisco Graziano and Dennis Lerrer Rosenfield argue that the MST’s confrontational relations with Brazil’s governing institutions are harmful for democracy. For Martins, Brazil’s most renowned rural sociologist, the MST is the local equivalent to the English Luddite movement, a short-lived popular uprising in the early 19th century famed for wrecking new factory machines. Incited by similar “fundamentalist” beliefs, the MST “refuses to recognize the institutional legitimacy and actions of the government and the state.” In fact, according to Martins, the movement’s actions and demands represent a “pre-political and precarious attempt to demolish the political order.” Navarro, a fellow sociologist, describes the MST as an “anti-systemic” and “anti-state” organization, driven by a hardened Marxist disposition toward non-institutional venues of action. According to Navarro, the MST stopped being a social movement in the 1990s.
1 These statistics are from Carter (2007). This article builds on Carter (2009b, 2009c, 2009e), and Carter and Carvalho (2009). An early version of this text was published in 2005 as a Working Paper for the University of Oxford’s Centre for Brazilian Studies.
2
Instead, it degenerated into a “semi-clandestine” organization propelled by the “childish Leninist” ideas of a small revolutionary cadre.2
Graziano, a former federal deputy and head of Brazil’s national land reform bureau under President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, depicts the MST as “an authoritarian guerrilla organization” that is “undermining democracy” with its land occupations, and even abetting “acts of agrarian terrorism.” Rosenfield, a philosopher and news columnist, treats the MST as a “paramilitary” organization bent on establishing a Soviet and Cuban-like regime in Brazil. MST calls for land reform, the reduction of record-high interest rates, a system of national plebiscites, and a humanistic form of socialism, merely mask, according to Rosenfield, the movement’s efforts to “suppress the market economy, the rule of law and representative democracy.”3
During the last decade, these four intellectuals have helped sanction recurrent media depictions of the MST as an “autocratic, violent, shady revolutionary organization.” As such, they have endorsed a public image that treats the landless movement as a “threat” to the Brazilian state and its democratic regime. The tacit proposition, here, clearly underpins conservative calls to restrain, and even eliminate the MST.
2 Martins (2000: 18-19, 26; 2003; 2007); Navarro (2002a: 206- 211; 2002b: 277, 279; 2007; 2009); also see Navarro in Arruda (2007) and Scolesce (2003).
3 Graziano (2004: 304, 72) (2006); Rosenfield (2006: 247, 252-253, 303, 309, 301, 311). The ideas espoused by all four analysts have received widespread attention in Brazil’s mainstream media. Martins is a professor emeritus of the Universidade de São Paulo and former advisor to the Cardoso government. Navarro is a professor at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul and a Research Fellow at the Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex. Graziano worked for the Cardoso administration and subsequently served as a PSDB (Party of Brazilian Social Democracy) federal deputy for São Paulo. He then set up an agribusiness consulting office; and is currently the Environment Secretary for the state of São Paulo. Rosenfield teaches at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul. Martins, Graziano and Rosenfield write regular columns published in Brazil’s leading newspapers. During the last decade, Navarro has given extensive interviews on the MST to major national and international press outlets. Both Martins and Navarro were advisors to the MST and the Church’s Commissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), prior to their personal fallouts with these organizations in the late 1990s. A closer review of their critique of the MST can be found in Carter (2009d).
3
The views espoused by these intellectuals have gained traction in top echelons of state and media power. A telling manifestation of this took place in December 2007, when the High Council of Prosecutors of Rio Grande do Sul unanimously approved a secret report that called on the judiciary to take unprecedented measures aimed at “outlawing the MST.” The decision was followed by various efforts to criminalize and curtail MST activities in this southern state. These included the indictment of eight landless activists under a National Security Law sanctioned by Brazil’s military regime, along with various court orders barring the movement from carrying out marches and other peaceful demonstrations.4 Press revelations in June 2008 of the secret judicial plans led to a brief scandal; followed by a temporary lull in state hostilities. Yet by early 2009, the state government had renewed efforts to restrict MST activities in Rio Grande do Sul, notably by shutting down all schools set up in its landless camps. The arguments used by the High Council of Prosecutors to justify the MST’s banishment were crafted on the ideas advanced by Zander Navarro and other academic critics.
This article disputes the extreme caricature and unsubstantiated depictions of the MST presented by these intellectuals and much of the Brazilian mainstream press. It challenges their restrictive view of democracy and patronizing representations of this popular movement. The purported conflict between the MST and Brazil’s democratic institutions is far more rhetorical than real. A sober review of the MST’s actual practice shows that it is far from an “anti-state” or “anti-democratic” organization. Quite to the contrary, it demands that the state play an active part in fostering an inclusive model of development; one that seeks
4 An incisive depiction of the state government’s efforts to criminalize the landless movement took place in January 2008, when close to 1,000 police officers, supported by 100 vehicles, helicopters, horses and police dogs surrounded the Annoni settlement where 1,500 MST activists from Rio Grande do Sul were holding their 24th state congress. The ostentatious police apparatus was assembled to carry out a court mandate to investigate whether MST participants were responsible for stealing the equivalent of 120 dollars, a watch and a photo camera from a nearby ranch. After a tense stand-off, the police investigators found none of the allegedly missing goods. For a useful analysis of recent legal efforts to curtail the MST, see Scalabrin (2009); for the High Council of Prosecutors of Rio Grande do Sul report on the MST, see Thums (n/date).
4
to rebalance the nation’s social order and strengthen capabilities among its underprivileged population.
During the last quarter of a century, the MST has undertaken a wide range of public efforts to enhance the quality of democracy in Brazil by: organizing the poor at grassroots level and raising consciousness about their basic rights; supporting election candidates; lobbying and bargaining with state officials; collaborating with public authorities to implement various development projects; and running court cases to defend its members while advocating for progressive legal reforms. The movement’s sharp impetus and occasionally rough demeanor must be appraised in light of Brazil’s striking disparities of wealth and political power; formidable obstacles to land redistribution; widespread rural poverty; and ongoing violations of basic civil rights in the countryside. Given the nature of its struggle, and the options available, the movement’s oppositional politics should be understood as grounded, first and foremost, on practical considerations rather than any dogmatic ideology.
The MST’s contentious edge, it is argued here, has contributed to Brazil’s ongoing democratization process by: (1) highlighting the role of public activism –a form of social conflict grounded on pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities— in building political capabilities among the poor and catalyzing downward redistribution policies; (2) facilitating the extension of basic citizenship rights, broadening the scope of the public agenda, and strengthening civil society through the inclusion of groups representing the most vulnerable strata of the population; and (3) fostering a sense of hope and utopia through the affirmation of ideals imbued in Brazil’s long term, complex and open-ended democratization process.
An amiable and institutionalized MST, as Martins, Navarro, Graziano and Rosenfield seem to prefer, would render the movement innocuous and defeat its raison d’etre. In light of the crude realities of Brazilian rural politics and the enduring powers accrued by its agrarian elite, it would be naïve, at best, to expect the MST’s struggle for social justice to require anything less than a tough touch.
5
Setting the Context
An incisive appraisal of the conditions that have shaped the MST is crucial for understanding its history and activities. Brazil is the world’s ninth largest economy and the globe’s tenth most unequal society in terms of income distribution. The wealthiest 10 percent of the population holds 45 percent of the nation’s income, while the poorest 20 percent holds less than three percent of this income.5 This starkly divided society is the upshot of the country’s historical configuration, notably, its oligarchic politics, weak patrimonial state, slave-based economy, and striking land concentration. During the 20th century Brazil underwent an intense process of capitalist modernization, led by an invigorated state. Yet its secular inequities have remained largely intact, especially in the countryside. After more than two decades of political democracy and ongoing mobilization for agrarian reform, the nation continues to exhibit one of the world’s highest patterns of land concentration. According to Brazil’s land registry, 1.6 percent of the landholders control 47 percent of the nation’s farmland, while a third of the farmers hold 1.6 percent of this area.6
The nation’s stark social disparities are responsible for producing a disjointed, apartheid-like society.6 In rural Brazil, a highly modernized and dynamic agricultural economy coexists with a pauperized society in which more than half of the population lives below the national poverty line. The nation is a leading global producer and exporter of major food commodities--notably sugar, coffee, oranges, soybeans, and beef--yet according to a government survey, more than 25 million Brazilians, 14 percent of the population, have suffered from hunger in recent years.7 Over the last few decades Brazil has become largely
5 UNDP (2007: 282). Brazil’s income inequality ranking is based on data for 139 countries, computed by Carter (2009f). According to a study conducted by Campos, Barbosa, Pochmann, Amorin and Silva (2005: 29), the combined resources of the richest 5,000 Brazilian families –that is, 0.001 percent of the population— amounts to 40 percent of the nation’s GDP.
6 This data is from the government’s 2003 land registry, as published in DATALUTA (2008: 27). For helpful historical reviews of Brazil’s agrarian structure and politics, see José de Souza Martins (1997, 1994); Leonilde Sérvolo de Medeiros (1989); João Pedro Stédile (1994); Guilherme Costa Delgado (2009).
7 World Bank (2005, 275); IPEA (2005, 56).
6
urbanized and currently only one-fifth of its population lives in the countryside and works in agriculture.8 Still, the number of landless people is estimated between 3.3 and 6.1 million families, while Brazil's unproductive farmland comprises more than a quarter of the national territory.9
Brazil’s sharp class asymmetries condition the balance of forces in its society and shape much of its political process. Three sets of obstacles, in particular, have thwarted the implementation of a progressive agrarian reform. These are: the enduring influence of the agrarian elite, an oligarchic system of governance, and an acute concentration of media power.
The continuing strength of the landlord class owes much to the policies, legal framework and inactions of the Brazilian state. Government subsidies and technical support to large commercial farmers, instituted after the mid 1960s, fueled the rise of an intense process of capitalist modernization in agriculture. Rural production increased substantially in the ensuing decades. The 1982 debt crisis compelled the state to augment its agro-exports to repay its foreign and domestic creditors. The agrarian elite’s privileged access to public resources and protection intensified under these economic policies. Throughout this process, the state continued to protect large landholders through assorted measures, such as negligible taxation on rural properties; state acquiescence to the fraudulent appropriation of vast tracks of the nation’s territory (especially in the Amazon); lax enforcement of environmental, labor and agrarian reform laws; judicial favoritism towards the agrarian elite; and highly inflated compensations for most land expropriations. Trade liberalization policies established in the 1990s gave rise to an influential agribusiness sector, operating in close partnership with the world’s leading agrifood conglomerates –notably, Monsanto, Syngenta, Dupont, Bayer, Acher Daniels Midland (ADM), Cargill and Bunge— which control global markets for seeds, chemical inputs and agricultural trading.10 As a result, over the
8 CEPAL (2004). 9 Del Grossi et al. (2001); MDA (2003, 43 and table 5.1.1.1). 10 On the power of global agrifood corporations, see ActionAid International (2006).
7
last two decades Brazil has witnessed the formation of a powerful triple alliance between the national landed elite, the state and global agrifood corporations.
Thus, contrary to the assessments offered by Navarro, Martins and Graziano, Brazil’s agrarian elite has not reached levels of “unprecedented weakness,” become “more receptive to land reform,” or “vanished” as result of their modernization.11 Large landholders in Brazil continue to wield significant economic influence and political clout. Though more modernized and well assimilated into the nation’s competitive electoral process, this sector has generally resisted agrarian reform and the adoption of other pro-poor measures aimed at extending effective citizenship rights in Brazil.
Various facets of Brazilian politics bolstered the nation’s lopsided distributions of political power. A highly fragmented party system, widespread clientelistic practices, including frequent vote buying among the poor; and the “un-rule of law” among marginalized sectors of the Brazilian population; have historically weakened the political capabilities and representation of popular interests. Enduring patrimonial legacies and a disjointed national bureaucracy have facilitated elite capture of state resources.12 Adding to this, the over-representation of conservative rural interests in Congress due to the mal-apportionment of legislative seats, have assured the agrarian elite and close conservative allies control of more than a third of the seats in the lower chamber. This multiparty coalition known as the “bancada ruralista” has been the largest voting bloc in Congress since Brazil’s re-democratization. Their political clout has compelled all
11 Navarro (2002b: 274), Martins (2000: 48) and Graziano (2004: 133). The empirical bases for these assertions are remarkably poor. Navarro, for instance, equates the diminished visibility of a single large landholding association, the Democratic Ruralist Union (União Democrática Ruralista, UDR) to the demise of an entire agrarian class, ignoring the breadth of organizations representing rural elite interests, as well as the many informal ways through which this sector has traditionally exercised its influence and power.
12 On Brazil’s party system and political clientelism see Mainwarring (1999); on the “un-rule of law” see Méndez, O’Donnell and Pinheiro (1999), Pinheiro (1997) and Pereira (2000). On the patrimonial fragmentation of the Brazilian state, see Weyland (1996). On the nation’s enduring traditional politics, see Hagopian (1996).
8
recent civilian presidents to appease the large landowners’ caucus in order to sustain majority coalitions in the legislature.13
These and other features of Brazilian politics have shorn up what Alfred Montero describes as a system of “government by and for the few,” in which minority interests have exhibited a resilient capacity “to block institutional change.”14 Under these oligarchic arrangements, the distribution of public resources has usually favored dominant interests over the needs of the poor. The following findings serve to illustrate the point. Between 1995 and 2005, landless peasants had an average of one federal deputy for every 612,000 families, while the large landlords had one deputy for every 236 families. The political representation of landlords was therefore 2,587 times greater than that of landless peasants. As a result of these disparities, each of Brazil’s largest landlords had access to U.S.$1,587 from public coffers for every dollar made available to a landless family.15 The numbers speak eloquently for themselves.
Another powerful obstacle to agrarian reform in Brazil stems from the nation’s conservative, oligopolistic media structure. Through its influential role in shaping the nation’s public agenda, the mainstream press has done more to buttress the country’s political and social inequities than to challenge these conditions. According to estimates, nine family conglomerates generate 85 percent of the country’s news information. Though staffed with many competent journalists, the striking concentration of media power and its attendant class biases explain much of the one-sided, mostly negative, and often blatantly hostile coverage accorded to popular movements like the MST.16 As Guillermo
13 In the last three legislatures only two percent of federal deputies were linked to popular organizations in the countryside, such as the MST and CONTAG, see Carter (2009b). On the over-representation of conservative rural interests, see Stepan (2001: 343; 2000), and Snyder and Samuels (2004). On the bancada ruralista, see Vigna (2003).
14 Montero (2005: 51). 15 Carter (2009b).
16 Informative accounts of the media’s portrayal of the MST can be found in Lerrer (2005), Comparato (2003) and Berger (1998).
9
O’Donnell explains, in highly unequal societies, “Few issues get onto the public agenda other than those that interest the dominant sectors and classes except concerns for ‘public security,’ which often entail the criminalization of poverty, and, with it, further repressions in the civil rights of the popular.” The “resulting deafness of the agenda” to the need-claims of popular groups, he adds, “is an indication of the low quality of these democracies.”17
Brazilian peasant organizations have sought to overcome such “deafness” through recurrent mobilizations, including 7,078 land occupations between 1987 and 2006.18 Successive governments have responded to such demands by undertaking various land distribution measures. From 1985 to 2006 close to 825,000 families received a parcel of land, in an area amounting to a total of 41.3 million hectares; a territory as large as Sweden. Brazilian government spoke- persons have often touted these land reform initiatives as “the world’s largest.”19 The absolute numbers are certainly impressive. Yet Brazil is the fifth largest nation in the globe in population and territory, hence the need for proportional comparisons. Weighed against 16 other Latin American countries that undertook comparable reforms, Brazil actually ranks last in the percentage of beneficiary families (at five percent of the nation’s agricultural workforce), and twelfth in land allocation (based on the distribution of 11.6 percent of the nation’s farmland).20
These figures are clearly indicative of Brazil’s conservative trend in land tenure policies. Since the return to political democracy, all presidents, from José Sarney to Luis Inácio Lula da Silva, have pursued some variation of what could be broadly described as a “conservative agrarian reform.” Under all these administrations, the impetus for reform has been essentially reactive and restrained. It has strived mainly to appease rural conflicts, rather than promote
17 O’Donnell (2005: 59). 18 Carter and Carvalho (2009). 19 Graziano (2004: 238); Carta Maior (2009).
20 Land reform figures and comparative rankings are from Carter and Carvalho (2009) and Carter (2009b).
10
family farming through proactive measures aimed at transforming the rural structure and its power relations.21 By treating agrarian reform as an isolated problem, of marginal interest to the nation’s development, all governments have engaged in an ad hoc distribution process, offering land in places convenient to the state and landowning elite.22 As a rule, all governments have shied from taking measures that would confront or upset Brazil’s dominant rural forces: its large landholders and agribusiness conglomerates. As a consequence, Brazil’s agrarian reform has had largely negligible effects on the nation’s land tenure pattern.
All these mobilizations for land have taken place amid recurrent human rights violations in the Brazilian countryside, as noted in Table 1, and striking levels of impunity. According to the CPT, between 1985 and 2006, 1,465 land reform activists and peasants, including dozens of children, were killed in different rural conflicts. Only 8% of the cases were ever brought to trial, and barely 20 landlords who hired the gunmen to execute such crimes have been condemned by the courts.23
Table 1
21 A major survey of agrarian reform settlements found that 96 percent of all these communities had originated through some from of land struggle, see Leite et al. (2004: 40-43). On average, peasants have had to mobilize for four years in order to gain access to a farm plot, due to the restrictive legal and bureaucratic process required to create a reform settlement, see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
22 This explains the fact that more than 70 percent of all land distributed between 1985 and 2006 has taken place in the Amazonian agricultural frontier (including the neighbouring states of Mato Grosso and Maranhão), where land values tend to be much lower than in the rest of Brazil.
23 CPT (2007a).
11
Land Distribution & Human Rights Violations in Brazil, 1985 - 2006
President
Period
Beneficiary Families
Area Distributed (in hectares)
Human Rights Violations (a) Yearly Average
Total
Yearly Average
Amazon %
Total
Yearly Average
Amazon %
Sarney Collor & Franco Cardoso 1 Cardoso 2 Lula 1
1985 - 1989 1990 - 1994 1995 - 1998 1999 - 2002 2003- 2006
92.178
57.194 299.863 155.491 220.606
18.436 14.299 74.966 38.873 55.152
44 58 31 28 47
5.091.049
2.895.903 12.222.613 6.768.771 14.356.824
1.018.210 723.976 3.055.653 1.692.193 3.589.206
64 71 41 41 73
312 (b) 315 198 225 376
Total
1985 - 2006
825.332
37.515
38
41.335.160
1.878.871
57
284
Source: DATALUTA and CPT, compiled by Carter and Carvalho (2009).24
(a) The figures for Human Rights Violations are based on yearly averages per government period of the total number of people that have been assassinated, suffered assassination attempts and received death threats over rural conflicts in Brazil.
(b) Human Rights Violations data for the Sarney period covers only two years, 1988 and 1989.
24 These figures draw on data provided by DATALUTA, which is generated by the Núcleo de Estudos da Reforma Agrária (NERA) of the Universidade Estadual de São Paulo (UNESP). Both the Cardoso and Lula governments have published land reform statistics substantially higher than those generated through DATALUTA’s scholarly review of data obtained from the federal land reform agency, INCRA. The figures presented here have not computed the data from 55 extractive reserves created in the Amazonian rainforest (covering an area of 18,339,543 hectares and benefiting 35,957 families); as these huge areas averaging more than 500 hectares per recipient cannot be properly equated to family farmland allocations. For a closer examination of the ongoing debate over Brazil’s land reform statistics, see Carter (2009b), Delgado (2009) and Melo (2006: 220-223).
12
Making History
Brazil’s first stirrings for land reform took place in the mid 1950s, in the country’s Northeast region. These mobilizations gained broader impetus in the early 1960s and prompted President João Goulart to issue the nation’s first agrarian reform law in 1964. Days later, however, a military coup d’etat ended Brazil’s fledgling democratic regime. The military takeover was strongly backed by the influential landlord class. Popular movements in the countryside and their leftist allies suffered extensive repression during the ensuing years. All remaining peasant associations were subject to state controls. Under the military regime, land reform was confined to a colonization program in the Amazon and largely removed from public debate.
The MST was forged in the context of a second wave of peasant mobilizations that surfaced in the early 1980s. Officially created in January 1984, in Cascavel, Paraná, the movement emerged under the aegis of the Pastoral Land Commission (Commissão Pastoral da Terra, CPT), an ecumenical agency linked to the Catholic Church. The CPT nurtured the MST’s formation by building a network of activists engaged in different land struggles across southern Brazil.
The movement’s origin in the South was facilitated by the region’s relatively high levels of rural development, state capacity, education and social capital. The strong family farm legacy, particularly in Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, and Paraná, a consequence of intense European immigration after the mid 1800s, helped foster a historically active and inventive civil society. Previous land mobilizations, notably during the late 1950s in Paraná and early 1960s in Rio Grande do Sul, had established an important precedent in the region. Moreover, despite many restrictions, the creation of state-sponsored rural trade unions in the 1960s and 1970s helped diffuse basic notions of citizenship rights and nurture a sense of class identity among the peasantry.25
The MST’s genesis was shaped, in particular, by the rise of a large contingent of landless farmers in the 1970s. This resulted mostly from population
25 On the history of these rural trade unions, see Maybury-Lewis (1994), Medeiros (1989).
13
growth in the countryside, the capitalist modernization of agriculture and the state-led construction of large hydroelectric dams. The military regime’s gradual abertura in the late 1970s created new political opportunities for popular mobilization. These changes, in turn, enabled progressive religious agents – inspired by innovative Catholic trends, including a theology of liberation— to play a pivotal role in re-igniting Brazil’s struggle for land reform. Indeed, these and other Church initiatives at the grassroots helped foster an array of rural social movements, the MST being its most prominent offspring.26
The landless movement expanded to other regions of Brazil through the support of a progressive network of Church and rural trade union activists. By 1997 it had established a foothold in 23 of the country’s 27 federal units. Nine years later it carried out its first land occupation in the state of Roraima, near the border with Guyana.
After the mid 1990s, the MST became particularly active in the Brazilian Northeast. In 2006, nearly half of its estimated 2,012 agricultural settlements were located in this region. By then, the movement had prodded the Brazilian government to distribute close to 3.7 million hectares or 14,285 square miles; a territory roughly the size of Switzerland or half the state of South Carolina. An estimated 135,000 MST families have benefited from these measures.27
During the last decade, over 90 peasant associations were involved in land struggles across Brazil. The MST and the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (Conferederação dos Trabalhadores Agrícolas, CONTAG) are the largest and most active of these organizations. The MST is predominant in the South, as well as some states in the Southeast and Northeast.28 In the Amazon, the Center-West
26 Key sources on the MST’s history and evolution include Branford and Rocha (2002); Carter (2009a); Fernandes (2000); Ondetti (2008); Stédile and Fernandes (1999); Wright and Wolford (2003); as well as Welch’s (2006) useful review of the literature on this movement. On the Church’s involvement in support of the MST, see Poletto (2009) and Poletto and Canuto (2002).
27 Estimates of MST settlements are from Carter and Carvalho (2009).
28 The federal units where MST settlements comprise more than half of the state’s total settlements are (ranked from the top): Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Sergipe, Espiritu Santo, Paraná, Pernambuco, Ceará and São Paulo.
14
and other Northeastern states, land struggles have been led primarily by CONTAG-affiliated unions and various local movements, including informal groups of squatters. In 2006, over a quarter of Brazil’s agrarian settlements were connected to the MST.29 Yet more than 90 percent of the land distributed since 1984 resulted from mobilizations undertaken by peasants groups that were not linked to the MST.30
The MST gained ample national visibility in the mid 1990s. A surge in land mobilizations after 1995 and ample media coverage of dramatic developments in the countryside, notably two police massacres of landless peasants in the Amazon, contributed much to this newfound impetus. The April 1996 slaughter of 19 MST peasants at Eldorado dos Carajás, Pará, triggered a national scandal, and prompted the federal government to accelerate land distribution throughout Brazil.31
This episode, in particular, along with the benign depiction of the landless struggle in a highly popular television soap opera, O Rei do Gado (The Cattle King), which aired two months after the massacre, helped generate widespread support for land reform. This momentum peaked during the first months of 1997, with the MST’s national march to Brasília. Led by 1,300 people, divided into three columns originating in distant corners of the country, the marchers walked for 64 days, some covering as much as 640 miles, before their triumphant arrival into the nation’s capital. At the final gathering in front of the National Congress close to 100,000 supporters came to rally for agrarian reform. These events allowed the MST to gain wide-spread recognition as Brazil’s principal social movement.
29 Carter and Carvalho (2009).
30 Carter and Carvalho (2009). The disparity between the percentage of MST settlements and area allocated reflects the fact that reform plots in the Amazon are much larger in size than those distributed in regions where the MST is more active.
31 A telling illustration of Brazil’s “un-rule of law” in the countryside can be gleaned from the aftermath of the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre. The first court trial of the 146 police officers charged with killing 19 people, and seriously wounding 70 other peasants, found them all to be innocent. A retrial followed the annulment of the first ruling. Here, only two senior police officers were found guilty; none of which has actually spent time in prison.
15
Opinion polls taken in April 1997 showed that 94 percent of the population felt that the struggle for land reform was just, while 85 percent indicated a support for non-violent land occupations as a way to accelerate government reform efforts.32 Around this time the MST became one of the leading critics of the neoliberal policies pursued by the Cardoso administration and various state governors.
As noted in Table 1, the Cardoso and Lula administrations substantially increased the pace of land distribution in Brazil. Together, both administrations helped settle 82 percent of all reform beneficiaries between 1985 and 2006. Each of these governments, however, exhibited different dispositions towards the MST and varying policy concerns.
The Cardoso administration multiplied the number of reform settlements, especially between 1996 and 1999, when the government’s monetary stabilization program triggered a temporary drop in rural property values. The new agricultural communities instituted during the Cardoso era, however, received meager ancillary support from the government, despite the existence of federal laws mandating the provision of credit, infrastructure and basic services to ensure the development of these reform settlements.33 During Cardoso’s second term a discernable effort was made to restrict MST protest and curb financial support for its activities. Aside from instituting efforts to criminalize landless mobilizations, it instigated a media campaign aimed at discrediting the MST’s public image.34 With the backing of The
32 These figures are from Ibope, one of Brazil’s leading polling firms, and were published by O Estado de São Paulo on April 16, 1997; see Comparato (2003: 190- 191).
33 A 2002 survey of all land reform settlements created between 1995 and 2001 found that nearly half of these communities were in a “precarious state.” Over half of them lacked internal roads or access to public transportation; 55 percent had no electricity; and 77 percent had no access to a secondary school, see Sparovek (2003: 169, 100- 114).
34 On President Cardoso’s agrarian reform policies and relations with the MST, see Branford (2009), Fernandes (2009), Ondetti (2008) and Comparato (2003). The mainstream media’s hostility towards the MST picked up steam under Cardoso’s second term and has remained strong during Lula’s tenure in office, partly as a way of keeping Lula’s left-leaning cabinet members in check. The decade-long media attack explains much of the drop in the MST’s popularity, as revealed in an April 2008 poll take by Ibope, which found that 50 percent of Brazilians held a negative view of the
16
World Bank, the Cardoso government introduced a decentralized, market-based approach to land distribution, which severely undercut the MST’s capacity for collective action.35
The election of President Lula, a longstanding MST friend, was greeted with an enthusiastic sense of relief within the landless movement MST. The Workers Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, PT) administration no longer sought to criminalize the movement’s protests, despite repeated demands for this by right- wing politicians and the conservative media establishment. Notwithstanding a greater capacity for dialogue with popular movements and increased public funding for family agriculture and reform settlements, the Lula government failed to pursue the more audacious agrarian policies he had ardently defended in the past. The annual rate of land reform beneficiaries during Lula’s first term in office was actually lower that that of the Cardoso era. Moreover, 73 percent of Lula’s land distributions took place in the Amazonian frontier, often in remote areas, compared to only 41 percent of the Cardoso land allocations.36
Lula’s conservative agrarian policies were largely the result of the administration’s fear of upsetting agribusiness interests, alienating its conservative congressional allies, and undermining its fiscal austerity policies. Eager to assure a steady flow of hard currency obtained through agro-exports, and increase the production of agro-fuels, the Lula government lent ample support for the expansion of large-scale agribusiness farming. From 2003 to 2007, state support for the rural elite was seven times larger than that offered to the nation’s family farmers, even though the latter represent 87 percent of Brazil’s rural labor force
country’s rural social movements, of which the MST was the most recognizable group, see O Estado de São Paulo (2008).
35 On The World Bank’s land policies in Brazil, see Sauer and Pereira (2006); Pereira (2004); and Dias Martins (2004).
36 Under the two Cardoso administrations, the government settled a yearly average of 56,919 families, 1,768 families more than under Lula’s first term; see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
17
and produce the bulk of the food consumed by its inhabitants.37 All this led to a growing disenchantment with Lula within the ranks of the MST. As one leader put it, “Lula has now become a friend of our enemies.”
The MST has made great strides since its precarious origins in the 1980s. The movement, nevertheless, is not the great powerhouse in the nation’s political scene imagined by a number of its detractors and admirers. Although large and broadly extended throughout Brazil, the MST comprises only five percent of the country’s rural inhabitants.38 As an organization of poor people, operating with scarce resources, the MST exhibits many of the collective action problems – logistical shortcomings, strategic errors and human vices-- that can be found in other popular groups of this kind. Amid its many limitations, the MST has demonstrated unusual longevity and sophistication for a popular movement. As such, it has effectively re-written the history of popular movements in Brazil.
37 Carter and Carvalho (2009). Adding to this, the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget to support agribusiness farming during the 2008/2009 harvest was six times larger than the funds allocated for Lula’s flagship poverty reduction initiative, the Programa Bolsa Família, as can be ascertained by contrasting data published by MAG (2009) and INESC (2009).
38 Carter (2009b)
18
Building Capabilities
The MST’s endurance and growth owes much to its ability to make the best of the opportunities and obstacles on hand. The nation’s political freedoms and competitive elections, for one, have allowed the movement to expand its organizing efforts and petition public authorities. State response to MST demands, however partial and delayed, has enhanced the movement’s attractiveness among its actual and potential participants. Moreover, Brazil’s apartheid society, with vast numbers of people living in abject poverty, has ensured a large contingent of potential recruits for the MST. In turn, the steep obstacles to agrarian reform have prompted the movement to boost its organizational capacities, in order to extract concessions from the state and make up for inadequate government services. All this has led the movement to engage in a continuous process of pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities. As a result, the MST has developed seven major sources of power, namely, its: 1) mobilization capacity, 2) multifaceted yet flexible organization, 3) strategic creativity, 4) quest for financial independence, 5) resourceful allies, 6) investment in popular education, and 7) mystique and discipline.
1. Mobilization Capacity. The movement possesses a large membership and the adroit ability to mobilize masses of people. In 2006, the MST had an estimated membership of 1.1 million people, supported by 20,000 activists engaged in coordinating movement activities on various issues and levels.39 That same year, the MST led 55 percent of all land occupations in Brazil and was active in more than half of all popular demonstrations in the countryside.40 The movement has sponsored some of the largest and most elaborate mass mobilizations in Brazilian history. In May 2005, the MST organized a 125-mile march to Brasília with 12,000 people. The 17-day mobilization was supported by an impressive logistical apparatus: several massive circus tents to lodge all
39 Carter and Carvalho (2009). The number of MST members is precarious, given that the MST has no formal membership roster. Needless to say, levels of commitment among MST members are quite variable.
40 Author’s calculus based on CPT (2007b: 83-89; 176-199).
19
campers, 65 transport vehicles, a roving child care center, 325 health workers, and a cooking staff of 415 people responsible serving three meals a day, prepared with food donations from MST settlements scattered across the country. The event even featured a mobile radio station which broadcast programs to the marchers through 10,000 small radio receivers borrowed from the World Social Forum. Never had the world recorded a long distance march as large and sophisticated as this one.41
2. Multifaceted yet Flexible Organization. The MST is not a stodgy bureaucratic entity. Rather it operates through a complex and scattered network of collective groups. Its multiple instances of coordination –at national, state, regional and local levels— function in a fairly decentralized though cohesive manner. The MST relies fundamentally on volunteers, yet has strengthened its professional support over the last years. The MST’s main national and state offices employ full-time staff organizers and technical advisors, albeit mostly at minimal living stipends. Though consistent and synchronized in many of its tactics, the movement allows for regional variation and experimentation. Between 1988 and 2006 the MST created 13 task teams to deal with various facets of its struggle. These multi-layered collectives cover an assorted range of issues, from education, finance, recruitment and grassroots organizing, to health, communication, culture, gender, youth, human rights, international relations, and production and ecology. These task teams are responsible for managing 161 cooperatives, including four credit unions; 140 agro-industries; scores of training centers, news outlets, and artistic groups; and a variety of national and transnational advocacy networks.42 The MST’s growth and maturation over the last quarter of a century has engendered a highly sophisticated organization that has gradually come to assimilate a more comprehensive, long term and holistic agenda for social change.43
41 Further details on this march can be found in Carter (2009b). 42 Cooperatives and agro-industry figures are from Revista Sem Terra (2009: 16).
43 For a closer review of the MST’s internal organization see Carter and Carvalho (2009), Fernandes (2009) and Branford and Rocha (2002).
20
3. Strategic Creativity. The MST has learned to seek and devise homegrown solutions to a wide range of practical problems. This led the movement to develop an inventive ethos, open to experimentation and renewal. MST ingenuity is sharply exhibited in the way its local activists plan and carry out its massive and peaceful land occupations, a generally risky endeavor conducted with tactical acumen. Throughout its history the MST has shown a discernable capacity for innovation and adaptation. All this owes much to the movement’s practical disposition, its collective decision-making process, and ability to learn from past mistakes.
Examples of MST’s resourcefulness abound. After the mid 1990s, the movement began to reappraise its early attachment to an industrial, chemical- dependent model of agriculture, and began to foster a growing enthusiasm for agro-ecology. The 1997 creation of BioNatur, the movement’s first cooperative for organic seeds, established in Rio Grande do Sul, marked a turning point in this process. A decade later, BioNatur had become the largest producer of organic seeds in Latin America, with 117 crop varieties and annual yield of 20 tons of seeds. In the mid 1990s, the MST sought to overcome a period of relative isolation by investing significantly in the creation of various news outlets, in addition to the monthly newspaper established in 1981. Along with a glossy bi- monthly magazine, web page, 30 community radio stations, and news programs distributed to 1,500 radios, the MST helped establish a publishing house, two news agencies and a weekly newspaper, Brasil de Fato, sold at newsstands across the country.44 In the late 1990s, after extensive lobbying, MST women gained access to child care facilities at every movement gathering; and by 2003 had helped guarantee full gender equality within the organization’s leadership structure.
4. Quest for Financial Independence. As a poor people’s movement, the MST has faced an ongoing challenge in securing the material resources needed to
44 On BioNatur and the MST’s communication outlets, see Carter and Carvalho (2009).
21
sustain its activities. Early concerns about becoming too dependent on a handful of external supporters led the movement to diversify and decentralize much of its fundraising efforts. At the local level, the MST receives regular contributions from its cooperatives and members, and occasional assistance from municipal governments. Aid is also channeled through an assortment of civil society groups, including religious institutions, trade unions, student groups, artists, NGOs and educational institutions. Federal and state governments have funded various educational and agricultural projects, and often provide food rations for the movement’s landless camps. Between 1995 and 2005, three associations linked to the MST received 19.2 million dollars from the federal government.45 International sources of support for the MST have generally come from church organizations, solidarity groups, foundations, NGOs, as well as development agencies run by governments in Europe, Canada, Cuba and Venezuela. In the early 2000s, the European Union contributed 1.3 million dollars to help build the MST’s own university.46 Cuba and Venezuela, in turn, have provided full scholarships for 120 MST medical students.47
5. Resourceful Allies. The movement’s birth and ongoing expansion would not have been possible without the contribution of numerous partners, notably within Brazilian civil and political society. Over time, the movement became adept at capitalizing on sympathetic pockets within the state, including those in the federal land reform agency, INCRA. Its strongest supporters in civil society include liberal sectors of the Catholic and mainline Protestant churches, urban and rural trade unions, as well as progressive NGOs, university professors, students,
45 During the same period, five societies representing elite rural interests received 509.6 million dollars from the federal government; a sum 27 times larger than that made available to support MST projects in education, agriculture and health. Despite these vast disparities, virtually all of the intense congressional and media scrutiny has been on the monies allocated to MST-related associations, and not those that subsidize the associations controlled by wealthy ranchers and planters. The figures used here were computed from data compiled by Melo (2006: 127, 177).
46 Arruda (2005). 47 Revista Sem Terra (2009: 17).
22
musicians and actors. The MST has also played an active role in several Brazilian networks such as the National Forum for Agrarian Reform and Justice in the Countryside, the Consulta Popular, the Coordination of Social Movements and the Church-sponsored Popular Assembly. Within political society, the movement has enjoyed the backing of left-leaning political parties, notably the PT. The MST’s international ties were strengthened considerably during the 1990s. After receiving Sweden’s Alternative Nobel prize in 1991, it established solidarity groups in 14 European and North American countries. In 1994, following several years of active engagement with other popular groups in Latin America, the movement helped create the Latin American Coordination of Peasant Organizations (Coordinadora Latinoamericana de Organizaciones del Campo, CLOC). Two years later it joined and became a leading proponent of La Via Campesina, an international peasant coalition, which by 2008 had expanded to include 168 associations from 69 countries around the globe.
6. Investment in Popular Education. The movement has placed a uniquely strong emphasis on providing an education to its participants and raising popular consciousness. Starting in 1984, the MST set up a network of 1,800 primary and secondary schools, which has served an estimated 250,000 children. The bulk of its 8,000 teachers use pedagogical methods inspired by Paulo Freire and teaching materials developed by the MST’s own educational team.48 Since 1991 the MST has provided adult literacy classes for more than 50,000 people.49 Significant resources have been devoted to the preparation of its cadres. Between 1988 and 2002 over 100,000 activists took part of hundreds of workshops organized on a assorted range of topics.50 In early 2005 the movement inaugurated its first university, the Escola Nacional Florestan Fernandes, named after a renowned Brazilian intellectual, on an attractive campus near the city of São Paulo. Over the last decade, the MST established partnerships with 60 Brazilian universities offering
48 Carter and Carvalho (2009). On the MST’s approach to education see, Kolling, Cerioli, Caldart (2002); Caldart (2000); and Kane (2001: 90-110).
49 Revista Sem Terra (2009: 16). 50 Carter and Carvalho (2009).
23
various degrees and special courses for its members. These programs and workshops complement the intense pedagogical experience that takes place during its collective struggles. These moments, in particular, have helped MST participants overcome previous sentiments of disempowerment and fatalism, and foster a strong sense of agency. In this way, the movement has nurtured feelings of dignity, self-confidence and social responsibility among its members.51
7. Mystique and Discipline. Under the auspices of the Church and liberation theology, the movement learned to cultivate a sense of “mística” among its participants. And has done so by creating a rich symbolic repertoire –its flag, songs, chants, theatre, poetry, and stirring speeches— displayed in ritual gatherings that stimulate feelings of shared sacrifice, camaraderie, and idealism, and offer moments of festive commemoration. All this has helped nourish an intense social energy, forceful convictions and strong sense of identity. Among MST activists one often hears expressions of deep emotional attachment, such as: “I love the MST,” “The movement is my family.”52
Alongside these strong dispositions, the movement normally exhibits a well composed and orderly lifestyle. By disciplining passions and other raw impulses into more methodical forms of behavior, the MST has helped nurture what Norbert Elias describes as a “civilizing process.”53 Feelings of enhanced self- control and greater self-esteem have inclined MST participants to channel their contentious behavior through constructive means. The movement’s sense of mystique and discipline are interwoven in subtle ways. Together, they elicit and channel the emotions that give vitality, courage and perseverance to the MST’s struggles. They are its intangible sources of power.
51 Caldart (2000) and Quirk (2008).
52 Elsewhere, I have characterized these forceful convictions as grounded on Max Weber’s concept of “ideal interest” behaviour, whereby actors are strategically oriented toward the fulfilment of an absolute, non-negotiable goal, see Carter (2008, 2003). On the MST’s symbolic repertoire, see Vieira and McGuirk (2007).
53 Elias (1982).
24
Engaging the Political Process
MST relations with Brazil’s political system are multifarious and dynamic. This owes much to the assorted and decentralized structure of the Brazilian state, and variegated forms of access and influence on its decision making process. Brazil’s democratic freedoms, oligarchic traditions, federalist regime, strong local governments, distinct electoral system, and disjointed bureaucratic apparatus play a key role in shaping the MST’s repertoire for collective action. At any given juncture, the movement’s choice of tactics will be determined largely by the perceived opportunities and challenges at stake. In the MST’s own parlance, its strategic options emerge from its “analysis of the correlation of forces.”
This section examines the predominant forms of MST interaction with Brazil’s governing institutions. Contrary to established views in Brazil, it argues that none of these patterns of engagement are essentially “anti-democratic.” If anything, such actions display the kinds of contentious practices employed by popular groups engaged in democratizing struggles throughout the modern world.54
The MST’s prevailing mode of action is grounded on a distinct form of social conflict described here as public activism. This approach to social struggle is substantially different from that of an armed insurgency, a scattered riot or what James Scott defines as “everyday forms of resistance,” to describe informal, discreet and disguised forms of popular aggression.55 Unlike these other patterns of social confrontation, the MST’s public activism involves an organized, politicized, visible, autonomous, periodic and non-violent form of social conflict.
Actions carried out through public activism are geared towards drawing public attention; influencing state policies, through pressure politics, lobbying and negotiations; and shaping societal ideas, values, and actions. Typically,
54 On the democratizing role of popular sector groups, see Collier (1999), and Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens (1992).
55 According to Scott, everyday forms of resistance include actions such as poaching, foot-dragging, evasion, discrete forms of land squatting, anonymous threats, sabotage and arson (1990, 1985). This discussion of “public activism:” builds on Carter (2009c).
25
mobilizations of this kind employ an array of modern repertoires of contention, such as demonstrations, marches, petitions, group meetings, hunger strikes, protest camps, election campaigns, and acts of civil disobedience such as sit-ins, road blockades, building takeovers, and organized land occupations.56	Unlike other approaches to social conflict, public activism’s non-violent thrust makes it essentially compatible with civil society and provides a legitimate democratic vehicle for propelling social change.
Public activism requires certain facilitating conditions, notably, enhanced political opportunities for collective action and substantial access to mobilizing resources. Together, these opportunities and resources structure a set of incentives that persuade contentious groups to make demands on the state and bargain with its authorities. Moreover, they encourage the development of partnerships with civil and political society groups in order to strengthen these demands and improve prospects for a successful negotiation. These conditions help channel social conflict into non-violent forms of interaction with the state and other societal forces. The MST’s disposition towards public activism is manifested through various patterns of engagement, as detailed below.
Pressure Politics and Civil Disobedience. The MST’s contentious politics often involve disruptive mobilizations. Some of these entail lawful protest activities; others involve acts of civil disobedience. The MST’s penchant towards pressure politics is conveyed through an array of authorized demonstrations, ranging from long distance marches, hunger strikes to the organization of landless camps. These protest encampments, with their makeshift plastic tents, well-organized life-style, and red-MST flags flying overhead, are perhaps the most visible, well-known and ingenious repertoire for MST contention. The camps not only make the demand for land reform perceptible. They also facilitate MST consciousness-raising activities among the landless, enable the preparation of other protest mobilizations, and help the movement recruit and train its new cadre.
The most controversial tactics employed by the MST entail acts of passive resistance to civil laws. Principally among these forms of pressure politics are: land
56 On this theme, see Sidney Tarrow (1998) and Charles Tilly (1979).
26
occupations of private or public landholdings, sit-ins at government buildings, and highway blockades. These forms of MST engagement are essentially mass-based, strong-arm actions carried out in a non-violent fashion. They generally infringe conventional laws, notably those protecting property rights. State tolerance or repression of these forms of protest depends principally on the political persuasion of state governors, given their control over police enforcement. In the state of Paraná, for example, the MST experienced greater police hostility under the rightist Governor Jaime Lerner than under his left-leaning successor, Governor Roberto Requião, who on several occasions refused to dispatch public forces to evict MST land occupations. Forceful police removal of land and building occupations are not uncommon. Yet most acts of civil disobedience end peacefully, generally the result of lengthy negotiations with police, judicial and political officials. MST protest mobilizations are invariably geared toward dramatizing a public demand and bringing state authorities to the bargaining table.
Lobbying and Bargaining. MST pressure tactics do not emerge in a vacuum. These are usually preceded by a string of failed petitions and frustrated negotiations with public officials. These activities can take place at various levels of government. The MST’s most frequent interlocutors are the staff of the Ministry of Agrarian Development and, especially, its land reform agency, INCRA, given the federal government’s privy over agrarian reform laws. If the issue, however, is getting public monies disbursed on time, the target for MST insistence and bargaining could be the Bank of Brazil or the Ministry of Finance. Since 1993, the MST has held fairly regular meetings with all of Brazil’s presidents.
Associated Networks with the State. Yet another mode of interaction with the Brazilian political system could be treated as a loosely organized, non-hierarchal pattern of interest representation, offering various types of partnerships with the state.57 These associated networks have facilitated different points of access to public resources and participation in selective policy-making bodies. Over the
57 The term “associated networks” draws on Chalmers, Martin and Piester (1997). It also shares elements of the state-societal arrangements that Schmitter (1974) described as “societal corporatism.”
27
years, the MST has signed a number of agreements with federal, state and local governments, to carry out a variety of development projects, notably in agriculture, education and public health. In recent years the MST has collaborated with the Ministry of Health on programs to prevent the spread of HIV/Aids and promote the cultivation of herbal medicines. In 2004, Petrobras, Brazil’s state oil company, financed the construction of the movement’s first natural medicine plant, located in the state of Ceará. In addition, MST representatives have served on various government commissions, local administrations, and even helped run some state agencies. After the 1998 election of Governor Olivio Dutra in Rio Grande do Sul, the MST was invited by the PT administration to direct the state’s land reform bureau. Overall, though, partnerships between the Brazilian state and popular organizations have been far more precarious, politicized and intermittent than those established by social democratic states in Western Europe, where labor unions, in particular, have become an integral part of the policy-making framework.
Electoral Participation. MST members have actively engaged in election campaigns and party politics since the mid 1980s. For over two decades the movement held close ties to the PT. In Rio Grande do Sul, for example, the MST elected a five-term PT federal deputy and a string of PT representatives to the state assembly. While both associations shared many members, they have historically run their organizations in an autonomous way. This independence owed much to the fact the MST was founded separately from the PT. It was further reinforced by the PT’s early decision to eschew tenets from the traditional left that would have sought to subordinate the movement to the party. Ties between the PT and MST were solidified in the mid 1980s with the formation of the party’s National Agrarian Secretary and the Agrarian Nuclei of the Chamber of Deputies. Both party venues offered a space for dialogue and policy formulation that brought together PT officials, MST representatives, rural trade union leaders, and spokespersons from other progressive civil society organizations. In times of need, PT officials have customarily provided support for MST activists.
28
The ties between the PT and MST were stronger when both party and movement were in opposition to governing authorities and neoliberal policies. The PT’s victory in the presidential election of 2002 and decision to uphold many of Cardoso’s economic and rural policies led the MST to waver on its alliance with the PT. The movement’s disappointment with Lula’s policies were initially tempered by the MST’s pragmatic decision to side with the PT’s left and attack the government’s neoliberal economic policies, while sparing President Lula himself. In 2006, the movement campaigned for Lula’s re-election in an effort to defeat his more conservative opponent. Despite a growing sense of disenchantment with the PT among MST cadres, the movement has continued to support progressive candidates, linked mostly to the PT.58
Manifold Relations with the Rule of Law. The MST’s relationship with the legal system is an issue of enduring controversy. Prevailing orthodoxy in Brazil assumes that MST’s land and building occupations are in conflict with the rule of law, and a sign of the movement’s disdain for the state. This view, however, oversimplifies what is an altogether complex relationship. It ignores the fact that Brazil’s justice system is cripplingly bureaucratic, saturated with class bias and traditionally pliant towards landlord interests; hence much of the MST’s difficulties in dealing with the legal system.59 The idea of a fundamental opposition between the MST and the law omits the fact that social movements around the world have also served as architects of an alternative legal order.
The MST has taken an active part in the nation’s debates over the interpretation of existing laws. The 1988 Constitution, for instance, upholds agrarian reform and qualifies property rights by their social function. Despite these provisions, most judges insist on applying the Civil Code’s absolutist approach to property rights and thus criminalize land reform activists. In a major
On the historic relations between the PT and MST, see Branford (2009) and
58 Pereira (2009).
59 The MST’s mistrust of the Brazilian judiciary is broadly shared in this country, where according to the Corporación Latinobarómetro (2007: 101), only 10 percent of the population believes it would be treated equally in a court of law. For a thoughtful analysis of this problem, see Vieira (2007).
29
victory for MST lawyers, a 1996 decision by Brazil’s highest court ruled that land occupations designed to hasten reform were “substantially distinct” from criminal acts against property. Far from simply disdaining legality, the MST has actively contributed to shaping the debate on the nature and function of law. Through a dedicated and expanding network of close to 500 lawyers, the movement and its allies are frequently involved in running legal cases and lobbying higher echelons of the judiciary. In fact, MST land occupations are often planned with legal issues in mind, by targeting, for example, estates of dubious or illicit proprietorship.60
All of these considerations –the MST’s disposition towards pressure politics and civil disobedience tactics, negotiations and lobbying with public authorities, associated networks with the state, electoral participation, and manifold relations with the rule of law-- highlight the complex nature of the MST’s interaction with Brazil’s political institutions. Ostensibly, they demonstrate that for all its harsh rhetoric, the MST is not an “anti-state” or “anti-democratic” movement as some analysts would have us believe. Quite to the contrary, the MST and its allies actively underscore the state’s central role in defending human rights and rebalancing the nation’s social order through downward redistribution policies. This explains the MST’s determined opposition to the neoliberal project of public retrenchment, and the resulting concentration of wealth in the hands of powerful economic forces. Democracy, in the MST’s view, cannot be limited to a system of elite competition for public office. Rather, it should encompass a range of efforts geared towards developing greater state accountability and responsiveness to popular sector needs. In this way, democracy would help foster a more inclusive and egalitarian society, offering better conditions for the meaningful exercise of citizen participation.
60 My observations on the MST’s relation to the rule of law are greatly indebted to Meszaros (2009; 2000a; 200b).
30
Contributing to Democracy
The prevailing critique of the MST, articulated by Martins, Navarro, Graziano and Rosenfield, presents the landless movement as a “threat to democracy.” In their assault on its reform efforts, these authors display what Albert O. Hirschman described as the “rhetoric of reaction,” notably by advancing the argument that the MST jeopardizes a “previous, precious accomplishment.”61 The sentiments and ideas espoused by these Brazilian scholars are quite revealing in their assumptions and omissions. Three of these include: a restrictive view of democracy, tacit aversion to class conflict, and a-historical understandings of democratization.
Restrictive views of democracy have long intellectual history. Their proponents have traditionally shared a low esteem for the demos and disdain for the excessive participation and mobilization of popular masses. Their tendency to overlook the impact of large social asymmetries on the distribution of political power and state benefits is matched, as David Held observes, by their skepticism towards about the “possibility of a radical re-organization of society.” “Excessive” criticisms of the government on all too many issues, they fear, could harm democracy by infringing “on the smooth functioning of ‘public’ decision- making.”62 These sentiments have an affinity with complacent arguments that treat Brazil as a “consolidated democracy,” and thus downplay prospects for qualitative improvement.
Among MST critics, irritation towards its contentious demeanor is often fueled by discrete cultural norms embedded in mainstream Brazilian politics. One of these conventions is grounded on a strong distaste for explicit manifestations of class conflict. As Bolívar Lamounier explains, this aversion stems from the nation’s oligarchic tradition and the ethos of conciliation and political flexibility it fostered among the ruling elite. This disposition bred a “cultural construction (that) vigorously asserted that zero-sum conflict” was inimical to Brazilian society.
61 Hirschman (1991: 7). 62 Held (1987: 160, 176, 184).
31
Fueled by patrimonial customs and a lack of experience with “principled politics,” the legacies of this conservative, patriarchal view of politics can be found in depictions of popular class struggles as instances of “childish behavior.”63 Many of the terms used to portray the MST suggest a close affinity with this patronizing ethos: “The MST is the perfect incarnation of the political childishness of sectors of our society;” engaged in a “frivolous resistance” and “comedy of errors;” inspired by the “vulgar Marxist” ideas of its leaders; that merely seek to “indoctrinate” and “manipulate” its “little foot-soldiers;” in what only amounts to a “pre-political” movement or a “pseudo-revolutionary” group.64
Analyses that represent the MST as a “threat to democracy” are also short- sighted in their historical understanding of democracy and Brazilian society. They discount the fact that throughout world history the main social force against democratization has been the landlord class, not the peasantry.65 The Brazilian case certainly fits the mold. A-historical views of contemporary affairs undermine efforts to examine Brazil’s authoritarian legacies and allow people to assume that large agribusiness farmers are nothing like the traditional landed elite. Since the return to civilian rule, however, politicians and associations representing large landholding interests have consistently opposed different initiatives to strengthen citizenship rights among the poor and thus enhance the quality of democracy in Brazil.
Restrictive and a-historical views of democracy have built-in blinders that hamper an appreciation of the many democratic contributions made by popular movements like the MST. In particular, they disregard the fact that social movements can contribute to democratization both as “explicit programs or as by-products of their action.”66 The following comments offer a broad assessment
63 Lamounier (1989: 123-124).
64 Navarro interview in Arruda (2003); Navarro (2007); Navarro (2002b: 279); Martins (2000: 114); Navarro (2009); Martins (2000: 18); Graziano (2004: 278).
65 On the negative democratic impact of landlords, see Moore (1966), Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens (1992), and Huber and Safford (1995).
66 Tilly (2004: 142-143).
32
of the boisterous conduct, civic impact and normative drive that have shaped the MST’s contribution to democracy in Brazil.
(1) Public Activism, Political Capabilities and Pro-Poor Policies. Grassroots organizing, pressure politics and bargaining with state authorities have been at the heart of the MST’s way of engaging with Brazil’s democratic institutions. Electoral participation, though never irrelevant to the movement, has normally taken a back seat to other more assertive and direct tactics. In doing so, the MST has sought mainly to exercise a form of “societal accountability,” by shaping the public agenda and influencing state policy, rather seeking to exert control over the state apparatus itself.67
Public activism has become ingrained in the movement’s ethos and self- image. The movement, after all, was born and raised amid social conflict. In everyday MST speech, all of its conquistas (conquests) are the result of their ability to organize at grassroots and engage in sustained struggle. Its penchant towards pressure politics, however, is not the result of mere ideological assumptions, as critics like Navarro insist. Navarro maintains that the MST has “canonized” collective action as a result of its “fundamentalist” view of politics.68 Given its options, however, the MST’s preference for pressure politics is actually the most rational strategy available for maximizing its efficacy.
Considering the alternative means for accomplishing its objectives – electoral contestation, legislative representation, media influence, lobbying, or armed insurgency— pressure politics is clearly the most cost effective option. Fielding national election candidates or acquiring a major media outlet is clearly beyond the MST's financial means. Legislative representation offers few tactical advantages given the prerogatives accorded to the executive branch for carrying out land reform and the traditional overrepresentation of conservative rural interests in Congress. The MST is also fully aware that lobbying without pressure politics is usually a toothless instrument. Despite a fondness for Che Guevara and
67 The idea of “societal accountability” draws on Smulovitz and Peruzzotti (2000). 68 Navarro (2002b: 261 and 267).
33
other world revolutionaries, the movement clearly understands that a guerrilla alternative would be a suicidal gamble.
Public activism and its disruptive tactics, then, are the only reasonable course of action available to Brazil's landless peasants. This mode of collective action is first and foremost a practical response, a collective problem-solving measure— not the machination of an ideological agenda. Public activism enables the MST to stir public opinion and gain direct access to policymakers in a way that most institutional mechanisms would render ineffectual or innocuous at best.
Pressure politics, however, is more than just an instrument for exacting government concessions. Collective acts of struggle also strengthen the movement internally. By energizing its participants, they help galvanize the passions, convictions and sense of mystique that gives the MST its resilient character. They also foster feelings of pride and ownership over the results achieved. MST mobilizations, furthermore, sharpen class consciousness, raise awareness of basic rights, build social networks of trust, nurture organizing skills and cultivate new popular leaders. As such, the movement’s public activism has played a central role in the long-term development of political capabilities among Brazil’s rural poor.69
Over the years, the MST has inspired and helped nurture an array of Brazilian popular movements representing peasant women, populations displaced by hydroelectric dams, small farmers, homeless people, and other landless groups, principally those linked to CONTAG’s rural trade unions.70 In this way, the MST has helped catalyze an unprecedented distribution of state resources among the rural poor, through land purchases, farming and housing credits, infrastructural development, technical assistance, educational programs, and the creation of scores of rural cooperatives and food-processing plants.
All this suggests that public activism should be treated as a crucial instrument for inequality reduction in societies as starkly disparate as Brazil. Such environments, after all, tend to produce daunting obstacles to change. Their
69 On the development of “political capabilities over the long run,” see Whitehead and Molina’s (2003).
70 Rosa (2009).
34
removal requires that they be tackled with concerted, forceful, and disruptive pressure from below. If coupled with a bargaining process at the top, this societal drive can foster an auspicious momentum for progressive reforms. In apartheid- like environments, amiable, top-down attempts to carry-out substantive downward-redistribution measures are likely to produce empty government promises, or meagre reforms, at best.
Far from being a sign of “incongruence” and affront to democracy, as Navarro and other critics suggest,71 MST pressure politics should be appreciated as a mark of democratic vitality and engagement. Indeed, compared to other manifestations of social tension and conflict –including street gangs, riots, crime and guerrilla warfare— public activism offers a constructive, democratic venue for channeling popular demands and instigating pro-poor development policies.
(2) Citizenship Rights, the Public Agenda and Civil Society Inclusion. The MST has contributed to the development of citizenship rights in Brazil, and done so in all three basic dimensions of this idea: civil, political and social rights.72 Since its origins the MST has fought for the right to protest and mobilize freely, and thus exercise its democratic right to influence decisions made by public authorities, independent of the electoral process. Through legal measures and publicity efforts, it has defended the basic civil rights of hundreds of peasants who have been imprisoned, abused and assassinated for their land reform activism.
MST achievements in the creation of land reform settlements, cooperatives, agro-industries, education and consciousness-raising have improved the material conditions, cultural resources and political capabilities of its members. As such, the movement has fortified the social foundations for democracy in Brazil. When basic needs are met and awareness of rights enhanced, people are unlikely to sell their votes on Election Day. The sense of character and dignity forged through long years of MST struggle has helped nurture more conscientious citizens and foster greater public participation in local and national affairs. By
71 Navarro (2002a: 219). 72 As outlined originally by T.H. Marshall (1992).
35
enabling people to use their political rights, the MST has facilitated the integration of hundreds of thousands of poor and historically marginalized Brazilians into the democratic process. In doing so, the MST has abetted their “transition from clientelism to citizenship.”73
MST demands to implement national agrarian reform laws are illustrative of the movement’s efforts to bridge a striking gap in Brazilian society –the abyss between the Constitution’s social rights and their weak enforcement. The effort to diminish the historic chasm between the pays légal and the pays réel –between the country’s formal edifice –made, as the popular saying in Brazil goes, “para o inglês ver” (for the English to see)— and its everyday reality, amounts to a concerted struggle aimed at overcoming Brazil’s “low-intensity citizenship.”74 The process of surmounting such democratic deficits is an eminently political and contentious one. As Charles Tilly highlights, throughout world history, citizenship rights were never created through gentle concessions from the ruling elite or the gradual enlightenment of society as a whole. Rather, these rights are the historical result of years of resistance, struggle and bargaining with national authorities.75
The quality of democracy is enhanced through the “complementary and mutually reinforcing tasks” of “strengthening citizen participation and expanding the agenda for public discussion.”76 Through its protests and public advocacy, the MST has enriched Brazil’s public debate in many ways. Over the years the movement has incorporated several new themes to its traditional class-based analysis of Brazilian reality, from gender equality to agro-ecology, food sovereignty, youth empowerment and human rights. All these themes have become an integrate part of the movement’s critique of Brazil’s exclusionary and predatory model of development. MST detractors dismiss this line of reasoning as
73 Fox (1994).
74 O’Donnell (1994: 166); also see Carvalho (2006: 199-217).
75 Tilly (2002); also see Foweraker and Landman (1997).
76 Iazetta (2005: 6). On the quality of democracy, see O’Donnell, Cullell and Iazzetta (2004), and Diamond and Morlino (2005).
36
a sign of the movement’s “undue politicization” and “deviation” from a more “wholesome past,” in which its main preoccupation was to gain access to land.77 The landless movement’s quest for “revolutionary change” in Brazil, the critics assert, is “backward-looking,” “anti-modern” and “dangerous.”
Other audiences, however, are likely to interpret MST proposals differently. For instance, the movement’s sharp critique of the agribusiness model of rural development, with its large-scale industrial farms, intense use of pesticides, reliance on genetically-modified seeds and close affinity to the “fast- food lifestyle,” would elicit sympathy from European and North American consumers and activists engaged in the budding counter-culture movement in support of an organic food production system, anchored on local family farms.78 Similarly, citizens in most advanced democracies would readily agree with the MST’s support for strict gun controls. Leading international human rights organizations have endorsed MST petitions to Congress urging that it federalize human rights crimes in the countryside and ratify a constitutional amendment to expropriate ranches that use slave labor. Efforts to democratize Brazil’s media structure, in turn, have put the MST in close collaboration with alternative media networks in various parts of the globe. In light of the world’s 2008-2009 financial debacle, it would appear to many that the MST’s longstanding disagreement with neoliberal policies of financial deregulation and fiscal austerity were not as “regressive” as portrayed by its adversaries. Indeed, its ongoing support for a grassroots campaign to re-nationalize Brazil’s giant mining conglomerate formerly
77 For relevant comments of this sort, see Graziano (2004: 73, 103, 278), Martins (2000: 17-39, 112-115; 2007); Navarro (2002a: 201-212; 2007; 2009) and in Scolese (2003); Rosenfield 227, 239, 252-253, 267). Fernando Henrique Cardoso (2006: 70, 79, 541) offers a similar appraisal. He describes the MST as belonging “to a niche of resistance to modernity that is a conveyer of a regressive utopia;” a movement that looks at the world “through the rearview mirror;” and committed the grave mistake of seeking to “politicize” the agrarian question in Brazil.
78 MST advocacy for alternative forms of rural development shares core principles and ideas espoused by Michael Pollan (2006, 2008) and other critics of the industrial model of food production and consumption.
37
known as the Companhía do Vale do Rio Doce, privatized at fire-sale prices in 1997, might still prove to be a prescient move.
Recurrent efforts to de-legitimize the MST and dismiss any discussion over the issues raised by the movement counter classic liberal arguments in favor of free speech. As John Stuart Mills long noted, “fear of heresy” and the tendency towards “intellectual pacification” thwart prospects for “social progress.” Such dispositions stifle intellectual creativity and restrict the open discussion and consideration of alternative viewpoints needed to find new elements of truth. They also hamper the development of the mental and moral character forged through vigorous deliberation.79 Though constricted in many ways, MST efforts to keep a substantial, rather than a minor, spectrum of dissent alive, have enhanced the quality of public debate in Brazilian democracy.
All together, the struggle to enhance political capabilities among the poor, extend basic citizenship rights, and broaden the nation’s public agenda, has strengthened Brazilian civil society. The organization and incorporation of marginalized sectors of the population into this arena through autonomous popular movements is a relatively novel phenomenon in Brazilian history. Traditionally, civil societal associations and media outlets represented mostly the interests of the upper and middle classes. These interests, no doubt, are still predominant. Yet the inclusion of subaltern actors such as the MST has contributed much to the democratization of this societal space. The long term trend suggests a potential for many innovative developments, provided the conditions for this be secured through the preservation and expansion of Brazil’s political freedoms.
(3) Hope, Utopia and Democratizing Ideals. Contemporary democratic institutions, practices and ideas are the result of a longstanding development fueled by powerful normative aspirations. As Giovanni Sartori put it, “what democracy is cannot be separated from what democracy should be. A democracy exists only insofar as its ideals and values bring it into being.”80 The creative
79 Mill (1956: 40-41, 64). 80 Sartori (1987: 7).
38
tension between democracy’s real and ideal dimensions has been at the heart of its historical evolution.
MST demands for greater social justice in a nation afflicted by remarkable inequities represent a vital democratizing force for Brazil. From its early days, the movement has helped inspire new horizons and heartened visions of a more just society. In recent years, the belief that “another world is possible,” has found a congenial setting at the assemblies of the World Social Forum. This global gathering of progressive and alternative forces emerged as a counterpoint to the World Economic Forums established in Davos, Switzerland, a meeting place for leading financiers, corporate managers and heads of state. The MST has been very much involved with the World Social Forum since its first encounter in 2001. Indeed, four of the first five gatherings have taken place in Porto Alegre, Brazil, not far from where the movement was actually born.
By cultivating a resilient sense of hope and quest for “another world,” the MST has bolstered the dreams and ideals of equality, liberty and participation that have invigorated movements for democratization throughout world history.81 Democratization, as Laurence Whitehead underscores, is a “complex, long term, dynamic and open-ended process,” that cannot be frozen in time and place.82 Democracy, in other words, is a perpetually unfinished product, open to improvement through contestation, deliberation and bouts of creative inspiration.
A sense of utopia can be crucial for all this. As Max Weber perceptively wrote, humans “would not have attained the possible if time and again (they) had not reached out for the impossible.” A “steadfastness of the heart ... can brave even the crumbling of all hopes. This is necessary right now, or else (people) will not be able to attain even that which is possible today.”83
81 On the historical importance of social movements for democracy, see Markoff (1996).
82 Whitehead (2002: 6-34). 83 The quote is from Weber’s essay, “Politics as a Vocation” (1958: 128).
39
Conclusion
To confine the MST’s place in Brazilian society as one merely engaged in the struggle for agrarian reform is to miss out on the larger picture at stake. The MST is not just a rural phenomenon. Lurking behind the movement’s orderly marches and bright red flags is a specter that haunts Brazil’s secular inequities. Though often exaggerated, the fears of change it elicits are not groundless. The MST rattles common-held perceptions, norms and customs. It upsets “the natural order of things.” It exposes, gives voice and channels tensions that underlie Brazilian society. Some see its agitation as a national anathema. Others sympathize with its disruptive thrust. Among the latter, many consider the movement a powerful Brazilian symbol and inspiration in the struggle to achieve the full promise of equal citizenship rights.
The way the MST has pursued such promise has not always squared neatly with conventional forms of liberal democratic politics. Brazil’s starkly unequal society and great obstacles to the political representation of popular sector interests are crucial to understanding the MST’s alternative approach to democratization. For lack of a comprehensive pro-poor reform policy in the countryside, peasant groups have been left with few alternatives to strong-arm, pressure tactics. The MST’s radicalism, therefore, should be understood principally as a reaction to the adverse conditions that have hampered land redistribution and the adoption of other progressive economic and social policies in Brazil.
According to the Latinobarómetro poll, between 1996 and 2006, an average of only 24 percent of Brazilians claimed they were satisfied with their democracy.84 It should come as no surprise, therefore, to find harsh words of contempt within the MST towards the nation’s governing institutions and ruling political class. Unlike the majority of Brazilians, who vent their frustrations in more private ways, MST members are inclined to channel their indignation through public activism. Indeed, for all their malaise and disappointment with the
84 Corporación Latinobarómetro (2007: 72-74).
40
political system, within the landless movement one can find some of the most relentless, no-nonsense practitioners of grassroots democracy in Brazil.
This point can be illustrated with a brief follow up to the 1985 Annoni land occupation in Rio Grande do Sul, described at the beginning of this article. By the early 1990s, 354 families had been settled in the Annoni estate. The influx of people into the area led to the creation of a new municipal district named Pontão, which celebrated its second elections for local government in 1996. In Brazil, municipal elections tend to mobilize politicians and voters in intense contests given the substantial powers conferred to local governments.
The Annoni community was one of the largest in this overwhelmingly rural district. Hence, MST settlers were able to put forth a PT candidate and win a three-way election with almost 39% of the valid votes. This represented another milestone victory for the MST as it was the first time one of its members was elected mayor of its municipality. The 2000 vote for local government, however, involved a tight re-election contest, as the opposition formed a broad coalition against the left. The PT, nonetheless, won again with 56% of the valid votes, thanks to the MST’s efforts among the Annoni settlers.85 At a simple glance one would presume that such outcomes were the result of conventional campaign tactics found in mainstream democracies. The truth, though, is that the decisive election move was not as ginger as this.
Political clientelism and vote-buying are a longstanding practice in Brazil that affects the country’s poorest social strata, in particular. The national laws established to punish such behavior are strong, yet the mechanisms to enforce them are actually weak. In the months preceding the 2000 vote, anti-PT campaigners in Pontão got organized to purchase the support needed to win the election. Days before the election, they went out through the back country roads to offer car tires, money and groceries in exchange for votes. But the PT activists struck back with a string of all-night, gun-in-hand roadblocks to prevent their rivals from buying out their more feeble supporters. One night, the roadblock
85 Election data is from the Núcleo de Pesquisa e Documentação da Política Rio- Grandense (NUPERGS), of the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.
41
crew fired warning shots towards an approaching vehicle. On another day, the PT militants had the police ground a truck full of spare tires. And in between, they held back a second truck loaded with groceries. Thus, they were able to secure a tense election victory in Pontão.86
The lessons from all this should be clear by now. Given the crude realities of Brazilian politics and harsh conditions under which agrarian reform must be implemented, one cannot expect the MST’s contribution to democracy in Brazil to be anything less than muscle-bound, forceful and rough. By virtue of birth and necessity, the MST’s distinct mark has been that of the tough touch.
86 This account was gathered during a field visit to Pontão and neighboring municipalities shortly after the 2000 municipal elections. Problems with vote-buying or attempts to do so were reported in all neighboring districts. As in Pontão, progressive candidates had to resort to similar strong-arm tactics to thwart their adversaries’ vote-buying efforts.
42
Bibliography
ActionAid International. Power Hungry: Six Reasons to Regulate Global Food Corporations. Johannesburg: ActionAid International, 2006.
Arruda, Roldão. “’Não existiria nenhum abril vermelho sem recursos públicos.’” O Estado de São Paulo, (April 29, 2007).
Arruda, Roldão. “MST inaugural escola de US$1,3 mi,” O Estado de São Paulo, (January 16, 2005).
Arruda, Roldão. “'Ofensiva do MST será estorvo político para Lula': Para o sóciologo Zander Navarro, movimento pode atrapalhar programa de reforma agrária,” O Estado de São Paulo (May 5, 2003).
Berger, Christa. Campos em Confronto: A Terra e o Texto. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade/UFRGS, 1998.
Branford, Sue. “Lidando com Governos: O MST e as Administrações de Cardoso e Lula,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Branford, Sue and Rocha, Jan. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau, 2002.
Caldart, Roseli Salete. Pedagogía do Movimento Sem Terra: Escola É Mais do que Escola, 2nd edition (Petrópolis: Vozes, 2000).
Source:
h t t p : / / w w w . c a r t a m a i o r . c o m . b r / t e m p l a t e s / m a t e r i a M o s t r a r . c fm ? m a t e r i a _ i d = 1 5 5 5 3
Access: April 9, 2009 Carter, Miguel, editor. Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária
no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009a.
Carter, Miguel. “Desigualdade Social, Reforma Agrária e Democracia no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009b.
Carter, Miguel. “Origem e Consolidação do MST no Rio Grande do Sul,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009c.
Carta Maior. “Lula divulga balanço de 6 anos e defende Reforma Agrária.” Carta
Maior (January 30, 2009).
43
Carter, Miguel. “Desafiando a Desigualdade: Contestação, Contexto e Conseqüências,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009d.
Carter, Miguel. “The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) and the Struggle for Social Justice in Brazil,” Alternative Visions of Development: The Rural Social Movements in Latin America, edited by Carmen Diana Deere and Fred Royce. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2009e.
Carter, Miguel. Stroessner Vive: Legados Autoritarios y Democracia en el Paraguay. Asunción: ServiLibro / CIPAE, 2009f.
Carter, Miguel. For Land, Love, and Justice: The Origins of Brazil’s Landless Workers Movement. Unpublished Manuscript, 2008.
Carter, Miguel. “Land Mobilizations in Rio Grande do Sul, 1978-2006.” Unpublished Database, American University, 2007.
Carter, Miguel. “The Origins of Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers’ Movement (MST): The Natalino Episode in Rio Grande do Sul (1981-84). A Case of Ideal Interest Mobilization.” Working Paper Number CBS-43-03, Centre for Brazilian Studies, University of Oxford, 2003.
Carter, Miguel and Horacio Martins Carvalho. “A Luta na Terra: Fonte de Inovação, Fortalecimento e Desafio Constante ao MST,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Chalmers, Douglas A., Scott B. Martin and Karieanne Piester. “Associative Networks: New Structures of Representation for Popular Sectors?” The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and Representation, edited by Douglas A. Chalmers, Carlos M. Vilas, Katherine Hite, Scott B. Martin, Keriane Piester, and Monique Segarra. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Collier, Ruth Berins. Paths Toward Democracy: The Working Class and Elites in Western Europe and South America. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
CEPAL (Comisión Económica Para América Latina). Anuario Estadístico de America Latina y el Caribe, 2004. Source: http://www.eclac.cl/, accessed May 19, 2006.
Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT). “Assassinatos e Julgamentos 1985-2003.” Setor de Documentação. Unpublished Report, 2007a.
Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT). Conflitos no Campo Brasil 2006. Goiânia: CPT, 2007b.
44
Comparato, Bruno Konder. A Ação Polítiça do MST. São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2003.
Corporación Latinobarómetro. Latinobarómetro Report 2007. Santiago de Chile, 2007. Source: www.latinobarometro.org.
DATALUTA (2008). Banco de Dados da Luta pela Terra, Relatório 2007. Presidente Prudente: NERA – FCT/UNESP.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo, José Garcia Gasques, José Graziano da Sila, and Júnia Cristina P. R. da Conceição. 2001. “Estimativas das famílias potenciais beneficiárias de programas de assentamentos rurais no Brasil.” Transformações da agricultura e políticas públicas, edited by José Garcia Gasques and Júnia Cristina P. R. da Conceição. (Brasília: IPEA, 2001).
Delgado, Guilherme Costa. “Questão Agrária e o Agronegócio no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Diamond, Larry and Leonardo Morlino, editors. Assessing the Quality of Democracy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. “Formação e Territorialização do MST no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. A Formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis: Vozes, 2000.
Foweraker, Joe and Todd Landman. Citizenship Rights and Social Movements: A Comparative and Statistical Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Fox, Jonathan. “The Difficult Transition from Clientelism to Citizenship: Lessons from Mexico.” World Politics 46: 2 (January, 1994), pp. 151-184.
Graziano, Xico. “Terrorismo Agrário.” Estado de São Paulo, May 23. Graziano, Xico. O Carma da Terra. São Paulo: A Girafa, 2004.
Hagopian, Frances. Traditional Politics and Regime Change in Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Held, David. Models of Democracy. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.
Huber, Evelyne and Frank Safford, editors. Agrarian Political Structure & Political Power: Landlord and Peasant in the Making of Latin America. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1995.
45
Iazzetta, Osvaldo M. “Introduction.” The Quality of Democracy: Theory and Applications, edited by Guillermo O’Donnell, Jorge Vargas Cullell and Osvaldo M. Iazzetta. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, 2004.
Instituto de Estudos Socioeconómicos, INESC. “Orçamento Público, Direitos e Desigualdades: Um olhar sobre a proposta orçamentaria para 2009.” Source: www.inesc.org (Access: April 9, 2009)
Kane, Liam. Popular Education and Social Change in Latin America. London: Latin America Bureau, 2001.
Kolling, Edgar Jorge, Paulo Ricardo Cerioli, and Roseli Salete Caldart, editors. Educação do Campo: Identidade e Polítiças Públicas: Por uma Educação do Campo. Coleção Por Uma Educação do Campo No. 4. Brasilia: Articulação Nacional Por Uma Educação do Campo, 2002.
Lamounier, Bolívar. “Brazil: Inequality Against Democracy.” Democracy in Developing Countries: Latin America, edited by Larry Diamond, Juan J. Linz, and Seymour Martin Lipset. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publisher, 1989.
Leite, Sergio, et al., editors. Impactos dos Assentamentos: Um Estudo sobre o Meio Rural Brasileiro. Brasília: Núcleo de Estudos Agrários e Desenvolvimento Rural (NEAD), 2004.
Lerrer, Débora Franco. De como a mídia fabrica e impõe uma imagem: A degola do PM pelos sem-terra em Porto Alegre. (Rio de Janeiro: Editora Revan, 2005).
Mainwaring, Scott P. Rethinking Party Systems in the Third Wave of Democratization: The Case of Brazil. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999.
Markoff, John. Waves of Democracy: Social Movements and Political Change. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press, 1996.
Marshall, T. H. “Citizenship and Social Class.” Citizenship and Social Class, edited by Tom Bottomore. London: Pluto Press, 1992.
Martins, José de Souza. “O MST e seus moinhos de vento.” O Estado de São Paulo (April 22, 2007).
Martins, José de Souza. O Sujeito Oculto: Ordem e Transgressão na Reforma Agrária. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade/UFRGS, 2003.
Martins, José de Souza. Reforma Agrária: O Impossível Diálogo. São Paulo: Editora da Universidad de São Paulo, 2000.
46
Martins, José de Souza. “A Questão Agrária Brasileira e o Papel do MST,” A Reforma Agraria e a Luta do MST, edited by João Pedro Stédile. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1997.
Martins, José de Souza. O Poder do Atraso: Ensaios de Sociología da História Lenta. São Paulo: Editora HUCITEC, 1994.
Martins, Mônica Dias, editor. O Banco Mundial e a Terra: Ofensiva e Resistência na América Latina, Ásia e África. São Paulo: Biotempo, 2004.
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers' Trade Union Movement, 1964-1985. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1994).
Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de. História dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE, 1989.
Méndez, Juan E. Guillermo O’Donnell, and Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, editors. The (Un)Rule of Law and the Underprivileged in Latin America. Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 1999.
Meszaros, George. “O MST e o Estado de Direito no Brasil,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Meszaros, George. “No Ordinary Revolution: Brazil’s Landless Workers’ Movement.” Race & Class. 42:2 (2000a), pp.1-18.
Meszaros, George. “Taking the Land into their Hands: The Landless Workers’ Movement and the Brazilian State.” Journal of Law and Society. 27:4 (December 2000b), pp.517-41.
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty, edited by Currin V. Shields. Indianapolis: Bobbs- Merrill Educational Publishing, 1956.
Ministério de Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento, MAG (2009). “Estatísticas: Crédito Rural no Brasil.” Source: http://www.agricultura.gov.br/ (Access: April 9, 2009)
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA); Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária (INCRA); Superintendência Nacional de Desenvolviment Agrário (SND). “Projetos de Reforma Ágrária Conforme Fases de Implementação: Período da Criação do Projeto - 01/01/1900 Até 24/07/2003.” Unpublished Document, July 2003.
Ministério de Desenvolvimento Agrário (MDA), Equipe Técnica. “Proposta de plano de reforma agrária.” Unpublished manuscript. Brasília: MDA (October 2003).
47
Moore, Barrington. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Landlord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Navarro, Zander. “MST tenta se manter vivo no sistema politico.” Gazeta Mercantil (February 12, 2009).
Navarro, Zander. “Comédia agrária.” Folha de São Paulo (April 22, 2007).
Navarro, Zander. “Mobilização sem Emancipação – As Lutas Sociais dos Sem Terra no Brasil.” Produzir para Viver: Os Caminhos da Produção Não Capitalista, edited by Boaventura de Sousa Santos. São Paulo: Civilização Brasileira, 2002a.
Navarro, Zander. “O MST e a Canonização da Ação Coletiva (Reposta a Horacio Martins Carvalho).” Produzir para Viver: Os Caminhos da Produção Não Capitalista, edited by Boaventura de Sousa Santos. São Paulo: Civilização Brasileira, 2002b.
O Estado de São Paulo. “Editorial: O perfil dos movimentos sociais.” O Estado de São Paulo (June 17, 2008).
O’Donnell, Guillermo. “Human Development, Human Rights and Democracy.” The Quality of Democracy: Theory and Applications, edited by Guillermo O’Donnell, Jorge Vargas Cullell and Osvaldo M. Iazzetta. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, 2004.
O’Donnell, Guillermo. “The State, Democratization and Some Conceptual Problems (A Latin American View with Glances at Some Post-Communist Countries).” Latin American Political Economy in the Age of Neoliberal Reform, edited by William C. Smith, Carlos H. Acuña and Eduardo A. Gamarra. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1994.
Ondetti, Gabriel. Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2008.
Pereira, Anthony W. “An Ugly Democracy? State Violence and the Rule of Law in Postauthoritarian Brasil.” Democratic Brazil: Actors, Institutions and Processes, edited by Peter R. Kingston and Timothy J. Power. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2000.
Pereira, Hamilton. “Somos a Perigosa Memória das Lutas,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Pereira, João Marcio Mendes. “O Modelo de Reforma Agrária de Mercado do Banco Mundial em Questão: O Debate Internacional e o Caso Brasileiro. Teoria, Luta Política e Balanço de Resultados.” Masters Thesis, CPDA, Universidade Federal Rural de Rio de Janeiro, 2004.
48
Pinheiro, Paulo Sergio. “Popular Responses to State-Sponsored Violence in Brazil.” The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking Participation and Representation, edited by Douglas A. Chalmers et al. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Poletto, Ivo. “A Igreja, a Comissão Pastoral da Terra e a Mobilização pela Reforma Agrária,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Poletto, Ivo and Antônio Canuto, editors. Nas Pegadas do Povo da Terra: 25 Anos da Comissão Pastoral da Terra. Sao Paulo: Edições Loyola, 2002.
Pollan, Michael. In Defense of Food: An Eaters Manifesto. New York: Penguin Group, 2008.
Pollan, Michael. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals. New York: Penguin Group, 2006.
Rosa, Marcelo. “Além do MST: O Impacto nos Movimentos Sociais Brasileiros,” Combatendo a Desigualdade Social: O MST e a Reforma Agrária no Brasil, edited by Miguel Carter. São Paulo: Editora da UNESP, 2009.
Revista Sem Terra, 11: 48 (January/February 2009). Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyne Huber Stephens and John D. Stephens. Capitalist
Development and Democracy. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1992. Quirk, Patrick W. Emotions and the Struggle ofBrazil's Landless Social Movement (MST).
(Saarbrucken, Germany: VDM Publishing, 2008).
Sauer, Sérgio and João Marcio Mendes Pereira, editors. Capturando a Terra: Banco Mundial, políticas fundiárias neoliberais e reforma agrária de mercado. São Paulo: Editora Expressão Popular, 2006.
Sartori, Giovanni. The Theory of Democracy Revisited. Chatham: Chatham House Publishers, 1987.
Scalabrin, Leandro Gaspar. “’Estado de Exeção’ no Rio Grande do Sul e a criminalização do MST.” Unpublished manuscript, 2009.
Scolese, Eduardo. “Revogar MP é "tiro no pé", diz especialista,” Agência Folha (March 23, 2003).
Schmitter, Philippe C. “Still the Century of Corporatism?” Review of Politics, 36 (January 1974), pp. 86-131.
49
Scott, James C. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985.
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.
Smulovitz, Catalina and Enrique Peruzzotti. “Societal Accountability in Latin America.” Journal of Democracy, 11:4 (October 2000), pp. 147-158.
Snyder, Richard and David J. Samuels, “Legislative Malapportionment in Latin America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives,” Federalism and Democracy in Latin America, edited by Edward L. Gibson. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004, pp. 131-172.
Sparovek, Gerd. A Qualidade dos Assentamentos da Reforma Agrária Brasileira. São Paulo: Páginas & Letras Editora e Gráfica, 2003.
Stédile, João Pedro, editor. A Questão Agrária no Brasil. 7th edition. São Paulo: Editora Atual, 1999.
Stédile, João Pedro and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora da Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1999.
Stédile, João Pedro and Frei Sergio Görgen. A Luta Pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Página Aberta, 1993.
Stepan, Alfred. Arguing Comparative Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. Stepan, Alfred. “Brazil’s Decentralized Federalism: Bringing Government Closer
to the Citizens?” Daedalus, 129:2 (Spring 2000).
Thums, Gilberto. “Investigando: MST – Levantamento de dados sobre suas atividades no Rio Grande do Sul.” Conselho Superior do Ministério Público. Procedimento Administrativo No 16315-0900/07-9, n/date.
Tilly, Charles. Social Movements, 1768-2004. Boulder and London: Paradigm Publishers, 2004.
Tilly, Charles. Stories, Identities, Political Change. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002.
Tilly, Charles. “Repertoires of Contention in America and Britain,” The Dynamics of Social Movements, edited by Mayer N. Zald and John D. McCarthy. Cambridge, Mass.: Winthrop, 1979.
50
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Human Development Report 2007/2008. Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World. New York: UNDP, 2007.
Vieira, Else R.P. and Bernard McGuirk, editors. Landless Voices in Song and Poetry: The Movimento dos Sem Terra of Brazil. Nottingham: Critical, Culture and Communications Press, 2007.
Vieira, Oscar Vilhena. “Inequality and Subversion of the Rule of Law in Brazil.” Working Paper Number CBS-60-05, Centre for Brazilian Studies, University of Oxford, 2007.
Vigna, Edélcio. “Mediação de Sementes.” Reforma Agrária: Os Caminhos do Impasse, interview by Débora Lerrer. São Paulo: Editora Garçoni, 2003.
Weber, Max. Economy and Society, edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. Berkeley: University of California, 1978.
Welch, Clff. “Movement Histories: A Preliminary Historiography of Brazil’s Landless Laborers’ Movement (MST).” Latin American Research Review, 41: 1 (2006).
Weyland, Kurt. Democracy Without Equity: Failures of Reform in Brazil. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996.
Whitehead, Laurence. Democratization: Theory and Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002
Whitehead, Laurence and George Gray-Molina. “Political Capabilities over the Long Run.” Changing Paths: International Development and the New Politics of Inclusion, edited by Peter P. Houtzager and Mick Moore. Ann Harbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003.
Wright, Angus and Wendy Wolford. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland: Food First Books, 2003.
51

Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 3 No. 4, October 2003, pp. 500–520.
500	Wendy Wolford
Producing Community: The MST and Land Reform Settlements in Brazil
WENDY WOLFORD
This paper analyses the attempt to create an ‘imagined community’ among members of the MST (Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, Movement of Rural Landless Workers) as a way of maintaining high levels of participation. As one of the most active rural movements in Brazilian history, MST owes much of its success to high levels of involvement among members who have already achieved their initial goal of access to land. Move- ment leaders and activists encourage participation by creating a community through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. The lived experiences of community differ from the imaginings, however, and in this paper I show how MST members negotiate the movement’s expression of community in ways that reflect historical experiences of economy and society. Ultimately, MST’s imagined community is effective because the movement has established itself as a successful mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
Keywords: land occupations, land reform, social movements, Brazil INTRODUCTION
Established in 1984, the MST is now ‘the most active organization in the Brazilian countryside’ (Navarro 2000: 37). At the movement’s first National Congress in 1985, members decided on two main goals. MST would fight for an agrarian reform that distributed land to those who would work it, and for the develop- ment of a just, fraternal society (Rocha and Branford 2002; Fernandes 1999). In the years since then, the movement has organized over 230,000 land occupations and overseen the creation of approximately 1200 agrarian reform settlements.1 Movement efforts have been critical in pushing through legislation geared towards land redistribution and the promotion of small family farming. Partly as a result
Wendy Wolford, Department of Geography, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 203 Saunders Hall, Campus Box 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu The research for this paper was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. The author would like to thank
Henry Bernstein for his helpful comments and advice. 1	For updated numbers and information about MST’s activities, see the movement’s own web page at: www.mst.org.br. Also see a web site on MST maintained in the United States by a group called Friends of MST at: www.mstbrazil.org/index.html.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Henry Bernstein and Terence J. Byres 2003.
of these successes, MST’s membership has increased from several hundred in 1984 to over one million today.
The vast majority of these members are not, in fact, ‘sem terra’ (landless) any more – they are people who have won access to land through the movement and now could be more accurately described as ‘com terra’ (landed). These com terra are very important to the maintenance of movement activities because they typic- ally have better access to resources than sem terra and can support ongoing land occupations and political battles. Maintaining a high level of participation and commitment among members who have already won access to land is therefore crucial to MST’s continued growth and impact. But most social movements find it difficult to generate such ongoing momentum. They often become victims of their own success, particularly when they are invested in the acquisition of an easily identifiable, tangible good such as land (cf. Zamosc 1986). MST members who have satisfied their initial demand for land need to be convinced of a reason to remain active in the movement, or many will cease to participate.
Many of MST’s accomplishments over the past seventeen years can be attrib- uted to its success in convincing members that there is a reason to stay in the movement after they win land. MST leaders and activists have worked hard to create, in Benedict Anderson’s (1983) words, an ‘imagined community’, consti- tuted through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. Embedded in this sense of community are ideological guidelines for interpreting different experiences, events and relationships. In this paper, I describe MST’s efforts to create an ‘imagined community’ of settlers conceived as a class for itself in a system dominated by landed elites. I then briefly examine the experiences of community on two MST settlements, one in southern Brazil and one in northeastern Brazil. These two settlements provide an interesting comparison because of the different occupational histories shared by a majority of MST members in the two places. The settlers in southern Brazil were primarily small family farmers before joining the movement, while the settlers in northeastern Brazil were primarily salaried rural workers. The settlers in both places struggle over their understanding of what community means to them – they struggle inwardly and they struggle with each other. Sometimes the everyday experience of ‘community’ is not very communal at all. Ultimately, I argue that while many elements of MST’s framing are successful, people participate in the movement for reasons that have less to do with the appeal to community and more to do with the movement’s effective positioning as mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND THE RISE OF MST
MST’s call for agrarian reform is not a new idea in Brazil. Land distribution has been both inequitable and contested since the Portuguese began to settle the new colony in the early 1500s. Because the Portuguese crown was unwilling and unable to colonize Brazil directly, the area’s known territory was divided into 15 captaincies in 1534, and considerable rights over these areas were bequeathed to
Producing Community	501
502	Wendy Wolford
hereditary captains ( Johnson 1987). The captains oversaw land distribution within their territories, and colonists who had connections to the captains were able to obtain large plots of land. Smaller plots of land were also set aside for poor settlers who were convinced to emigrate to Brazil, but the successful captaincies relied on wealthy men who produced export crops on large rural properties. Access to land could also be obtained through the act of squatting (posseiro), which was practised by wealthy and poor colonists alike. In general, however, these two mechanisms of land distribution (patronage and squatting) favoured the wealthy, and this bias is reflected in Brazilian land tenure patterns today (Stein 1985).
Until the 1930s, Brazil’s economy was dependent on the production of a few primary commodities. In the early colonial years, sugarcane dominated, but by the 1670s when competition from Dutch producers in the Antilles lowered demand for Brazilian sugar (Schwartz 1985), new commodities such as gold, rubber, cocoa, dairy and coffee became increasingly important. Sugarcane and coffee were the principal crops in the densely settled areas of the country, the Northeast and the South/Southeast. Produced for export, both crops were grown on large- scale plantations owned by wealthy elites and worked by slaves until the mid- 1800s (Dean 1976; Eisenberg 1974).2 The plantations, which were often richer than the towns, were set up as individual communities, with the owner – the senhor do engenho – at their head, followed by a group of skilled or semi-skilled employees, and surrounded by a mass of unskilled workers. The hierarchical paternalism of sugar and coffee plantations shaped social and economic develop- ment in Brazil and similar communities are still evident in its rural areas today.
In spite of the restrictive conditions keeping indigenous and African slaves at work in the sugar mills, a surprising number of runaway slave communities, called quilombos, were set up in remote areas as refuge communities. The most famous quilombo, called Palmares, was actually a network of settlements that ran throughout 200 square kilometres in the Northeast, an area now known as the State of Alagoas. Palmares existed for almost 100 years until the Brazilian gov- ernment succeeded in destroying the quilombo in 1695, decapitating its leader Zumbi and imprisoning the women and children who were not killed during the military operations (Schwartz 1992). The existence of Palmares, a community based on very different rules than Brazilian society, threatened the colonial rulers and provoked a violent reaction.
When Brazil was granted independence from Portugal in 1822, members of the newly established government debated the issue of land distribution (Viotti da Costa 2000). Access to land was an important subject because Brazil still had considerable territory open for settlement, and distributing property was seen as a way of encouraging immigration. Immigration was increasingly viewed as necessary to supplement the domestic labour force in the event that slavery was
2	Between 1500 and 1850, when the slave trade was finally abolished, over 3.65 million slaves were shipped into Brazil, more than to any other region in the Americas (Skidmore 1999: 17). Historians’ estimates of numbers vary, as it is difficult to produce reliable figures after 1830 when the slave trade (though not slavery) was abolished and Africans were smuggled into the country illegally.
abolished or became prohibitively expensive (Dean 1976). The two most popular proposals for regulating land distribution were market-based (making land avail- able for sale) and government-based (making land available for public distribu- tion) (Viotti da Costa 2000). In 1850, the land issue was resolved with a new land law that theoretically moved land onto the market, although in practice wealthy elites were able to continue the practice of claiming land through possession (Wright 2001). The government and plantation owners agreed to promote immigration by making frontier areas available for colonization, particularly in the southern end of the country.
In 1886, planters from the State of São Paulo organized the Sociedade Pro- motora de Imigração (Society for Promoting Immigration) and the number of immigrants to Brazil increased from 33,000 in 1886 to 132,000 in 1888 (Skidmore 1999: 72–3). Migrants received some private and public subsidization of travel costs, but the conditions they found in Brazil were far from the paradise they were promised. The planters found it difficult to reconceptualize their relation- ship with labour as a voluntary wage contract (Stein 1985; Viotti da Costa 2000), and they worked to frustrate settlers’ desire for land because the plantations were only viable with a steady source of labour. If immigrants were free to settle elsewhere, it was unlikely they would choose to stay on the plantations, and so planters restricted their mobility through debt peonage and intimidation (Dean 1976; Stolcke 1988). In 1902, the Italian government officially prohibited its citizens from accepting subsidies for travel to Brazil, and the Swiss Consul in Brazil was actively investigating several accounts of persecution (Lesser 1999). Descendants of these immigrants, some of whom found their own land, would be among the first members of MST.
By the early 1900s, Brazil’s economy was beginning to diversify as the profits of coffee production were invested in industrialization, particularly in the south- eastern State of São Paulo (Dean 1969). As industrialization increased, govern- ment officials discussed the ‘agrarian problem’. The large-scale properties and plantations in rural Brazil were seen as traditional and backward (Stein 1985), and it was doubted that they could satisfy the growing demand for cheap food from urban workers and employers. The large estates were seen as a barrier to the modernization of both the rural and urban areas. By the 1950s, the call for land redistribution was growing stronger, although the method was debated. Two classic opinions were presented by Ignácio Rangel (1956) and Caio Prado Júnior (1945, 1966). Rangel believed that industrialization would naturally lead to land tenure change and agricultural modernization, while Prado Júnior believed that a State-led socialist reform was necessary for boosting both agricultural production and development. During the 1950s and early 1960s, grassroots organizers with the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), rural trade unions and the Catholic Church, increased their presence in the rural areas and advocated a distributive agrarian reform (Medeiros 1989). In 1954, the PCB included agrarian reform as part of its strategy for carrying out a democratic-bourgeois revolution, and in 1957 formed a national union of peasants and rural workers in São Paulo (the Union of Farmers and Agricultural Workers of Brazil, ULTAB). Throughout
Producing Community	503
504	Wendy Wolford
the 1950s and 1960s, the Communist Party organized rural trade associations in several States, particularly Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Bahia (Maybury-Lewis 1994).3
In 1955, rural sugarcane workers in the northeastern State of Pernambuco founded a society that came to be known as the Peasant Leagues (Ligas Cam- ponesas). The rural workers, led by a plantation-born lawyer, formed their society in protest over their plantation owner’s decision to violate traditional practice and withhold money for a coffin intended for the burial of a worker (Pereira 1997). The Peasant Leagues grew rapidly and their development, combined with the activities of the Communist Party, stirred suspicions that a left-wing revolu- tion was imminent.4 The fear over revolution in the countryside was heightened by then President Goulart’s decision to announce a radical agrarian reform, expro- priating rural properties over 600 hectares without compensation.
In March 1964, the armed forces of Brazil seized power, forcing Goulart into exile and establishing military rule. Once in power, the military adopted an approach to the rural areas that would solve the agrarian problem by redistri- buting land through colonization and modernizing agricultural production. The military believed that it could satisfy the demand for land that was generating unrest in the Northeast and South of the country by moving ‘men without land’ to a ‘land without men’. The plan involved settling 200,000 families in the sparsely populated savannahs of the Centre-West and the Amazon Basin. In this way, the military could also secure the Northwest border of the country through effective possession.5
As the second part of its agrarian reform project, the military government targeted large-scale producers for subsidized modernization.6 The government poured millions of dollars of subsidized credit into the hands of private pro- ducers (Delgado 1985). Rural credit increased five times in real terms between 1968 and 1978 (Goodman et al. 1984: 198). During years of high inflation, such credit carried a negative rate of interest and financed the soybean and wheat boom in the southern and central-west States. Agricultural technology moved
3	When the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG) was formed in 1964, replacing ULTAB as an umbrella movement representing rural workers, the Brazilian Communist Party provided some of its most active leaders. Although the military government banned the Communist Party later that year, CONTAG continued to organize rural workers, focusing prim- arily on securing workers’ rights.
4	See Forman (1975) who has an interesting discussion of the Peasant Leagues. 5	The planned colonization projects were largely failures because they did not provide the necessary infrastructure, and basic services such as health and sanitation were never offered. The military managed to create only 43 settlements for 8000 of the 100,000 people expected. The military’s experiment with colonization brought international condemnation because of the difficult conditions experienced by the settlers and because of the environmental damage caused to the Amazon region (Schmink and Wood 1984). 6	According to José de Souza Martins, ‘five months after the coup and some time before the Land Statute was sent to Congress, the North American representative for the Alliance for Progress, Walt Rostow, was in São Paulo speaking animatedly with industrialists about the issue of the internal market. [He emphasized] that the industrialists should take an interest in transforming and modernizing their agriculture’ (Martins 1981: 94).
increasingly towards mechanized planting and threshing and chemical inputs. The use of irrigation equipment, pesticides and fertilizers all expanded produc- tion at an unprecedented rate.
The modernization of agriculture restructured land and labour relationships. Mechanized production reduced the need for workers and, without the money to pay for land of their own, millions of rural workers left for the urban areas (Graziano da Silva 1982). Large farmers out-competed small, traditional ones, making it more difficult for the latter to make a living. Land ownership became more concentrated, with the GINI index of land distribution increasing from 0.731 in 1960 to 0.867 in 1985 (Cardoso 1997). Through selective modernization and the urban migration of rural workers, the military government effectively ‘solved’ the agrarian problem. Agricultural production increased rapidly and Brazilian producers became internationally competitive in several lucrative com- modities, including soy, wheat, orange juice, poultry and cattle/beef (Müller 1989).
During military rule (1964–82), the Catholic Church grew into a force for radical organization and change in the Brazilian countryside. In 1961, the Roman Catholic Church officially decided to focus on land tenure issues in Latin America, publishing a series of educational documents to inform rural workers in Brazil of the biblical statement that ‘the land is a gift of God’. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, the Brazilian episcopate was one of the most progressive religious clergies in the world (Mainwaring 1986). In 1963, the first Ecclesiastical Base Communities (Comunidades Eclesiais de Base – CEBs) were created as a means of enabling communities to hold Sunday service without a priest, and in 1972 the Church formed the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra – CPT) to protect landless workers in the Amazon. By 1975, the CPT had extended its activities to peasants all over Brazil. By 1985, it was estimated that there were over 100,000 CEBs in local communities. Because of their integration into local communities and connection with a wider network of reform-minded activists, the CEBs were an ideal channel for grassroots organization (Houtzager 1997).
In 1982, the military formally withdrew from government. They had stepped into office ‘temporarily’ in 1964 to restore order to the country and had ended up ruling for eighteen years. The gradual end of authoritarian rule was characterized by economic crisis. The Brazilian State was deeply in debt and hyper-inflation threatened even as society clamoured noisily for a piece of the country’s eco- nomic wealth. When José Sarney was inaugurated as president in 1985, he remarked, ‘I have inherited the greatest political crisis in Brazilian history, the largest foreign debt in the world and the greatest internal debt and inflation we have ever had’ (Selcher 1986: 7).
In 1985 MST held its first National Congress. Tracing its roots back to the quilombos and Peasant Leagues, the movement grew out of several different land disputes in southern Brazil during the late 1970s and early 1980s (Fernandes 1999). MST members argued that the military had not only failed to solve the agrarian problem, it had created new ones. MST employed an aggressive method of land occupations, while justifying its actions with an appeal to the Federal
Producing Community	505
506	Wendy Wolford
Constitution, which states that ‘land has a social responsibility to be productive’. Land occupations were organized by activists, many of whom came out of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches. Activists travelled through poor rural and urban areas, informing people about their rights to land and organizing occupations. Once an encampment was set up on occupied land, activists and new members waited for representatives of the government or the landlord (sometimes the same) to visit. Negotiations over expropriated/occupied land were often violent and protracted, but MST won key successes early on that fuelled the movement’s growing momentum.
THE IMAGINED COMMUNITY OF MST
From the very beginning, MST activists have envisioned a struggle that goes well beyond the simple demand for land. This has created some difficulties for the movement because most of those who join it do so as a means to a very definite end. Although members ascribe different meanings to land (Wolford forthcoming a), most join the movement in the hope of incorporation into the government’s agrarian reform programme. Successful members usually express gratitude towards the movement and remember their experiences with pride and even pleasure, but without a compelling reason to continue as sem terra (landless) after receiving land, many would cease to participate regularly in movement events or drop out altogether. MST cannot afford to let this happen, as landed members constitute a valuable source of ideological and material support. Landed members are often asked to provide food for people living in occupation camps, and they even participate in new occupations as a way of adding numerical and emotional strength (Fernandes 1999). Landed members also attend regular public demonstrations that are considered crucial for raising government and public awareness about the plight of landless workers and small family farmers.
MST leaders address this dilemma of participation among successful members by creating an imagined community complete with group norms and expecta- tions that will tie members into the movement. As Benedict Anderson wrote of nationalism, this community of sem terra is imagined because most of its members will never actually meet each other, no matter how many national meetings they attend. In addition, the community is imagined because adherence to MST’s ideological and practical guidelines requires each individual to go well beyond past experiences to imagine a new social, political and economic ideal. Borrowing the language of ‘frames’ from Erving Goffman (1974), Robert Benford and David Snow (2000; see also Snow et al. 1986) have referred to this sort of ideological guidance within movements as the creation of ‘schemata of interpre- tation’ that ascribe meaning to past, present and future events and relationships in order to explain and legitimate movement activity. MST leaders develop frames of community that will close the gap between what they see as the ‘objective conditions of exploitation’ and the subjective interpretation of those conditions as exploitation. Because the frames that MST presents conflict with hegemonic interpretations of reality, the imagined community needs to change
not just the settlers’ economic situation but their cultural and social situations as well.
The main element of MST’s imagined community is its oppositional class character. The movement argues that as small farmers in rural Brazil, the settlers are exploited by a capitalist system whose chief engineers are large landowners, politicians and corporations. The sem terra are landless because others (capitalists, bankers, politicians, etc.) stole, misused and abused property that should belong to society as a whole. Within the dominant system, rural workers have few options: ‘The rural worker justifies an anti-capitalist stance because his only alternative under capitalism is “inevitable proletarianization”’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 92: 6). As an internal MST document argues, quoting Karl Marx: ‘All progress in capitalist agriculture is progress in the art of exploitation, whether of the worker or of the soil’. Participation in MST is presented as an expression of a class for itself: ‘we aren’t fighting against one land-grabber, we are fighting against a class, the land owning elite’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 35). Although the movement has moved away from a dogmatic reliance on Marxist-Leninist theory, a recent anthology of ‘Marxism in Latin America’ cited MST as one of the most important ‘new tendencies’ in the region (Löwy 1999: 63). According to MST’s outline of class conflict in Brazil, the landowning elite is supported ideologically and practically by the Brazilian State. At the movement’s First National Con- gress in 1985, the 1600 delegates present decided to take a stand against the New Republic (1985–9), and MST has rejected every government since on the grounds that the administrations represented ‘a bourgeois state . . . invested with class interest’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 36, 51).
The other side of MST’s class positioning is that within the movement all members are theoretically equal, part of a class in itself. This is deliberately based on the socialist ideal of egalitarianism and embodied in the concept of ‘union’, or unity. In the words of one MST member: ‘è a união que faz a força’ (it is unity that makes us strong)’.7 Leadership in the movement is carefully structured to be as horizontal as possible and all offices are, in principle, occupied temporarily.8 All participants in national-level decision making are selected on a rotating basis or are elected by the members of their communities. Through this ideal of equality, members across the country are encouraged to feel kinship with, and pride in, their unknown but imagined companheiros (comrades).9
Through documents and rituals, MST leaders carefully embed the class nature of the movement’s imagined community in historical structures and experiences. The historical tradition that MST draws upon goes back 500 years to injustices that are depicted as a direct consequence of the way in which Brazil was colonized.10
7	Interview #10, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 8	Movement members at the first meeting in 1984 decided that they did not want a president because it would invest one office and one person with too much power. Six of the most visible MST leaders, however, have been in positions of power since the movement was first formed. 9	As a figure in one of MST’s educational booklets explains: ‘Companheiros! We have to stay to- gether – IN ALL OF BRAZIL, you know how it is! Unity brings Strength’. 10	A popular MST slogan reads: ‘500 Years of Injustice’.
Producing Community	507
508	Wendy Wolford
MST consciously unites time and space by invoking events that took place in different time periods and regions to explain the present reality of Brazil as a whole. In a document prepared for discussion, an MST leader argues: ‘If agrarian reform was originally justified because it was necessary for overcoming feudal relations in the countryside . . . in ‘modern Brazil’ it is justified for even more important reasons. Not only do feudal social relations remain, but [so do] pro- duction relations that are effectively slavery’ (Teixeira 1999: 17). MST activists emphasize their belief that the movement is only the most recent expression of discontent in the rural areas. They invoke Zumbi, the leader of the quilombo Palmares, and the Peasant Leagues to establish a noble line of predecessors. During an MST meeting in the State of Santa Catarina, a theatre piece featured settlers dressed up as participants in past resistance movements, all holding up MST’s flag in symbolic support of their contemporary counterparts. Establish- ing the belief that peasants throughout time have fought and died for causes similar to that of MST plays an important part in the movement’s imagined community. When the government or national media ridicules MST members, calling them vagabonds and bandits, they are reminded that others suffered the same ill treatment. To paraphrase Benedict Anderson, it is through such emo- tional linkages to heroic ancestors that ‘pasts are restored, fellowships are imag- ined and futures dreamed’ (Anderson 1983: 154).
The historical tradition extends globally to include heroes of Marxist-inspired resistance around the world. Posters of Vladimir Lenin and Che Guevera are regularly present at MST meetings, as in the case of this photograph taken during a 1999 meeting in Pernambuco (Plate 1). The large red flag stretched across the stage pictures Che Guevera, Fidel Castro, Rosa Luxembourg and Nelson Mandela, among others. The words framing the flag read: Proletarians of the World Unite.
MST’s imagined community, like most communities, has important rules about who can be included and who cannot. As one older woman on an MST settlement said: ‘We are all together here – you can already see how different someone is who isn’t in the movement’.11 Membership in the movement is ‘elite’ in the sense that theoretically only those who fulfil the appropriate criteria are accepted. The ideal settler is a combination of the traditional peasant and the so- called ‘new man and woman’. The early editions of MST’s monthly newspaper, O Jornal Sem Terra (The Landless Newspaper, or JST), were filled with discussions of the new ‘social citizen’ that MST wished to create, as well as imaginative ways of encouraging settlers to willingly conform to this image. The vices that MST members are warned against are ‘reflexes of a sub-ideology generated by the private ownership of the means of production’. The vices range from ‘individu- alism’ (where one person ‘puts himself above the organization’) to ‘spon- taneity’ and ‘immobility’ (which causes a person to not ‘involve himself with anything’) ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).12 MST activists are encouraged to
11	Interview #19, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 12	The full list of vices includes: personalism, anarchy, complacency, sectarianism or ‘radicalism’, impatience, adventurism and self-sufficiency.
Producing Community	509 Plate 1. Flag displayed at MST meeting, Pernambuco 1999
promote discussion so that people will ‘know the vices [in order] to overcome them’ ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).
Most movement leaders are not conscious of promoting an ‘ideal’ settler, but the outlines of what is considered acceptable behaviour are evident in the imagined community’s guidelines for participation. These guidelines are distributed by movement activists who travel regularly throughout the settlements, both to hear from the settlers and to disseminate information from the movement’s headquarters in São Paulo. MST activists provide information, material goods and ideas that have both practical and ideological value. Acceptance of one legitim- ates, and encourages, acceptance of the other. Being a member of MST’s imag- ined community requires some degree of involvement in movement activities, whether through participation or support. Adherence to the behaviour appropri- ate to membership in MST is continually assessed from within. Any individual can be kicked out of the group for violating the rules of personal conduct (although violations would have to be extreme). The practice of peer evaluation is supported by government legislation on the land reform settlements. Section 5, part e, of the Settlement Contract signed by all agrarian reform beneficiaries states that settlers can be kicked off their land if they ‘become disruptive ele- ments [that negatively affect] the development of the workers in the project area due either to poor conduct or inability to adapt to community life’. Sufficient agreement among MST members can result in a settler losing rights to his or her land as well as membership in the movement. During a 1997 demonstration,
510	Wendy Wolford
two supposed MST members were expelled from the movement because they were believed to be spies. This sort of discriminatory membership is an import- ant component of any community, particularly a social movement community. There would be little appeal to sacrificing everything for a movement that any- one could join.
MST’s imagined community is symbolically represented in the movement’s dramatic flag: a deep red, the flag is stamped by an outline of the Brazilian nation. A generic representation of a man and woman are poised at the edge of the outline, his hand holding high a machete to symbolize resistance and struggle. At the movement’s first meeting, members chose this symbol over a straw hat because they wanted to express the movement’s commitment to a better, more progressive Brazilian nation (Rocha and Branford 2002). The flag’s emblem is repeated on T-shirts, baseball caps and posters that can be seen at any MST demonstration and on any settlement.
One of the main methods for actively presenting the frames underlying MST’s community is through what the movement calls ‘mysticism’ (see Schwade 1992). Mysticism is a legacy of Liberation Theology, which relied on charismatic leaders who were able to re-engage people in the practices of the Church. MST activists build on this combination of worldliness and idealism by creatively using songs, theatre and chants to help form new ideas and mould behaviour. Symbols of the struggle for land that characterize mysticism include dramatic representations of a joyful harvest where people work together to bring in the crops, and visits from past resistance leaders. In 1998, one State-wide meeting in Santa Catarina opened with several children walking single file through the audience carrying the tools and fruits of working the land – a machete, a handful of beans, a large squash. These were all laid at the front on a large outline of Brazil, signifying the construction of a better nation through the practices and values of MST’s new community. The dominant messages of mysticism are humility, honesty, convic- tion, perseverance, sacrifice, gratitude, responsibility and discipline. According to an MST publication, mysticism ‘reduces the distance between the present and the future, helping us to anticipate the good things that are coming’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 102: 3). Movement leaders encourage activists to use mysticism to tie settlers more firmly into the movement: ‘the more that the masses attach them- selves to their symbols, leaders and the organization, the more they fight, the more they mobilize and the more they organize themselves’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 97: 3). Mysticism is always present at MST meetings, assemblies and public demonstrations.
NEGOTIATING MST, COMMUNITY AND THE STATE
Most academic discussions of MST refer to the imagined community as repre- sentative of the movement (Hammond 1999; Petras 1997, 1998; Robles 2000). MST leaders themselves attribute the movement’s success to the formation of an imagined community that resonates with the settlers’ historical experiences and new expectations. But MST members have come to the movement from many
Producing Community	511
Figure 1. Location of two MST communities
different backgrounds, and they bring with them varied experiences of com- munity. During field research conducted in 1998–9 and 2001, I found very dif- ferent ideas shaping community relationships on settlements in the sugarcane plantation region of northeastern Brazil and the small family-farming region of southern Brazil (Figure 1; Wolford forthcoming a). Members of the two groups negotiated MST’s imagined community in ways that reflected their particular understanding of community.
The historical community described by the rural workers on a settlement in Pernambuco named Flora was segmented hierarchically along occupational lines, from the plantation owner at the top to the day labourer contracted illegally at the bottom (Sigaud 1979). Members of the plantation community lived in close physical proximity, but relations between occupational groups were marked by social distance. The rural workers rarely met socially as a community, because as one older man who had worked on different plantations in the region since 1961 said, ‘in that time there were no workers’ meetings. A meeting was to do forced labour’.13
In contrast, the historical community described by the small family farmers on a settlement in Santa Catarina named Vento was organized horizontally, as there was little occupational differentiation between families. Unlike the families on Flora, contact among the families was relatively rare because houses were dispersed, and interaction was usually reserved for the weekend soccer game or church service. Families would co-operate occasionally, however, on tasks that
13	Interview #25, Flora, Agua Preta, PE.
512	Wendy Wolford
benefited the community, such as repairing the roof of the school house, or on tasks that benefited individual families, such as bringing in the harvest when it was ready or helping a neighbour build a fence. These mutirões, as they were called, usually took place among relatives, although many of the settlers on Vento remembered group projects that had involved the whole community. As one settler said: ‘we’d been working in a group since we were little. Everyone got along’.14 When the first occupation in Santa Catarina took place in 1980, the landless squatters (not yet a part of MST) sent a portion of their first harvest down to their counterparts on an occupation site in the neighbouring State of Rio Grande do Sul.15
These different historical experiences with community shaped the way that settlers on Flora and Vento interacted with MST’s presentation of community. For the settlers on Flora, MST was an organization that they participated in almost reluctantly (Wolford forthcoming b). As plantation workers, they had little experience deriving their livelihood from their own farming, and most expressed a preference for wage labour over working the land. As one older man on Flora said, ‘What I thought [about getting land] was the same thing that everyone thought. We were used to our boss, every week we worked, and the money came for us to do our little shopping in town. Afterwards, with agrarian reform, we didn’t have the right to that any more . . . And so this was why we thought [that becoming settlers] was difficult’.16 Thirteen of the forty-six families living on Flora had joined MST because they felt there was little alternative when they were unable to find work in the crumbling sugarcane economy. The re- maining thirty-three had effectively joined the movement when the government expropriated the plantation property they were living on and offered them a piece of land. MST’s propositions for community were not ones that resonated with the settlers, and many perceived the movement as a trade organization that provided services for the settlers rather than a political community. When asked whether he had joined MST, one settler on Flora said, ‘Listen, it’s like this, I live here inside the settlement, what they say that I have to do, what I have to pay and what I have to do about the association, these things, I do’.17
The settlers on Vento participated in MST’s imagined community very dif- ferently than the settlers on Flora. Only twenty-three of the ninety-six families on the settlement had received land on the settlement without participating in an MST occupation. The families who had come to Vento through MST said that they joined in order to get land for themselves or for their children. A young man preparing to get married said, ‘To have land is a beautiful thing’.18 A woman on Vento said she and her husband had joined MST because ‘our kids were growing up and they had no land – through the struggle, our kids have gotten
14	Interview #38, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 15	For more information on this, see Fernandes (1999). 16	Interview #27, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 17	Interview #14, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 18	Interview #3, Vento, Campos Novos, PE.
married and gone after their own land’.19 For the former small family farmers, many of the MST’s messages resonated with their own experiences of com- munity. They believed in MST’s struggle to ‘transform society’20 and to ‘fight for equality and a better life for everyone’.21 The settlers on Vento were willing to work within the general guidelines of MST’s imagined community, although collective production projects established on the settlement suffered severe prob- lems. MST settlers who had tried to work in the collective project and found they could not, remained committed to the movement. As one woman who was preparing to leave the collective for an individual plot on the settlement said, ‘We still participate – we are still in favour of the movement. The movement still helps us, they won’t throw us out. We are not leaving [the collective] because of them’.22
Even as MST members work with very different understandings of the move- ment’s imagined community, few cite the ideological frame components as the reasons for their continued participation. Members continue to attend meetings and demonstrations in large part because MST has successfully linked material resources to ideological resources by situating itself as the mediator between the settlers and the State. Although MST has theoretically and practically organized itself in opposition to the Brazilian State, one marked consequence of winning land through the movement is increased interaction with representatives and resources from the State. The settlers’ relationship with the State begins during the occupation period, when they rely on local government to send food and health supplies. Even though the act of occupying property is portrayed by the media and government as illegal, people living in MST encampments usually receive basic support from local government. Activists organizing occupations tell participants to bring enough food to last a few days, until the government and other settlers begin to contribute.
Once MST members receive land, the government becomes their landlord, creditor, educator and overseer. Technically, the agrarian reform process estab- lishes the State as a landlord because the settlers are given use rights, not title, to the land, although they are expected to begin paying for the land in ten years. Both MST and the settlers militate against being ‘liberated’ from government in this way. MST argues that the State has a moral obligation to give the settlers their land because wealthy landlords were able to acquire land without payment. The movement also recognizes that being liberated from the government would cut the settlers off from an important source of support. The State acts as the principal creditor for agrarian reform settlers because it provides significant funds for start up and investment. Start up funds include money to build a house and buy an initial set of supplies for production. Subsidized funds for short- and long-term investment are also provided on an annual basis, although these
19 20 21 22
Interview #21, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is a young man on the settlement. Interview #12, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is an older woman on the settlement. Interview #4, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	513
514	Wendy Wolford
are continually being reduced.23 The State is also involved in maintaining basic infrastructure on the settlements, including roads, primary education, health serv- ices, etc. In providing these goods and services, the State establishes itself as the ultimate overseer of settlement life and activities. If settlers want to move to a new settlement, experiment with alternative production practices or request ad- ditional assistance, they need to go through agents of the State.
Most settlers believe they need access to government resources to survive on the land. The government agrees, estimating that a majority of the settlers in the country would be forced to give up their land if they did not have access to the assistance it provides. A study conducted in 1998 estimated that only settlers in Santa Catarina had the means to pay back their State subsidized loans (Buainain and De Souza Filho 1998). Settlers are always nervous that the government will reduce their access to resources. As one settler in Santa Catarina said: ‘[The State is] going to abandon me, and I will only get resources from PRONAF. And this is how one loses the land’.24
MST’s ability to maintain participation turns on its presentation of the move- ment as the primary mediator between a cruel State and its members. The State is depicted as cruel because it is biased towards large landowners and, movement leaders argue, has no desire to see agrarian reform succeed. The State’s own visibility in the settlements makes it a good target. Poor roads, insufficient elec- tricity and a lack of resources all vividly maintain the impression that the govern- ment needs to do more in the settlements. As a settler on Vento said, ‘Even though we have a lot of things now, we cannot stop yet because the situation is not easy’.25 Having promised a regular supply of resources, the Federal govern- ment has had a very difficult time fulfilling what have come to be seen as its obligations. Short-term investment credit, for example, habitually arrives late or in the wrong season altogether.26 When this happens, settlers either have to simply give the money back or plant in the off-season and suffer significant production losses. MST activists and leaders continually warn settlers that the State will only fulfil its promises if constant and forceful pressure is applied. When resources are secured from the State, the movement argues that this is the result of successful organization within the sem terra community.
23	Until 2001, each settler had the right to almost R$20,000 when they received land through INCRA (National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform). This money included an initial amount of R$340, to be spent on emergency food supplies which many of the families need when they arrive in the settlement. The emergency money is followed by a grant of R$740 for start-up supplies such as a hoe, wheelbarrow and seeds, and as soon as boundaries between plots are legally documented, each settler received R$2000 to build a house. The remainder of the R$20,000 consists of long-term investment funds from the Program for Agrarian Reform Credit (PROCERA), which was created in 1985. Since 2001, settlers have been incorporated into PRONAF (Program for Small Farmers), where they are treated as small family farmers (instead of settlers) and eligible for less generous funding.
24 25 26
Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #42, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Beginning with an economic downturn in 1999, the Federal government began to hold back the
funds for agrarian reform more and more regularly. There was a noticeable deceleration in the number of settlements created and the amount of support disbursed overall in 1999.
And the movement’s positioning between settlers and the State has been very successful. During interviews with settlers on six settlements in the southern State of Santa Catarina and the northeastern State of Pernambuco, the main reason given for supporting MST and continued participation in movement activit- ies was the MST’s position of influence vis-à-vis local and Federal governments. As one older settler on Vento said: ‘Nothing would function without the move- ment. If it weren’t for protests, the struggle, everyone participating together, then we wouldn’t get anything’.27 Resources such as credit are seen as coming from MST rather than coming from the State. One former rural worker on Flora who was a spokesperson for the settlement in its struggle for State resources said: ‘The Federal Government is obligated to settle us, to provide infrastructure for the settlement and to give us credit. Unfortunately, it takes too long to do this – you only get [these things] through pressure, we only receive something after the government has been pressured, and this is done by the movement’.28 Most settlers feel that they won their land because of MST’s strength as an organization and they continue to see organization as an effective means to pursue resources. Movement demonstrations are considered largely responsible for ensuring a government-funded supply of credit in the first place: ‘Today the movement is respected because we have won some of the things that we wanted. Our credit is subsidized, for example, and not even the rural trade union got that!’29 Movement activists continually remind the settlers of the debt they owe the MST. And most people agree because they believe that ‘the people who get land through agrarian reform will be guaranteed a better life’.30
Over the past ten years, the State has increased the flow of resources to MST members. In some ways, the government has organized its own agrarian reform programme around social movements. As one government official said, ‘we are always just one step behind the movement’.31 Between 1993 and 1997, thirty- seven properties in Santa Catarina were distributed for the purposes of agrarian reform. Of these, only seven were not the result of organized pressure.32 In 1996, the country’s largest rural union, the Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG), identified 226 estates that were eligible for expropriation under the Federal Constitution. The Federal government inspected 198 of the properties and expropriated or bought 100. MST also identified 196 estates eligible for expropriation and the government followed up on 181, expropriating or pur- chasing 126 (Cardoso 1997, quoted in Deere and León De Leal 1999: 33). MST’s success in winning expropriations is such that new recruits and squatters con- sider it extremely unlikely that they will not win access to land (Deere and León
27	Interview #10, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 28	Interview #3, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 29	Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 30	Interview #36, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 31	Interview with Dr Alacir Pereira Batista, INCRA Superintendent, Florianopolis, SC. 24 March 1999.
32	Figures from the Regional INCRA office of Santa Catarina. Supported by an interview with the settlement division of the regional INCRA office in Santa Catarina, 26 March 1999. INCRA estim- ates that in Santa Catarina roughly 60 per cent of all expropriations are the result of social pressure.
Producing Community	515
516
Wendy Wolford
Table 1. Settlement projects created 1970–94 and 1995–7
Period	Years
Settlements
1970 –1994	25	795 1995 –1997	3	1454
Source: Seligmann (1998). Table 2. INCRA’s annual budget 1994–8
Year
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Source: Seligmann (1998).
Amount (in R$ million)
390 1279 1425 2020 2243
De Leal 1999; Hammond 1999). The Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) admin- istration (1995–2003) authorized the creation of more new settlements than all the previous administrations from 1970 to 1994 combined (see Table 1). And Cardoso’s administration more than quintupled the resources allocated for reform under the INCRA, the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform, since 1994 (see Table 2).
Even as resources from the State have increased, however, the movement has stepped up its offensive against the government, arguing that the FHC adminis- tration is a more dangerous enemy than any past administration. MST activists and leaders have travelled throughout the settlements, discussing the state of the national political economy with settlers. They argue that under Cardoso, the Federal government is providing resources with one hand and taking them back with the other through discriminatory trade and production policies. Discussion of these policies links Cardoso’s administration to neo-liberalism, US imperialism and the so-called Washington Consensus. MST documents argue that even if Cardoso authorizes settlements and provides credit for settlers, he is committed to an economic and political system incompatible with Brazilian sovereignty and small family farming. Included in the MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People, written during the 2000 National Congress, is an indictment of the Cardoso administration:
It is true that our society has always been unjust. Like any capitalist society, the poor have always been exploited and humiliated. And the rich class, earning more and more all the time, has always repressed the people and submitted it to the interests of international capital. But since 1994, with the neoliberal policies of Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s government, the
problems have become even more acute. This economic policy represents only the interests of the banks and of multinational companies. For these, the government guarantees high interest rates and financial help. Suffice to say: last year the government spent 64 percent of the national budget servicing the interest on internal and external debt. Despite all the social problems, the government of the Brazilian elites has the nerve to send 50 billion dollars to the rich countries every year. That is why there is a lack of money for education, health, public transport, popular housing and employment generation. In agriculture the situation is more grave still. The Cardoso government wants to ‘modernize’ the rural areas stimulating large export-orientated estates; handing control of the agricultural market over to the multinational corporations; and allowing agro-industries to con- trol the storage of food products. (MST 2000)
Settlers are reminded that even if access to land is authorized by the government, it is won through the struggle. As one settler on Flora said: ‘The one who gave me land was INCRA, that is to say, in the first place, it was MST, because if we were to wait for INCRA, it would never have come through. It had already been twenty years that we were waiting for INCRA. But then MST came and camped out here and they fought [for the land]’.33 Another settler on Flora agreed, although less robustly, saying ‘we have this here and they say it is because of the movement’.34
When Cardoso was re-elected President of Brazil in 1998, settlers were warned by the MST that they would have to increase their organizational efforts to protect their gains. As an older settler on Vento said, ‘Our government is against us. For all these four years [of Cardoso’s presidency], we are the ones who are going to lose. The big guys aren’t going to suffer. We need money – and they always hold it back. We always argued that we had to fight for a dignified life . . . Because if we don’t, [the government] will get us’.35
In presenting the State as the settlers’ primary enemy, MST is able to take advantage of necessary State resources without allowing individual members or the movement as a whole to be co-opted through incorporation. MST settlers rely heavily on the State for access to resources, including the basic recognition of their right to property, and so the movement has to justify the seeming paradox of reliance on a State it opposes. The movement has done this by presenting itself as the effective mediator between the settlers and the State and by insisting that continued access to State resources requires participation in the movement’s imagined community of sem terra. Framing the State as corrupt, cruel and incompetent is an effective means of convincing settlers that this com- munity is necessary long after they receive land. Even as settlers negotiate the movement’s imagined community, rejecting and adapting many elements, they are convinced that continued participation is necessary for their economic survival.
33 34 35
Interview #8, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #13, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #1, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	517
518	Wendy Wolford CONCLUSION
Although MST’s numbers are relatively insignificant compared to the total population of Brazil and its total land area, the movement is widely considered an important voice for effective national democracy (Gohn 1997; Rossiaud and Scherer-Warren 2000). The demand for land redistribution is a familiar one in the country, and MST’s agenda has won many supporters in the urban areas and universities.
MST’s consistent and coherent presentation of the movement’s community has led supporters and detractors alike to judge the movement according to statements made by representative leaders. But MST’s presentation of commun- ity differs greatly from the negotiations and experiences of community on the ground. MST leaders and activists have built the movement’s community around a series of frames – interpretive, diagnostic and prognostic frames, in Benford and Snow’s (2000) words. These frames explain rural workers’ subordinate posi- tion within Brazilian capitalism and provide workers with the means for address- ing their situation. The presentation of poverty as a result of class exploitation generates both opposition and solidarity, making it possible to identify whom to fight against and whom to fight with. Explicit ties to past resistance contextualizes participation in the movement, investing the present with a rich legacy. Move- ment members share experiences, and there is an expectation of shared values across community members such that a red cap or T-shirt symbolizes the fulfil- ment of movement criteria for participation. These criteria are disseminated regu- larly to members during organized movement activities.
And people throughout Brazil have joined MST in search of something better, or at least something different, than what they have. The elements of MST’s imagined community facilitate involvement in a movement that other sources, such as the national media, usually present as dangerous, radical and subversive. And the frames themselves work to present a coherent criticism of ‘politics as usual’. On the settlements, however, the test of MST’s community is not whether it makes sense, whether it introduces an acceptable or appropriate philosophy, but whether or not it works. Regardless of how committed settlers are to the ideas of MST’s imagined community, few would remain members if this meant total isolation from the State. In fact, most argue that they are grateful to the movement for improving their access to the State. MST leaders have had to work creatively to enable their alternative philosophy to be effective within the dominant economic, political and social system. This has involved persistent mediation between the State and their settler members.
REFERENCES
Anderson, B., 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Benford, D. and D. Snow, 2000. ‘Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment’. Annual Review of Sociology, 26: 611–39.
Buainain, A.M. and H.M. De Souza Filho, 1998. PROCERA: Productive Impacts and Payment Capabilities. Brasilia, DF: INCRA/FAO.
Cardoso, F.H., 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brasília, DF: Presidência Da República Secretaria De Comunicação Social.
Dean, W., 1969. The Industrialization of São Paulo, 1880–1945. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Dean, W., 1976. Rio Claro: A Brazilian Plantation System, 1820–1920. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Deere, C.D. and M. León De Leal, 1999. Towards a Gendered Analysis of the Brazilian Agrarian Reform. Storrs, CT: Center for Latin American & Caribbean Studies, Univer- sity of Connecticut.
Delgado, G.C., 1985. Capital Financeiro e Agricultura no Brasil: 1965–1985. Campinas, SP: Editora UNICAMP.
Eisenberg, P.L., 1974. The Sugar Industry in Pernambuco: Modernization Without Change, 1840–1910. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Fernandes, B.M., 1999. MST, Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, S., 1975, The Brazilian Peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press. Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. New York:
Harper Colophon. Gohn, M.d.G., 1997. Os Sem Terra, ONGs e Cidadania. São Paulo: Cortez. Goodman, D., B. Sorj and J. Wilkinson, 1984. ‘Agro-industry, State Policy and Rural Social
Structures: Recent Analyses of Proletarianization in Brazilian Agriculture’. In Proletar-
ianisation in the Third World, eds B. Munslow and H. Finch. London: Croom and Helm. Graziano da Silva, J.F., 1982. A Modernização Dolorosa: Estrutura Agrária, Fronteira Agrícola
e Trabalhadores Rurais no Brasil. Rio De Janeiro: Zahar Editores. Hammond, J., 1999. ‘Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Move-
ment’. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18 (4): 469–89. Houtzager, P.P., 1997. Caught Between State and Church: Popular Movements in the Brazilian
Countryside, 1964–1989. Berkeley, CA: University of Berkeley, Department of Political
Science. Johnson, H.B., 1987. ‘Portuguese Settlement, 1500–1580.’ In Colonial Brazil, ed. L. Bethell,
1–39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jornal Sem Terra. Newspaper published by MST, Sao Paulo. Lesser, J., 1999. Negotiating National Identity: Immigrants, Minorities and the Struggle for
Ethnicity in Brazil. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Löwy, M., ed., 1999. O Marxismo na Amèrica Latina: Uma Antologia de 1909 aos Dias
Atuais. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Mainwaring, S., 1986. The Catholic Church and Politics in Brazil, 1916–1985. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press. Martins, J.D.S., 1981. Os Camponeses e a Política No Brasil: As Lutas Sociais no Campo e Seu
Lugar no Processo Político. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes. Maybury-Lewis, B., 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade
Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. Medeiros, L.S.d., 1989. Historia dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE. MST, 2000. The MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People. Brasilia. http://
www.mstbrazil.org/manifesto.html/ Müller, G., 1989. Complexos Agroindustrial e Modernização Agrária. São Paulo: Hucitec. Navarro, Z., 2000. ‘Breaking New Ground: Brazil’s MST’. NACLA Report on the Amer-
icas, 33 (5): 36–9. Pereira, A.W., 1997. The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast
Brazil, 1961–1988. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Producing Community	519
520	Wendy Wolford
Petras, J., 1997. ‘Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left’. New Left Review, 223: 17–47. Petras, J., 1998. ‘The Political and Social Basis of Regional Variation in Land Occupations
in Brazil’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 254: 124–33. Prado Júnior, C., 1945. Formação do Brasil Contemporâneo. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Prado Júnior, C., 1966. A Revolucão Brasileira. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Rangel, I., 1956. ‘Iniciativa Pública e Privada’. Econômica Brasileira, 2 (3): 33–140. Robles, W., 2000. ‘Beyond the Politics of Protest: The Landless Rural Workers Move-
ment of Brazil’. Canadian Journal of Development Studies, XXI (3): 656–91. Rocha, J. and S. Branford, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in
Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau. Rossiaud, J. and I. Scherer-Warren, 2000. A Democratização Inacabavel: As Memòrias do
Futuro. Petropolis, RJ: Vozes. Schwade, E., 1992. A Luta Não Faz Parte Da Vida . . . E A Vida: O Projeto Politico-
Religioso De Um Assentamento No Oeste Catarinense. Florianopolis, SC: Universidade
Federal de SC. Schwartz, S.B., 1985. Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society: Bahia, 1550–
1835. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schwartz, S.B., 1992. Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels: Reconsidering Brazilian Slavery. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Illinois Press. Selcher, W., 1986. Political Liberalization in Brazil: Dynamics, Dilemmas and Future Pros-
pects. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Seligmann, R., 1998. PROCERA: Programa Especial de Credito Para Reforma Agrária.
Brasilia, DF: Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária. Sigaud, L., 1979. Os Clandestinos e os Direitos: Estudo Sobre Trabalhadores da Cana-De-
Açúcar de Pernambuco. São Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades. Skidmore, T.E., 1999. Brazil: Five Centuries of Change. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Snow, D., E. Burke Rochford Jr, S. Worden and R. Benford, 1986. ‘Frame Alignment
Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation’. American Sociological Re-
view, 51: 464–81. Stedile, J.P. and B.M. Fernandes, 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta Pela
Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Stein, S.J., 1985. Vassouras, a Brazilian Coffee County, 1850–1900: The Roles of Planter and
Slave in a Plantation Society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Stolcke, V., 1988. Coffee Planters, Workers and Wives: Class Conflict and Gender Relations on
São Paulo Coffee Plantations, 1850–1980. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Teixeira, G., 1999. Fatos e Mitos da Politica Agricola do Governo FHC. Brasilia, DF:
Movimento Sem Terra, MST. Viotti da Costa, E., 2000. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories, Revised Edition.
Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. Wolford, W., forthcoming a. ‘Families, Fields, and Fighting for Land: The Spatial Dy-
namics of Contention in Rural Brazil’. Mobilization: An International Journal. Wolford, W., forthcoming b. ‘Of Land and Labour: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane
Plantations of Northeast Brazil’. Latin American Perspectives. Wright, A., 2001. ‘The Origins of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers’.
Paper prepared for presentation at the meeting of the Latin American Studies Association,
6–8 September 2001, Washington, DC. Zamosc, L., 1986. The Agrarian Question and the Peasant Movement in Colombia: Struggles
of the National Peasant Association, 1967–1981. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

The MST Challenge to Neoliberalism Author(s): Monica Dias Martins Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 5, Radical Left Response to Global Impoverishment (Sep., 2000), pp. 33-45 Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2634156 .
Accessed: 12/03/2011 23:30
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
TheMST ChallengetoNeoliberalism
by Monica Dias Martins
Quandoeu morrer Cansadode guerra, Morrode bem Coma minhaterra. -FranciscBouarqudeeHollanda1,997
Brazil'sMovimentodosTrabalhadoreRsuraisSemTerra(Landless WorkersM'ovement-MST)isoneofthemostcombativpeopularforcesin contemporarLyatinAmericaI.temergedin 1979withitsfirsltandoccupa- tioninEncruzilhadNaatalinoR,ioGrandedoSul.Supportebdychurchorga- nizationsuchas thegrassrooctommunitieasndtheComissaoPastoralda Terra(PastoralLandCommission-CPT) andbythePartidodosTraba- lhadores(Workersp'arty-PT),amongotherst,hemovemenstpreadall over thecountryas landreformwasincludedinthepoliticalagendaduringthe redemocratizatidoanysofthemid-1980s.'Inthe1990s,itbecameanimpor- tantmassorganization.
TheMST's ruralsettlemenatrsecharacterizebdycooperativreelations, collectiveplanninga,nd self-managemenSto.lidaritys,ocialjustice,and autonomyareitsfundamenteatlhicalvalues.Ithasestablisheda monthly newspaperto communicatietsideas,an educationaslystembased on the "work-and-studmy"ethoda,ndan intenseprocessofpolitical-ideological formatiotnhroughstudygroupsonradicaltheoryW.ithinthesegroupsis emerginagnewlydevelopedconsciousnesosfthenecessityforsocialowner- shipofthemeansofproductionT.heirleadersappearinthemediaandnego- tiatewiththegovernmenatn,dtheiractionshaveconsolidatedan alliance withworkerst'radeunionsandurbanmovements.
M6nicaDias Martinissa sociologistwith25yearsofprofessionalndpoliticaalctivityamong rurawlorkerisnBrazilcombinedwithacademicstudiesattheFederalUniversitoyfCeara.She is theauthorofTheChallengesofCooperationintheRuralSettlement(1s994) andinJune successfullycompletedherdoctoradlissertatioontheNortheasotfBrazil.Sheisindebtedto TimothyHardingR,obertAustinP,abloPozzi,andJamesPetrasfortheirusefulcommentsA.n earlierversionofthisarticlewaspresenteadtthe21stCongressoftheLatinAmericanStudies AssociationC,hicago,Septembe2r4-26, 1998.Thisarticleis dedicatedtothememoryofthe MST activistasssassinatedinthestrugglfeora bettersociety.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue114,Vol.27No.5,Septembe2r000 33-45 i 2000LatinAmericanPerspectives
33
34	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
TheMST's complexpracticeis designedtodealwitha centraqluestion: Howcana peasantorganizationac,cordingtomanyintellectuaalsndpoliti- ciansa "vanishings"ocialcategoryc,h2allengetheso-calledbenefitosffree- markectapitalismanditsideologyn,eoliberalismL?andlessworkerhsave becomea powerfunlewsocialforceinBrazil.Despiterepressivveiolence and attemptast co-optationt,heypromotemass mobilizationto occupy unproductivperopertieasndpublicbuildingsL.and occupationisncreased from43in1990to180in1997,totalin6g98inthesesevenyearsT.heMST's beliefshavealreadybecomeintegrateidntoa popularmovementhathas thousandosfactivistfsightinfgorlandwithrevolutionarpyassion.
Aftera briefpresentationfthecontroversicaolnceptoflandreformt,his articleanalyzesthemainfeatureosftheMST's actionsandperspectiveosn resistancteotheneoliberasltateanditseffortsoconstrucatnalternativpero-
ject in termsofclass struggle.
LAND REFORM
Landreformis notnecessarilyradical.U.S. scholarsuchas Barrington MooreandSamuelHuntingtohnaveusedtheconceptoflandreformtomea- surevulnerabilityosocialrevolutioindevelopingcountrie(sSilva, 1971). DuringtheperiodoftheKennedyadministratiaondtheAllianceforProg- ress,manyLatinAmericangovernmenwtsereputunderpressurteocarryout landreformprogramsI.3n BrazilduringJoaoGoulart'spresidency(1962-
1964),popularmobilizatiofnocusedonlandreformas thekeytodemocrati- zationandmodificatioonfthesocialstructurIen. themilitarydictatorship period(1964-1985)itwasconsidereda nationaslecurityissue,strategifcor capitalistdevelopmenatndindustrializatioinparticularIt. has also been usedasastatepolicytorestraicnlassstrugglienruraalreasandtotransform potentiallryevolutionarpyeasantsintoconservativsemallfarmerBs.utland reformhasalsobeenimportanttorevolutionarsytructurcahlanges,asin Mexico,Bolivia,Chile,Colombia,Cuba,NicaraguaP,eru,andelsewhere.
Thus,landreformis betterdefinedas a contradictorpyrocessoftrans- forminpgroductioanndpowerelationtshatdependsi,nitsformulatioand implementation,thecorrelatioonfpoliticaflorcesandthespecificourse of theclass struggle(Martins,1994). This conceptreinforcetshelinks betweeneconomicp,oliticala,ndideologicalconditionsa,s opposedtothe viewoflandreformas eitheraneconomicissueora socialpolicyorsimplyan ideologicalproblemT.hereproductionfaclassofsmallfarmertshrough accesstoruralpropertiys occurrinigna conjuncturoefintensivperoletar- ization (expropriationof means of production).This challenging
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	35
contradictiohnelpstoexplainwhylandreformcannotbelabeledas "conser- vative"or"revolutionarpye"rse.Itisa tool,andwhatmakesthedifferencise whocontrolist.Theansweris complexandleadsus toanalyzelandreform as a movemenitnwhichsocialclassesdirecthiscontradictorpyrocess. Whethelrandreformis capitalisotrsocialistmustbe consideredinthecon- textofa newproposalemerginfgromthehandsandmindsofhundredosf acampadosandsettlersa,proposalantagonistticotherulingclasses' agrar- ianproject.
Thepolitical-ideologicpaollarizationbetweentheMST andtheUniao DemocraticaRuralista(RuralDemocraticUnion-UDR), a landowners' organizationp,a4rticulardlyuringtheelaboratioonfthefirsNtationaPllanof LandReformin 1985andthe1988ConstitutionAalssemblyl,edtothecon- structioonftwodifferenmtodelsoflandreformthatexpressthecapital-labor forceconfrontatioAnc.entrailssueistheownershiopfthemeansofproduc- tion(individuaolrcollectivea)ndtheprocessofwealthdistributio(pnrivate capitalaccumulatioonrsocialcapitalaccumulatioanndthedevelopmenotf productivfeorces).5
The UDR's	proposaldefendsindividuailnterestasndprivateproperty, and,to theextenthatthebourgeoisieacceptsredistributioint,mustbe througthheparcelingofthelandintohundredosfunitsafteritslegalacquisi- tionT.hemodelofprivataeppropriatioisnsimilartotheclassicalcapitalistic agrarianredistributiotnhatpromotesagriculturamlodernizationunder agroindustriecso'ntroolftheworkersp'roductiopnrocess.Inthe1970s,it wasimplementeidna limitedwayundertheBrazilianmilitardyictatorship throughtheestablishmenotfcolonizationprojectsI.n fact,theso-called colonoorparceleiroreceivedindividuatlitletoproperttyhatallowedhimto applyforcreditandtechnologyA.s hewasisolatedfromotherasndthedeci- sionsconcerninwghatandhowtoproduceortowhomandwhentosellhis productwsereimposedbythegovernmentinalstitutionansdtheagricultural policies,themajorbenefitwsentothehegemoniacgroindustrsiaelctorT.his is theparadigmoflandreformacceptedbyvariousfractionosfthedominant classes.
TheMST's modelofsocialappropriatioins basedoncooperativreela- tionsamongdirectworkerasndalternativpeatternosflandappropriatioand use.Throughdemocratisctructuroefsdecisionmakingsettlemenmtsayvary informfromfamilybasistocollectivpeossessiond,ependinogntheworkers' experiencet,hequalityofthesoil,thekindofcropst,hemarkesttructuraen,d manyotherfactorsF.orinstancep,ropertcyanbe individualloywnedbutthe workandtheproductiodnonecollectivelyo,rworkandproductiocnan be individuaolnpartofthelandandcollectiveonanotheprart,orall theprop- ertycanbecollectivbeutfamiliewsorkonpartofthelandtoproducefortheir
36	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
ownuse.Agrowingproportioonfsettlersm'onetariyncomeisnotdivided butusedcollectivelytomaintaintheexistingmeansofproductionf,ornew investmentosr,foreducationalh,ealtha,ndtechnologicalssistancetotheir familiesT.hesedifferenktindsoffundos(reservesp)rovidevidenceofan experimenint socializedcapitalaccumulationL.andreformas proposedby theworkingclasshasthepotentiatlobecomea moreegalitarianmeansof wealthdistribution.
Rurallandownerospposecooperativfeormsofpossession,production, andworkT.heyseemawarethathesexperimenctasnconsolidatneewprac- ticesofsocialorganizatioandpoliticaplarticipatiotnhatunderminperivate propertryightasndmayescalatefromthelocaltothenationaslphereT.he BrazilianscholarandUDRsupporteMriguelRealeJuniordescribestheir class positionin thejournalof theSociedadeRuralBrasileira(Brazilian RuralSociety-BRS) (1985: 9) as follows:
FromtheendofWorldWarII toourdays,itisevidenthathereisnoagrarian chaosinBrazil,butinsteadperfecctoherencbeetweentheland'sstructuraned itsuse andthepresenetconomic-sociaslysteminthiscountryandthecurrent neoliberaildeology.
A newmassiveandradicalandreformproposalis notsimplylandredistri- butiontoincorporatmeorefarmerisntothecapitalistsystembutinvolves shiftintgheentireagrarianstructurpe:roductionp,ower,andculturarlela- tions.Itmeansthathewholeeconomic-social-politicsaylstemisgoingto bechanged.EvenbeforetheMSTbecameinfluentianlationwidethe agrarianbourgeoilseaderswereconsciousthatheprojectofcollectivoeccu- pationandproductiornepresenteadchallengetotheirclassinterestasndto capitalism.6
ACTS OF RESISTANCE
To analyzetheimportancoeftheMST's resistancaegainstneoliberalism, theconceptof class is essentialA.	class-strugglaepproachallows us to understantdhelimitsand thepossibilitieosf itsproposalof landreform vis-a-vistheclassicalredistributiavgerarianreformandBrazilianstatepol- icyandlegislation.
Thespecificourseofthebattlebetweenthetwoantagonistimcodelsof landreforminBrazil,datingtothe1980sbutstillinflux,is thekeytoan understandinogfwhytheMST hasbecomethemostimportanstourceof
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	37
resistancteotheneoliberaplrojectI.nbrieft,heconfrontaticoanbeexpressed in termsofthedualityprivatizatiovnersusoccupation.
The MST developedan efficienstrategyof pressureon theInstituto NacionaldeColonizac,aoe ReformAagraria(NationalInstitutfeorColoni- zationandLandReform-INCRA),a stateinstitutiomn:assiveandcontinu- ouslandoccupationsB.y1964Brazilianlandlaw,privatepropertcyanbe confiscatewdhenitisnotcultivateodrwherethereareconflictbsetweenthe ownerandworkerosrenvironmentdalmage.ThustheMST's directaction supporttshisconstitutionparlovisionandviceversa.7Thisstrateghyasalso beeneffectivienrevealinglandconcentratiotnh,ecauseofmostofthepres- entsocialproblemsT.heoccupationprocessc,alledafesta("theparty"b)y themovementh,asa specialmeaningforthelandlessthemselvesT.hedeci- siontosettleonandseizea privatperopertyno, taneasyone,requirems	atu- rityc,ohesiond,isciplinea,ndhope.
Thisdirectactionturns"passive"peasantsintopowerfualctorsfighting forlandandpoliticaplarticipatioTnh.eynowcallthemselve"sfreeworkers." Theyrecoverthecapacitytocreatematerialndculturaclommoditiedsenied thembyboththetraditionlaaltifundiuamndthemodernagribusinescsom- plex,wheretheyare"workerfsorcapital."Theiractionthreatentsheruling classes,whichreactwithviolencea,s wellas arguingthatheoccupationasre illegal.Accordingtothem,landseizuresareleadingtoa breakdownof authoritiynBraziliansocietyT.omaintaipnublicorderr,epresentativoefsthe staterespondtowhatis consideredan obviousabotageofdemocraticnsti- tutionbsyprosecutintgheMST leaders.
Whatis beingchallengedbythisradicalaction?Basically,theprivate propertryightgsuaranteebdybourgeoilsaw,oneofthevaluesofthecapital- istorderthatisreinforcebdytheneoliberadliscourseI.tchallengePsresident FernandHoenriqueCardosobothinhispoliticaplerformanocnethenational sceneandintermsofthegovernmentc'sommitmentosstructuradljust- mentsimposedby theWorldBank and theInternationMalonetaryFund (IMF) intheinternationaarlena.
Market-assistleadndreformwasproposedbytheWorldBankin 1995as a solutionforunstablepoliticallydevelopingcountriesuchas SouthAfrica andColombiab,utBrazilwasincludedintheproposawlhentheWorldBank begantoviewtheintensitoyfmassivelandoccupationasndtheradicaliza- tionofconflicatsadangertotheneoliberarlegime.T8heagreemenwtiththe federaglovernmenwtastointroducmearket-assistleadndreforminCeara'i,n theNortheasotfBrazil,withthesupporotfa modernlocal administration controllebdythepresidentp'sartyt,hePartidoSocial DemocrataBrasileiro (BrazilianSocialDemocratipcarty-PSDB). Anothereasonforthechoice
38	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
ofCearaseemstohavebeentheoutstandinsguccessofthesettlemenrtessult- ingfromlandoccupationandcooperativperactice(seeMartins1,994)coor- dinatedbytheMST,whichaccelerateldandconfiscatiobnylegalmeansT.he WorldBankandthegovernmenhtadtorecognizethathesepracticeswere importanitn explainingCeara's performancTe.heirprojectproposesto transforamgrarianreformintoa privatbeusinesss,timulatintghelandmarket as a properplaceforthelandlessandlandownertsonegotiatuendercondi- tionsof"equality.T"hroughtheBankoftheNortheasotfBrazil,theproper- tiesarebeingsoldbytheirownertsothelandlessonanindividuablasis.Rural workerst'radeunionsandlocalassociationhsavebeeninvolvedinthisproject largelytoguarantetehedebtpaymenotftheirmembers.
Despitetheproposalto privatizelandreformsponsoredby theWorld Bank,thestrugglgeoeson.Occupationandproductioanrebothconsidered partoftheMST's economicandpoliticasltrategaygainstneoliberalismT.he settlemenist conceivedofas a wholeproductiounnitandnotonlya legal propertyIn.deed,productioanndmanagemenhtavebeencrucialtothesuc- cessoftheMST's alternativperoposala:griculturcaoloperatio(nMST,1993;
1996),combiningtheeffortosfindividuawlorkertsoaccomplishthingsin common-buyingmachinesandtools,raisingcattle,sharingland.Forthe settlerso'rganizationsp,lanningmeansdemocraticdecisionsconcerning productionm,arketinegd,ucationh,ealthcare,politicsc,ulture,tc.Butthis isnota simpletask,especiallyifhundredosfpersonsareinvolvedD.uring theirfrequenatssembliesf,amilymemberpsarticipatine manyways:making proposalsa,skingquestionsd,iscussingproblemsc,omingtodecisionss,ing- ing.9Normallyt,heagendais knowninadvanceandsomemethodological toolsare used to improveparticipationM.ost womenand teenagerspeak independentalys companheiradse luta.In someofthesettlemenatsmarried memberis acceptedonlyifbothspousesjoin. The annualbalanceis pre- sentedinageneramleetingandthedistributionfprofit-forepairss,oil improvemencta,ttlefeedingc,omputersh,ousebuildingt,eacherss'alaries, childcare,mobilizationan,dsoon-hastobeapprovedbythemajoritoyfthe membersT.heparticipatorpylanningprocessis influencebdythefamilies' previousexperiencesr,egionalandecologicaldifferenceasn,daccessto materiaclonditionosfproductiosnuchascreditt,echnologyan,dtraining. The resultsmayvarywidely(Medeiros,1994).
TheconceptofcollectivweorkingandlivingisthecoreoftheMSTstrat- egyfordevelopingsustainablaectsofresistancienthesettlementOsn.cethe landisappropriateda,periodofdemobilizatiomnayoccur.Peasantswho havefoughftora placetoliveandworkmaybe seducedbythesupposedben- efitsoffree-markceatpitalismT.otheextenthathisistruec,onfrontation also takesplaceinthesubjectivfeieldofbattle.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	39
Educationtoeliminatneotonlyilliteracbyutalsothetechnologicaglap andpoliticaml	isinformatiosna prioritoyftheMST's landreformprogram. Ina generalsense,as PauloFreiresaid(1983:58),"a settlemenptr,ecisely becauseitis a productiounnit(thereis noproductioonutsidetheman-world relation)s,houldalso be a wholepedagogicunit."Educationalactivities involvethesettlersc'hoosingtheirownteachersc,hangingthesubjectsand methodsoftheregularpubliclearningprocess,organizinbgrigadesforthe political-ideologicfaolrmationfactivistsa,ndcoordinatintgrainincgourses forentrepreneuraianldtechnologicailmprovemenTth.eMST'stwo-year schoolforsecond-levetlechnicianisnagriculturcaoloperationhasrecently beenaccreditedbytheMinistryofEducation.
In Brazil,therearetwocooperativoerganizationTs.heOrganizac,odas CooperativadsoBrasil(CooperativesO'rganizatioonfBrazil-OCB) repre- sentstheruralandownerasndis linkedwiththeUDR andtheSBR. The Confederac,oNacionaldas Cooperativasde ReformaAgrariado Brasil (NationalConfederatioonf AgrarianReformCooperativesof Brazil- CONCRAB) wascreatedbya networokflandreformcooperativeisn1994 andis calledthe"economicarm"oftheMST,supportinigtssocialandpoliti- cal mobilizations.
As efficienats thelargeprivatfearminsgectort,heMST settlerosrganize agriculturparloductiocnooperativelsocallya,tthestatelevel,andnationally. Neverthelests,hereis an essentialdifferencbeetweenthissystemand the OCB. Infactt,heMST's cooperativsetructureemphasizesocialneedsand politicarlesultassmuchaseconomicreturntsothesettlerCs.reditm,arketing supporta,ndtechnicaalssistanceareofferebdythecooperativetsoincrease theiragriculturacltivitiesp,rofitabilitayn,dlivingstandard(sMST, 1998). The CONCRAB systemhas becomean instrumenftorestablishingsolid relationshipamsongproducerasndconsumersd,emonstratitnhgerelevance oflandreformfortheurbanpopulationa,ndguaranteeinrgelativfeinancial autonomya,t leastcomparedwithotherpopularorganizationtshatdo not havecontroolftheirownproductionA.lthoughtheMST believesthateco- nomicpowerisfundamenttaolachievingpoliticaplowerm,ostofitsefforts areaimedatcreating"a newmananda newwomanfora newsociety."
THE ALTERNATIVE PROJECT
Social scientisthsavetendedtofocusmainlyontheactionsofpopular movementDs.espitetheirimportancteh,isisanelitistviewofthesocialpro- cess.Itlegitimatetsheauthoritarianrgumenthatworkerso'rganizations need to be tutoredbecause theyare incapableof articulatinigdeas and
40	LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
transformitnhgemintoacoherenvtisionforchangeinsocietyA.ctionand conceptioanreequallyimportanintexaminintgheMST's effortsoconstruct an alternativperojectforBrazil.
TheconceptionofthePopularProjectas democratiacndparticipatory planningcomesfromtheday-to-dapyracticeisntheoccupationasndsettle- mentsa,s wellas fromthestudyofotherpeople'shistoricaelxperienceisnthe schoolsandthebrigadesT.hecontributionftheMST's supporters-profes- sors,politicianst,echnicians,tudentsp,riests-isorganizedthrougha net- worktosupporsteveralgroupsthatmeetsregularltyodiscussthenumerous proposalscomingfromthebases andto producedocumenttshatreturnto themT.oconfronteoliberalismwithitsownpoliticawleaponst,hestrategy hasbeentocreatea consultapopularm,	obilizingthepopulationandstimu- latingthemtoparticipatine theformulationfeconomics,ocial,andcultural policiesforall Brazilians.
Toprovokea broaderdebateonthePopularProjectt,heMST leda march toprotestheCardosoadministrationtr'sansferrionfgthepeople'swealth, througphrivatizatiotno,powerfuBlraziliansandtopromotteheconstruction ofa trulydemocratiscocietywithsocialjustice,incomedistributioan,dsol- idarityF.romAugust3 toSeptembe7r, 1998(BrazilianIndependencDeay), almost6,000workerso,rganizedinmorethan80 colunas,marchedthrough- outthecountryd,iscussingissuessuchas employmenhte,althe,ducationa,nd housing.
Thebeginningosfthisnationwidmeovemenctanbetracedtothe1980s. AttheFirstNationaLlandlessCongressi,n1985,itwasdecidedthatstruggle andmobilizatiowneretheonlywayofpressurintgheSarneyadministration toimplementthelandreformprogramT.hesloganwas"LandOccupationIs theSolution."The SecondCongressi,n 1990,duringFernandoCollorde Mello'sadministratiofna,cedadifferenrtealityw,ithneoliberalreforms beingimposedalloverLatinAmericaF.ortheMSTtosurviveasanation- widemovemenatndovercomteheisolationimposedbythestateinstitutions, itneededmoreconomicandpoliticaelxpressionD.elegationfsrom20 states enthusiasticallaypprovedtheproposal"Occupy,Resist,and Produce." Includingproductionbecameextremelyimportantto invalidatethestate strategbyasedoneconomicallydestroyintgheruraslettlemenatnsdtreating thelandlessas invader(sFolhade Sdo Paulo,June13, 1997).
AfterCardoso'selectionin 1994,theThirdLandlessCongressi,n 1995, discussedaproposatlonegotiatweiththenewpresidenTt.histimethefocus was"LandReformE:veryone'sStruggle.I"treflectedthemarketexperi- mentsofthecooperativets,helandoccupationnsearthecities,andtheinflu- enceonthesettlerosfurbancultureT.hemajorityofthesewereyoungcou- ples thathad improvedtheirlivingstandardasnd changedtheirconsumer
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	41
preferenceGs.enerallyt,heproposalconcretizetdhepopularallianceanda newpoliticalagendaincludingtheneedsandinterestosfthemajority.
ThegovernmentrtiedtoimposesomeconditionosntheMST,oneofthem beingthatnegotiatiownouldstartonlyiftherewereno morelandoccupa- tions(O Globo,December26,1997).Awarethatthisstatepracticewas directedatweakeningitsnegotiatinlgeveraget,hemovementa'snswerwas toincreaseanddiversifmyassmobilizationTs.hemoraldefeatsufferebdy Cardoso'sadministratitohnenraisedtheidea ofthegreat"MarchAgainst Neoliberalisma,"s itbecameknownT. heNationaMl	archforLandReform, Employmenatn,dJusticoef1997,ledbytheMST,wasaneffectivienstru- mentforarticulatintghedemandosftheworkinsgectorasndthepoorestpop- ulationT.hetwo-month-lomngarcharriveidnBrasiliawiththesupporotfthe leftpoliticalpartiest,hepress,andthechurchT.hemarcherpsubliclypre- sentedtheauthoritiwesitha setofproposaltshatconstitutetdheoutlineofthe PopularProjecti,ntendetdobeanalternativtoetheneoliberaploliciesadopted bytheinternationcalpitalismandimplementebdytheBrazilianstate.
AvarietyofmeasurewsereusedtointimidateheMST:massacresuchas theonesthatookplaceatCorumbiarian 1995andEldoradodos Carajasin 1996,changesinthelegalapparatusju,dicialprosecutionps,ublicaccusa- tionsofbeingmarijuangarowersa,ndsoon.AtfirsCtardosotriedtoignore themovementap,plyingthemodern-versus-traditdiounaalilty".Modernity" is oneofthemythosftheneoliberadliscoursea,ndCardoso'spoliticswere portrayeads"modernw"hiletheMSTwassaidtorepresenatnarchaicpast. Nextcame attemptast co-optationandisolationandthenpunishmenatnd negotiationw,hichwereequallyunsuccessfublecauseoftheprecedinmgass mobilizationsM.orerecentlyt,hegovernmenhtastriedtodividetheMST leaders,exploitintgheirinternadlebateinthemedia.
Meanwhilet,helandlesshavebeendevelopingurbanactionsT.heysup- portprogressivuerbanpolicies,helpto organizehousingoccupationsa,nd visitsmallcitiestodonatebloodandfoodandtocleanthestreetsF.urther- more,becauseof theincreasedproductionof theirsettlementcsompared withthatofindividualgriculturteh,eyareimprovintgheirproductivsetruc- tureandintensifyinagroindustriparloductiounnderworkersc'ooperative control.
ThesecretothegrowincgredibilitoyftheMST amongtheBrazilianpeo- ple lies in theextraordinasriymplicityb,orderinogn thenaive,oftheircon- duct,theircollectivestructurteh,edeclaredsupporotfimportanotrganiza- tionsuchas thechurcheasndAmnestyInternationanl,dthecooperatioonf intellectuaalsndartists.S1u0rveyresultshowthat94 percenotftheBrazilian populationis favorablteolandreformS.omesaythattheMST's strength comesfromthemystiquoefmilitancycombinedwithitssymbolst:hered
42	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
flag,thehymna,ndtheemblematifciguroefCheGuevaraO.thersarguethat itis duetoitsmilitaryformation-thberigadesinspiredbyrevolutionary populararmiesE.conomistwsillemphasizetheproductioanspectsp,olitical scientisttshepowerrelationsg,eographertsheterritorialiatnyt,hropologists theculturahleritageh,istoriantsherootsofthemovementp,edagoguesthe learningprocesss,ociologisttsheorganizationfaelaturesa,ndsoforthE.ach disciplinefocuseson itsparticulasrubjectin attemptintgo understantdhe landlessmovementO.bviouslya multidisciplinaarpyproachcombinedwith participatioandmilitancwyouldcontributoebothacademicunderstanding andpractice.
Forme,fourchallengincgonceptasrisefromMST practice(:1) itscollec- tivewayoflife,whichrangesfromproductiotnotheartisticreationprocess, (2)theoriginalitoyfitseducationaslystemm,arkedbythework-and-study method(,3) itsrespecftora diversitoyfopinioncsombinedwithunityofper- spectivea,nd(4) itsinsistenctonfrontatiwoniththeneoliberaplroject.
Increaseinlandoccupationsd,enunciatioans falseoftheofficialgrarian reformdata,andsupporftorthepresidenticaalmpaignofthePT's LuisInaicio da Silva (Lula) wereimportanptointson theMST agendafor1998. The emphasish,oweverh,asbeenontheelaboratioonfanalternativneationaplro- jectfocusingas wellonglobalthemesuchas employmenetd,ucationh,ous- ing,food,healtha,ndculturaalctivitiesA.lthoughthePopularProjectdeals witha varietyofproblemsl,andreformremainasnessentiailssue.InMST politicaplracticeit,hasbeenthekeyelemenitnunifyinBgrazilianworkers- urbanandruralm,anuaalndintellectual-itnheirstrugglfeorabettesrociety.
Atthemomenta,ccordingtotheMST leader,JoaoPedroStedile,the agrarianissue,whilecentralt,akessecondplace,sinceitdependson the adoptionofa newmodel(interviewpublishedin0 Globo,December26, 1997).ItseemsthatheMST's proposaloflandreformforallcanonlybe thoroughliymplementewdithinewpowerstructuraensdanewmodelfor developmendtifferenfrtomcapitalismT.hisdebatehasseverailmplications, butonecouldexpecta radicalizatioonfthesuccessfusltrategieosflandsei- zureandcollectivperoductionT.heimmediatcehallengies,atthesametime, todemonstrateotheBrazilianpeoplethatheirday-to-dapyroblemasrea consequenceofneoliberaplolicies.
CONCLUSION
The MST practiceis beingcloselyobservedbythelandlessthemselves and by Braziliansocietyin general,notas a laboratoryexperimenitn free-markpeotlicya,s LatinAmericahasbeenusedinthepastdecade,butas
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	43
theembryofa newsocietythatwillemergefromtheeffortosfthepopular sectorsT.hePopularProjecti,nvolvinmgass,directr,adicalc,ontinuousa,nd sustainablaectionsofresistanceh,astobeconstructeidna processoriented fromthebase thatrespecttshesocialheritagec,onceivesofalternativefsor themajorityp,resentisdeasinasimpleandconvincinwgay,transformidseas intoprojectsforstructurcahlange,makespeopleunderstanadndfightfor thema,ndmobilizesforces.
AnimportanctomponenotfthePopularProjectis landreformofa very differenktindfromthecapitalistmodel.Insteadofindividuaplarcels,the workertshemselvews,hohavefoughftorandwonaccesstoland,capitala,nd knowledgea,reconstructinagneworganizatioonftheproductiopnrocessI.n somesettlementshereis evidencethatsocializedcapitalaccumulationis underway.Mass occupationandcollectiveworkarechallengingprivate propertryightsand legitimatinagnotherkindof appropriatioand wealth distributioTnh.isemerginglandreformsectorplaysacentrarloleineco- nomic,social,politicala,ndculturaclhange.
Workersc'ooperationdoesnotfitintotheneoliberaplrojecta,ndthenext stepistomobilizeforcesB.razilcertainlnyeedslandreforminthecontexotf changingthewholemodelofdevelopmenTt.heMST appearstohavethe capacitytotransfortmhecollectivdereamofmillionosfBrazilianswhowant a betterlifeintoradicalaction.Itremaintsobe seenwhetheirtwilldo so.
NOTES
1.Particularilmyportanatm,ongtheliteraturtehatexaminetshesignificancaendtheviabil- ityofBrazilianlandreforminthatperioda,retheworksthatreflecthedynamicosfthedebate amongintellectualasndworkerleaders(CONTAG,1982;Carvalho,1982;Figueredo,1984). Duringtheso-calledNewRepublicthisdebateintensifieadn,da nationaclampaignforland reformt,heCampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria/CNRAw,asorganizedtocoordinattehe proposalsandthepopularmobilization(CsNRA,1987).
2. TheruralpopulationofBrazilhasdeclinedto23percentofthetotalof156,664,223 (IBGE, 1993).Therearenearly12,000,000landlesspeasants.
3.ChileundertheFreigovernmenhtadaprototypAellianceforProgresslandreform project.
4. TheUDR, theBrazilianruralentrepreneurosr'ganizationw,as createdin 1986(Bruni, 1987).Becauseoftheviolenceofitsactionsh,iringunmenandmaintaininagprivatearmyto defendruraplropertyit,lostitspoliticaslupporitnthe1990s.ItsleaderR,onaldoCaiado,hada weakperformancaes a candidateinthe1990presidentiealection.
5. A theoreticalpproachtothetwomodelsoflandreformis developedinMartin(s1997: 57-71).
6. Atthebeginninogfthe1960s,thelandownerwserefrightenbedya strongmovemenftor landreforme,speciallyintheNortheasTt.hiswasoneofthecausesofthemilitarcyoupin1964 andthebrutarlepressionofpopularorganizationusntilthemid-1980sA.tthatime,therural
44	LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
workersn'ationaltradeunion,theConfedera,coNacionaldeTrabalhadorensaAgricultura (NationalConfederationfRuralWorkers-CONTAG)a,ndthemostimportanpteasantmove- mentt,heLigas Camponesas(PeasantLeagues),weremoreconcernedwithlandredistribution thanwiththeproductiopnrocess(Silva,1971).
7. Accordingtothislaw,theINCRAisresponsiblfeortheconfiscatioonfprivatperoperty. UnderdesapropriaCJo(dispossession)the owneris compensatedforthe land; under
(expropriatiotnh)elandbecomespublicpropertwyithouptayment. expropriaCdo
8.ThedocumenMtarket-AssistLeadndReformd,iscussedattheAgriculturCeonferencoef theWorldBankin 1995,saysthat"thelackoflanddistributiognenerateasn unstablepolitical situationw,ithruralunemploymencti,vildisordersa,ndarmedviolenceinmanydeveloping countrieisn,cludinBgrazil,"andcontinuetshat"therheasbeenalong-timienteresitnpromoting landreformintheNortheasBtrazil,withoneoftheworld'sworstincomedistribution(sG"ov- ernmenotfCeara,1995).
9. ThemeetingstaratndendwiththeMST hymnandpopularsongsaboutthestrugglfeor land,thealliancewiththeproletariaatn,dwomen'sparticipatioOnn.eofthebest-knowsnays, "To changesocietythewaywe wantto,we havetoparticipatweithouftearofbeingwomen." Beforemakingdecisionstheysometimedsramatizoerdraw"pictureosflife,"andtheyuseseeds toindicatetheirapprovaolfstatuteosrelectrepresentativreasthetrhanraisingtheirhands.
10.InMay1997,thePortuguesweriteJroseSaramangoandtheBraziliansingersMilton NascimentoF,ranciscoBuarquede Holanda,andthephotographSerebastiaoSalgadogavethe authorsr'ighttsotheMST,andtheproductisnquestion(books,postersa,ndCDs)weresoldat culturaelventsheldsimultaneousliynmanycountries.
REFERENCES
Bruni,Regina 1987"UDR:paraalemdaviolencia."TempoePresenca/CEDIn,o.221(June).
CarvalhoA,bdiasVilareD'incaoandMariadaConcei,cao(eds.) 1982Reformagrdria:SignificadeoviabilidadeP.etr6polisV:ozeseCEDEC.
CNRA(CampanhaNacionaldaReformAagraria) 1987ReformagrdrianaConstituintPer:opostaM.imeo,Brasilia.
CONTAG(Confedera,coNacionaldos Trabalhadorensa Agricultura) 1982PosiCdodaCONTAGsobreoProgramNaacionaldePoliticaFundidriaM.imeo,Sep- temberB,rasilia.
FigueredoV,ilma(ed.) 1984AquestdodareformagrdrianosanosoitentaR.iodeJaneiroT:empoBrasileiro.
FreireP,aulo 1983Extensdoucomunica,coR.iodeJaneiroP:azeTerra.
GovernmenotfCeara 1995"A reformagrariassistidapelomercado."Septembe2r6.
IBGE (InstitutBorasileirode Geografiea Estatistica) 1993CensodemogrdficborasileiroB.rasilia.
MartinsM,6nicaDias 1994Osdesafiodsacoopera,donosassentamentodsareformaagrdriaS.aoPaulo:Peres. 1997"Aradicalidaddeareformaagraria.C"adernosdoCEASno.171(September/October): 57-71.
Martin/sTHE MST CHALLENGE TO NEOLIBERALISM	45
MedeirosL,eonilde 1994Assentamentorsurais:UmavisaomultidisciplinSarao. Paulo:UNESP.
MST (MovimentdoosTrabalhadoreRsuraissemTerra) 1993"AcooperacaoagricolanosassentamentosC."adernodeFormacdono.20.Sao Paulo. 1996"Cooperativadse producao:quest6espraticas."Cadernode Formaca-noo.21. Sao Paulo. 1998CONCRAB:Quatroanosorganizandoa coopera,do.Sao Paulo.
Silva,JoseGomes 1971 A reformaagrdria no Brasil: Frustracdo camponesa ou instrumentode desenvolvimentRoi.o de JaneiroZ:ahar.
SRB (SociedadeRuralBrasileira) 1985A rural.65 (December):7-12.

Open Research Online
The Open University’s repository of research publications and other research outputs
Relocating participation within a radical politics of de- velopment
Journal Article
For guidance on citations see FAQs.
⃝c [not recorded]
Version: [not recorded]
Link(s) to article on publisher’s website: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1111/j.0012-155X.2005.00410.x
Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copy- right owners. For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult
How to cite:
Hickey, Sam and Mohan, Giles (2005). Relocating participation within a radical politics of develop- ment. Development and Change, 36(2), pp. 237–262.
the policies page.
oro.open.ac.uk
Relocating participation within a radical politics of development 1
Samuel Hickey and Giles Mohan
Abstract
In response to (and in sympathy with) many of the critical points that have been lodged against participatory approaches to development and governance within international development, this article seeks to relocate participation within a radical politics of development. We argue that participation needs to be theoretically and strategically informed by a notion of ‘citizenship’, and be located within the ‘critical modernist’ approach to development. Using empirical evidence drawn from a wide range of contemporary approaches to participation, the paper shows that participatory approaches are most likely to succeed where (i) they are pursued as part of a wider radical political project; (ii) where they are aimed specifically at securing citizenship rights and participation for marginal and subordinate groups; and (iii) when they seek to engage with development as an underlying process of social change rather than in the form of discrete technocratic interventions. However, we do not use these findings to argue against using participatory methods where these conditions are not met. Finally, the paper considers the implications of this relocation for participation in both theoretical and strategic terms
Authors
Samuel Hickey is a lecturer in international development at the Institute for Development Policy and Management, University of Manchester. Giles Mohan is a lecturer in development studies at the Open University in the UK.
1 This article is a shortened version of three chapters by the authors in Hickey and Mohan (2004). Many thanks to Tony Bebbington, Uma Kothari, Diana Mitlin, Kristian Stokke and Neil Webster for their insightful comments on this work, and also two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions on this particular paper.
Introduction
Over the past thirty years participation has become one of the shibboleths of contemporary development theory and practice, often directly linked to claims of ‘empowerment’ and ‘transformation’. Initially a marginal concern within development, most development agencies now agree that some form of participation by the beneficiaries is necessary for development to be relevant, sustainable and empowering. However, the past decade has witnessed a growing backlash against participation (e.g. Cooke and Kothari, 2001), on the basis that participatory approaches have often failed to achieve meaningful social change, largely due to a failure to engage with issues of power and politics. Despite the veracity of this critique, particularly in relation to particular forms of participation, it has notably failed to halt the spread of participation as a development concept and strategy. Apparently undeterred, and increasingly underwritten by policy and funding support from virtually all major development agencies, the participatory turn has actually become expressed more deeply and diversely within development theory and practice over recent years.
It is not our intention to review this contested trajectory per se, but to examine the extent to which participatory reforms and approaches necessarily fail to generate transformations to existing social, political and economic structures and relations in ways that empower the previously excluded or exploited. Our empirical review suggests that certain participatory approaches and agents appear to transcend this critique and have resulted in genuine forms of transformation. Moreover, a series of common threads underpins the transformatory potential of these interventions, and these threads, including the pursuit of participation as citizenship, can provide the basis for a conceptual relocation of participation within a radical politics of development. This leads us to argue for relocating participation as an overtly political approach to development, which requires a re-engagement with ‘the political’ linked to an expanded and radicalised understanding of citizenship. Crucially, we argue that for such a politics to have purchase it cannot be attached to a free-floating set of values, but must be rooted in a normative and theoretical approach to development. This is in contrast to mainstream participatory approaches, which are overly voluntaristic in seeing any form of participation as necessarily an improvement on past practices (Chambers, 1997), and which, lacking a strong theoretical basis, have been easily co-opted within disempowering agendas (Rahman, 1995). We argue that the critical modernist approach
within development theory offers the best theoretical home for an understanding of participation that is at once political and radical.
Problematising participation
A common problem across both the uncritical promotion of ‘participatory’ approaches to development and the more recent critical backlash against participation is a failure to locate such contributions within broader theoretical debates on development. Table One provides an overview of the different approaches within development theory and practice over the past century that have taken participation as a key element of their overall project, and reveals that participation has been mobilised on behalf of a variety of different ideological and institutional perspectives on development. This table focuses in particular on drawing out the points of comparison in terms of citizenship and development theory, each of which we argue are at the heart of any attempt to reconstitute participation as a legitimate and transformative approach to development. Initially, it is instructive to frame the current disputes over participation within the context of wider debates concerning the distinction and links between ‘immanent’ and ‘imminent’ development.
Observers distinguish between ‘imminent’ and ‘immanent’ development, whereby the former is concerned with ‘willed’ development policy and action and the latter is concerned with underlying processes of development (Cowen and Shenton, 1996). Imminent development emerged over the past two centuries largely as a means of managing those ‘surplus populations’ that have either been excluded from or ‘adversely incorporated’ into processes of immanent capitalist development. For much of this time the “development doctrine purported to put this relative surplus population to work within the integument of the nation” (Cowen and Shenton, 1996: 153). Hence, the state provided development studies with its key agent of development, while the rationality that underpinned the modern project of development justified the top-down, expert-led character of its associated interventions. However, although the past three decades have seen this statist approach give way to a broader focus on how civic and market actors can contribute to development interventions, there has been an increasing tendency within contemporary development studies to focus on imminent rather than immanent processes of development, in ways that often obscure the underlying politics of development. The assertion that emancipatory forms of development can be wilfully
‘managed’ through ‘the right mixture’ of institutional responses (e.g. Brett, 2000) has effectively ‘depoliticised’ the notion and practice of development in poor countries (Ferguson, 1994), rather than seeing it as negotiated with and contested by its subjects. The underlying politics of underdevelopment and exclusion, and of development interventions themselves, are thus obscured from view.
Table 1	Participation in development theory and practice: a selective history
Era Approach
Institutionaland intellectual influences United Kingdom Colonial Office
1944 Report on Mass Education in Africa
Post-colonial governments (Social Welfare or specialised departments) North American political science
Radical ‘southern’ researchers / educationalists. Friere, Fals Borda, Rahman _______________ 2nd Vatican Council, Latin American Catholic priests. Guittierez, Sobrino Dag Hammarskjold
Developmenttheory:approachtoimmanentprocessesand Approachtocitizenship imminent interventions
Locus/levelof engagement
Community
Political system and constituent parts; citizens
Economic and civic spheres; communities; citizens
Initially focused
1940s- 1950s
1960s- 1970s
1960s
1960s- 1970s
1970s-
Community Development (colonial)
Community Development (post-colonial)
Political participation
Emancipatory participation
____________ Liberation theology
‘Alternative
Immanent
(Re)produce stable rural communities to counteract processes of urbanisation and socio-political change, including radical nationalist and leftist movements Imminent
Development requires participation and self-reliance; cost-sharing. Animation rurale, adult literacy and extension education, institution building, leadership training, local development projects Immanent
As above; also development of state hegemony, moral economy of state penetration Imminent As above; also health, education
Immanent
Political development dimension of modernisation theory. Participation as securing stability, legitimacy for new states and strengthening the political system Imminent
Voter education; support for political parties
Immanent
Analyse and confront ‘structures of oppression’ within existing forms of economic development, state formation, political rule and social differentiation Imminent EP: Participatory action research (PAR), conscientisation, popular education, support for popular organisations LT: Form base Christian communities, training for transformation, popular education
Immanent
Participation as an obligation of citizenship; citizenship formed in homogenous communities
Participation (e.g. voting, campaigning, political party membership) as a right and an obligation of citizenship
Participation as a right of citizenship; participatory citizenship as a means of challenging subordination and marginalisation
Participation as a right of
1990s
1980s- present
Mid- 1990s- present
Late 1990s- present
development’
Populist / Participation in development
Social capital
Participatory governance and citizenship participation
Conference 1974. Development Dialogue, IFAD Dossier
Nerfin, Friedmann
Development professionals, NGOs (e.g. MYRADA, IIED) World Bank Participation Learning Group, NGDOs, UN agencies Chambers World Bank Social Capital and Civil Society Working Group Putnam, Bourdieu, Narayan Participatory Research and Action (Delhi), Institute for Development Studies, Brighton (Participation Group).
Critique of ‘mainstream’ development as exclusionary, impoverishing and homogenising; proposal of alternatives based around territorialism, cultural pluralism and sustainability Imminent Popular education; strengthen social movements & self-help groups
Immanent
Little direct engagement; implicit critique of modernisation
Imminent
Failure of top-down projects and planning; participation required to empower people, capture indigenous people’s knowledge, ensure sustainability and efficiency of interventions Participatory: rural/urban appraisal, learning and action, monitoring and evaluation; NGO projects.
Immanent
Social capital promoted as a basis for economic growth
Imminent
Local institution building, support participation in networks & associations
Immanent
Development requires liberal or social democracy, with a responsive state and strong civil society. Some focus on social justice Imminent
Convergence of ‘social’ and ‘political’ participation, scaling-up of participatory methods, state-civic partnerships, decentralisation, participatory budgeting, citizens hearings, participatory poverty assessments, PRSP consultations
citizenship; citizenship as a key objective of alternative development, to be realised in multi- levelled political communities
Focus on participation in projects rather than in broader political communities
Participation as a right and obligation of citizenship
Participation as primarily a right of citizenship
on communities and civic society, latterly the state through ‘inclusive governance’
Development professionals and agencies; local participants
Civic associations
Citizens, civil society, state agencies and institutions
One of the challenges to this form of imminent development over the past two decades has come from the ‘participatory development’ approach. In its current, mainstreamed and ‘populist’ form (see Table One), the ‘participation in development’ approach asserts the importance of placing local realities at the heart of development interventions, and of the need to transform agents of development from being directive ‘experts’ to ‘facilitators’ of local knowledge and capabilities (e.g. Chambers, 1983). The ‘power’ transformations required between ‘uppers’ and ‘lowers’, it is argued, can be achieved through according participatory roles to the subjects of development at each stage of development interventions.
However, this mission has faced a series of critiques, particularly regarding the apparent failure of participatory approaches to engage with the issues of power and politics raised by its language of ‘empowerment’. The key arguments against participatory development include an obsession with the ‘local’ as opposed to wider structures of injustice and oppression (Mohan, 2001; Mohan and Stokke, 2000); an insufficiently sophisticated understanding of how power operates and is constituted and thus of how empowerment may occur (e.g. Mosse, 1994; Kothari, 2001); an inadequate understanding of the role of structure and agency in social change (Cleaver, 1999); and, partly as a result of the mainstreaming of participation, a tendency for certain agents of participatory development to treat participation as a technical method of project work rather than as a political methodology of empowerment (Carmen, 1996; Cleaver, 1999; Rahman, 1995).2 In particular, this approach tends towards a methodological individualism (Francis, 2001) that obscures the analysis of what makes participation difficult for marginal groups in the first place, particularly in relation to processes of state formation, social stratification and political economy.
As already noted, the intensification of this critique has not significantly affected the continued ubiquity of participation across development policy and practice. For us, this raises a key question: to what extent can current approaches to participation be directly associated with the transformations promised by the language of
8
empowerment, and thus constitute an adequate response to the critique that participatory approaches fail to deal with issues of power and politics?
Transformative participation: a review of contemporary development policy and practice This section reviews those fields of development policy and practice wherein participation constitutes a definitive element. Following Mohan and Stokke (2000), these are participatory governance and decentralisation; NGOs and participatory development; and social movements. We argue that initiatives within each arena have either gone or have the potential to go beyond the criticisms of participation and address broader issues of politics in ways that make change more embedded and thoroughgoing, thus retaining the potential of participation to be ‘transformative’ (White, 1996). In identifying the factors that have contributed to the relative successes of the approaches identified here, this section lays the foundation for reassembling these positive political lessons into a theoretical and analytical framework wherein participation as transformation can be located.
Participatory governance and democratic decentralisation Democratic decentralisation is a key aspect of the participatory governance agenda, and is associated with the institutionalisation of participation through regular elections, council hearings and, more recently, participatory budgeting (e.g. Blair, 2000). The devolution of power to local authorities is also alleged to create incentives for increased civil society activity. However, despite being lauded by development agencies and theorists across the political spectrum as the key to state reform, popular empowerment and, more recently, poverty reduction (e.g. World Bank, 2000), the track record of decentralisation in developing countries has come under increasing criticism (e.g. Crook and Sverrison, 2001). Key problems observed so far include the failure of decentralisation to overcome socio-economic disparities within local authority regions and the likelihood of elite capture; the tendency for the forms of participation introduced by decentralisation to be subsumed either within more informal modes of patronage in ways that nullify its transformative potential (Francis and James, 2003), or to be negated by over-riding socio-cultural norms, as with the
2 Postdevelopment critics (e.g. Rahnema, 1992) go further and argue that the very language of ‘participation in development’ implies a form of imperialist intervention and the illegitimate
9
quota representation for minority groups (e.g. Kapoor, 2000; Tripp 2000). More broadly, and to the extent that such reforms constitute part of the ‘good governance’ agenda, decentralisation has been promoted as a technocratic means of ‘reducing’ or ‘smartening’ the central state (Campbell, 2001), rather than as a political project aimed at transforming state legitimacy and forging a new contract between citizens and the local state.
However, there is also growing evidence that the transformative potential of participatory governance reforms remain (Gaventa, 2004). Fung and Wright (2001) review examples from ‘north’ and ‘south’ of what they term ‘Empowered Deliberative Democracy’, each with the potential to be “...radically democratic in their reliance on the participation and capacities of ordinary people” (ibid: 7) and tying of discussion to action. For example, certain cases of democratic decentralisation stand out as having achieved both greater participation of and social justice for marginal groups and localities, as with the Indian states of West Bengal and Kerala. In both cases, decentralisation has been credited with ensuring the participation of subordinate groups – such as women, landless groups, sharecroppers and small peasants – and being directly linked to the pursuit of redistributive policies that have had pro-poor outcomes (Harriss, 2000: 15; Heller, 2001: 142). The reforms helped reduce the (ab)use of political power by landed elites (Crook and Sverrisson, 2001: 14-5), while increasing the ‘political space’ within which poor groups could participate, both within and beyond the formal institutions of state power (Webster, 2002). Crucially, these projects of democratic decentralisation in certain states in India were located within wider political programmes of state reform. The ‘reinvention’ of leftist politics in light of the failures of centralised rule and planned economies, and the need for parties of the left to maintain and increase their electoral constituency, provided the context within which participatory forms of governance became integrated within wider projects of redistributive politics and social justice.
Similar findings also emerge from reviews of participatory budgeting in Brazil, with findings of increased popular participation (e.g. over 10 per cent of the electorate in the state of Rio Grande do Sul participate in budgeting); changed investment patterns
appropriation of agency.
10
in favour of progressive social sectors such as housing, education, sanitation and health; excluded slums and populations drawn into the political process; and also increased efficiency in terms of planning and implementation (Santos 1998, Schneider and Goldfrank, 2002; Souza, 2001). Patronage relations have been challenged (Heller, 2001: 140), with people now able to make claims according to their status as citizens rather than as clients (Abers, 1998; Souza, 2001).
Once again, the agency for the success of participatory budgeting can be located within a wider radical political project. The most successful cases of participatory budgeting have been in areas where the Worker’s Party (PT) has been in power, with higher levels of participation correlated most closely with membership of the PT rather than other factors such as literacy (Schneider and Goldfrank, 2002: 9). Similarly, Heller (2001: 139) argues that the defining feature of both democratic decentralisation in India and participatory budgeting in Brazil is that of “a political project in which an organised political force – and specifically non-Leninist left-of- center political parties that have strong social movement characteristics – champions decentralisation”. Hence, such successful democratic projects of local governance reform are closely linked to their adoption of a development paradigm that directly challenges structural inequalities.
NGOs and participatory development: a radical rediscovery and moving beyond the local The forms of participation promoted by non-governmental organisations (NGOs) through discrete project interventions have been subject to particularly vigorous critique. The key problems identified include, first, their confused status between civic, public and private institutional spheres, which may mean that they interact with people only as clients (Uphoff, 1996), or are complicit in the weakening of the ‘social contract’ between state and citizen. Second, that the ‘transnational community of development NGOs’ transmits what is essentially a neo-imperialist and disempowering project through concepts and strategies of how the ‘third world’ should be managed (Townsend et al, 2002). Moreover, the NGOs that tend to receive support under the ‘civil society’ agenda tend to accord with the tenets of the neoliberal development project (Howell and Pearce, 2001). Third, relationships that are forged within this transnational community – both between ‘northern’ and
11
‘southern’ NGOs (e.g. Fowler, 1998) and between NGOs and local communities (e.g. Hickey, 2002; Miraftab, 1997) – often disempower the ‘lower’ partner through establishing patron-client relationships. The fourth and related problem is the tendency amongst NGOs to eschew partnerships with more political elements within civil society in favour of capacity-building professionalised NGOs in their image. Fifth, the increasing dependency of NGOs on official sources of funding raise the dangers that the demands of upwards accountability effectively short-circuit the participatory mechanisms required to secure downward accountability (Edwards and Hulme, 1996).
To a large extent, this paper would concur that NGOs face severe limitations in seeking to be genuine agents of transformative development through participatory approaches. However, the vast range and diversity of agencies and activities within the transnational community of NGOs not only precludes sweeping judgements, but has also produced initiatives capable of promoting participatory development in ways that do involve transformation. From a wide field, two such examples can be expanded on here, namely the ‘REFLECT’ approach to literacy generation and the increasing role of NGOs in advocacy work. While acknowledging the brevity of this exposition we argue that the transformative potential of each is distinguished by multi-levelled engagements with issues of citizenship and political change.
Adult education, citizenship and radical politics: the case of REFLECT3 The capacity of adult literacy to transform power relations has become an increasing focus, with “...the themes of participation, empowerment and popular organisation very prominent within the theory and practice of adult education for development” (Youngman, 2000: 79). Of the many associated approaches (Mayo, 1999), the REFLECT approach to literacy generation offers one way forward here. Originally piloted by ActionAid in the mid-1990s, REFLECT is currently employed by 350 governmental and non-governmental agencies in 60 countries (ActionAid, 2003).
The key idea behind REFLECT is to merge the pedagogical and political philosophy of Paulo Freire (1972) with the techniques of participatory rural appraisal, thus re-
3 Regenerated Freirean Literacy through Empowering Community Techniques.
12
engaging the technocratic expression of participation with one of its more theoretical, political and radical antecedents (see Table One). It is also theoretically informed by ‘gender and development’ thinking, and seeks to develop women’s capacity to take on participatory roles at community level and beyond (Archer and Cottingham, 1996). REFLECT proceeds by engaging participants in dialogical discussions of their socio- economic problems, and uses visual graphics to structure and depict the discussion (ibid.). ‘Keywords’ emerge from these discussions, which then form the basis for literacy development. Participants are encouraged to devise means of solving the problems, beginning with ‘action-points’ to be addressed either by REFLECT groups or higher-level organisations. The results of REFLECT in many cases to date have been impressive, with genuine transformation taking place with regards to gender relations, community-state relations, and between age groups within communities. Participants report self-realisation, increased participation in community organisations (Waddington and Mohan, 2004), and increased community-level actions (Archer and Cottingham, 1997: 200-1); female participants and REFLECT facilitators in particular have become key resource people for the communities (Kanyesigye, 1998: 51-53).
REFLECT is inextricably linked to citizenship formation, in that it focuses on “people’s ability to participate in civil society, enabling them to effectively assert their rights and assume their responsibilities” (Archer, 1998: 101). It thus emphasises that participation needs to be practised in the broader spaces of the political community beyond the project level, and recognises the need to ‘reconnect’ populist methods of participation with more politicised understandings of social change. However, while REFLECT was constructed, and is currently promoted by northern NGDOs, there is evidence that, “radical adult education initiatives are unlikely to prove effective when carried out on their own. They must operate in relation to a social movement” (Mayo, 1999: 133), a challenge we return to below. 4
NGO Advocacy One of the key weaknesses of the project-based work traditionally favoured by NGOs is the inability to challenge wider structures of marginalisation. As Nyamugasira (1998: 297) observes NGOs “have come to the sad realization that although they have
4 For studies of the links between popular education and social movements, see Ghanem (1998) and Patel (1998).
13
achieved many micro-level successes, the systems and structures that determine power and resource allocations – locally, nationally, and globally – remain largely intact”. Increasingly NGOs and other development actors are realising that a useful contribution is not to take an atomistic view of local organisations, but to address political processes that shape and constrain the local. As such advocacy contains greater potential for transformation than project based work, in engaging with making claims for excluded people in ways that (should) increase their capacity to demand their rights of citizenship and help them participate in wider arenas of decision- making. Significantly, it can be seen as one of the mechanisms by which the links between participatory development and participatory governance might be forged (e.g. PLA Notes, 2002). For example, Harper (2001) argues for a participatory form of advocacy that both involves the grassroots in agenda setting through genuine partnerships and participatory methods, and opens up policy processes to a wider range of voices and stakeholders.
NGO advocacy, then, involves the alignment of participatory approaches with a rights-based agenda, and brings together the key elements of a citizenship-based approach that stresses political engagement at local, national and international levels. In global campaigns, the transmission of both progressive discourses and resources across these levels has offered rewards to the agency of local people in ways that were previously unattainable within local and national political communities. However, important dangers remain apparent. For example, much global citizen action by- passes national governments in favour of applying direct pressure to global institutions, and may thus undermine national citizenship in favour of a form of ‘global citizenship’ that remains unattainable to most people in poor countries (Edwards, 2001). Furthermore, some advocacy campaigns reflect the current inequalities between northern and southern NGOs within the ‘transnational community of NGOs’ (Townsend, 1999), and are particularly open to growing charges concerning the problems of representation and legitimacy. One potential solution to this problem is to focus on those examples of ‘horizontal solidarity’, whereby south-south relationships form the basis of empowering advances in both livelihood strategies and policy change (Patel and Mitlin, 2002).
14
This section has argued that some participatory approaches promoted by NGOs can enhance citizenship, but they must be embedded within more political forms of participatory thought and action than has been the case until recently. Much of this activity increasingly requires moving beyond the locality with empowerment involving multi-scaled strategies and networks. Clearly, engaging with a more politicised project will often entail heightened conflict with vested interests at multiple levels (e.g. Rafi and Chowdhury, 2000). Indeed, one observer argues that the role of ‘participation’ within successful advocacy campaigns is often as a form of popular protest rather than as a set of methods, and that NGOs who prioritise advocacy should become classified as social movements (Dechalert, 1999). Problems of representation – whether of ‘universalist’ ideals within different cultural contexts or of ‘southern’ NGOs by ‘northern’ NGOs in various policy arenas – still abound (e.g. Hudson, 2000). However, it might be that a focus on the political is once again the way forward here, with a shift in focus from issues of ‘representation’ and ‘legitimacy’ to one on ‘political responsibility’ (Jordan and van Tuijl, 2000). The key is for NGOs to conduct their work and relationships “with democratic principles foremost in the process” (ibid: 2053), with all actors having to respond to the demands of ‘political responsibility’ at each stage and at all levels. This involves dividing different political arenas between different actors and empowering them to act therein, while monitoring the (potentially negative) impact that actions in one political arena might have in another (ibid: 2063).
Social movements Development theory and practice has generally been wary of engaging directly with social movements as sites of popular participation and political projects, preferring the more orderly and ‘makeable’ world of NGOs.5	However, a number of theorists are realising the potential of the former for radical change. So, our discussion concerns ‘progressive’ social movements since it is clear that many social movements are not seeking the sorts of social transformations examined here. Rather they aim to protect privilege rather than promote rights, and at worst, are harbingers of discrimination,
5 Although we would agree with Howell and Pearce (2001) that this constitutes a worrying ideological bias within international development thinking and practice around civil society, there are dangers in calling for a closer engagement between official development agencies and social movements. Such movements can easily be disrupted by such engagements (particularly financial), and some might also be constituted in ways that legitimately deter development agencies seeking probity and democratic forms of governance in their partners.
15
intolerance and injustice. This move towards social movements was initially premised on a thoroughgoing critique of the dominant ‘left’ position on civil society (e.g. Laclau and Mouffe, 1985) but has more recently been influenced by post-modern interpretations of such developments (e.g. Escobar, 1995). This has tended to leave the debate around social movements polarised between cultural and political readings of their meaning and potential. In the developing world, social movements are frequently characterised as standing in resistance to development (e.g. Routledge, 2001), or depicted by postmodern theorists as bailing out of the "limping vessel of development (and) striking out for new horizons in smaller craft" (Esteva and Prakash, 1992: 51). The destination as yet has no name other than ‘cultural autonomy’ and an escape from ‘mainstream’ development.
However, we would argue that the importance of social movements in relation to participation and development cannot be captured in such terms, particularly in relation	to	the	oppositions	between	‘culture’/’politics’,	and ‘development’/‘resistance’. Rather, the historical and contemporary role of social movements in using identity-based forms of participatory politics to extend the boundaries of citizenship to marginal groups (Scott, 1990; Foweraker and Landman, 1997), suggests that the cultural and the political are closely entwined (Castells, 1997). Furthermore, we would argue that some movements are better understood as being located within a critical position vis-à-vis the ongoing project of modernity rather than being ‘postmodern’ alternatives to development.
The starting point for many contemporary social movements is a critical resistance to the forms of exclusion and exploitation that have resulted from broad processes of neoliberal capitalist penetration and historical and contemporary forms of state formation, and more specific forms of statist and corporate development. Anti-dam movements such as the Narmada Bachoa Andolan (NBA) in India have opposed both the material project of development undertaken by the Indian state and the ideological representation of ‘development’ that underpins it, through action at multiple scales (Routledge, 2003). The movement’s opposition, in both material (e.g. developing alternative energy projects, threatening to drown themselves if the dam goes ahead) and discursive (e.g. peasant testimonials) forms, thus challenges the moral legitimacy of the state regarding its contract to protect and develop its citizens (ibid: 259).
16
In Mexico, the Zapatista’s have raged against free trade agreements and the patronage-mode of politics, as well as the State’s relegation of Indians to “a very inferior category of ‘citizens in formation’”, forced to occupy “the basement of the Mexican nation” (Marcos, 1994). As the most powerful of many peasant movements to (re)emerge in Latin America over the past two decades, the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra/Landless Rural Worker’s Movement (MST) argues that “democratic transition has not led to democratic transformation; that is, it has not led to the emergence of substantive forms of citizenship” (Robles, 2001: 147). As a movement, it advocates for and works towards not simply the gain of its share of both land and political power within Brazilian society, but “the fundamental transformation of the structures of power” within Brazil (op cit.). Each movement has impacted significantly on their respective terrain of struggle, as with the MST’s attainment of land for more than 400,000 landless workers.
The forms of participatory citizenship advocated and (in some cases) practiced by the movements noted here, resonate beyond the narrower concerns of regional and ethnic identity that limit some movements to a position of narrow defence rather than progress (Castells, 1997). For example, the Zapatistas have campaigned actively since 1994 to not only attain full citizenship for the Indians of the Chiapas region of Mexico, but also for wider political reforms, particularly to the patronage mode of politics. In demanding that the government amend the constitution so as to “recognise the indigenous as indigenous and as Mexicans” (Marcos, 2001), there is no renouncement of the notion of Mexican citizenship, but of the exclusive way in which it has been forged. Movements in Ecuador have similarly sought to make claims for both ‘ethnic’ and ‘national’ citizenship (Bebbington, 1996), and frequently link to broad global campaigns and networks regarding the environment and human rights. As such, they appear to have found a way of “relating the universal and the particular in the drive to define social justice from the standpoint of the oppressed" (Harvey, 1993: 116). In so doing, they have articulated a mode of political action capable of imagining and generating alternative development futures not only for its immediate
17
constituency, but also for a broader community of dispossessed and marginalised peoples.6
In terms of development more broadly, what is arguably most significant about such movements is the ways in which their claims are woven within a broader discourse of what are the familiar demands of modernity. This notion of social movements being transformative and radical within rather than in opposition to the modern is further supported by research with popular organisations in Andean regions of Latin America (Bebbington and Bebbington, 2001). Land, democracy, citizenship and development – all totems of the modern project – remain the key concerns of a number of ‘new’ social movements (Robles, 2001; Veltmeyer, 1997). This suggests that the participatory politics of cultural identity, material redistribution and social justice are not alternatives, but can be part of a single political project, a possibility we return to below.
Identifying the politics of participation as transformation
This (selective) sampling of political and policy arenas demonstrates that participatory approaches to development and governance have – to some extent and in some ways – gone beyond the critique mounted against them, particularly regarding the failure to engage with issues of politics and power. Although we cannot claim that these developments are conclusive or will go onto fully achieve their ends, they have transcended the search for simple technical fixes and are demonstrably moving towards the more structural transformations suggested by the language of ‘participation for empowerment’. Moreover, we argue that there are at least four threads of continuity that run throughout these initiatives, which can be drawn out as the key dimensions that underlie successful approaches to participation as transformation.
First, the successes of participation within contemporary development policy and practice have depended upon them being part of a broader project that is at once political and radical. By this we mean a project that seeks to directly challenge
6 Citizenship’ has formed the basis of demands made by movements of subordinate classes and excluded groups across time and space (e.g. from workers in 19th century Britain to the youth in late 20th Century Brazil), offering them a vocabulary that both demands rights and binds classes and groups
18
existing power relations rather than simply work around them for more technically efficient service delivery. The roots of this political radicalism varies. In the case of decentralisation, the stage has recently been set in some contexts by a convergence between the growth of populist approaches to governance and development, and the need for leftist political organisations to find a means of both institutionalising a politics of social justice in the post-welfarist, post centralist era of governance and (re)connect with an electoral base. With NGOs, it has formed around a rediscovery of the radical within participatory development history (REFLECT) and/or efforts to transform the policy process and development discourse itself through advocacy work. What is key here is that there is an explicit articulation of a radical project that focuses primarily on issues of power and politics.
Second, each approach that has achieved transformations has sought to direct participatory approaches towards a close engagement with underlying processes of development, rather than remain constrained within the frame of specific policy processes or interventions. In terms of NGOs, the REFLECT approach addresses itself to the patterns of domination and subordination within developing countries, rather than those between development professionals and project participants. The political parties that have attained the greatest success with participatory governance reforms have directly sought to alter patterns of inequality created by uneven processes of development. New social movements form the clearest example of a close and critical engagement with efforts to reshape development – and the project of modernity itself.
Third, each approach is characterised by an explicit focus on and pursuit of participation as citizenship. Each of the initiatives reviewed here seek in different ways not only to bring people into the political process, but also to transform and democratise the political process in ways that progressively alter the ‘immanent’ processes of inclusion and exclusion that operate within particular political communities, and which govern the opportunities for individuals and groups to claim their rights to participation and resources. This approach can be distinguished from earlier approaches to participation, such as the colonial project of community
to the state (Tilly, 1995), that can overcome divisions within heterogeneous movements and offers a basis of resistance accessible to all marginal groups.
19
development, which promoted a narrow form of citizenship designed to reduce claims on the centre (see Table One). Amongst the key exemplars here are the Zapatista’s campaign for constitutional change in Mexico and the success of some participatory governance reforms in securing citizenship participation as an alternative form of inclusion to patron-client relations. In such instances, citizenship here is often not being requested from a proscribed menu of rights and obligations, but actively defined and claimed ‘from below’.
The fourth commonality appears to be that, for participatory approaches to be successful in achieving transformation, a precondition is that the modes of accumulating political and economic power in the given context are (to a significant degree) structurally disentwined from each other. For example, the success of decentralisation in the Indian states of West Bengal and Kerala relied on the capacity of the new political elite being able to protect state resources and decision-making from the economic (landed) elite. To the extent that we focus on participation as a political project here, then, there is a need to examine the political economy of participation, particularly in contexts where the accumulation of political power and economic wealth are entwined, and where a focus on ‘participation’ may simply be a means of concealing ongoing patronage. However, new forms of citizenship participation can arguably play a key role in challenging and reforming such ‘dysfunctional’ forms of rule (Mamdani, 1996).
However, our argument that participation can only be considered transformative if these rigorous criteria are met needs to be qualified. We do not imply that there is little point in using participatory methods by agents and in contexts where these criteria are not met. It would be misleading to dismiss all ‘formal’ participation as disempowering simply because they are touched by the ‘development machine’. To see them as inevitably disempowering denies the less powerful any agency and treats political spaces as discrete when, in fact, a form of political learning can take place where experiences from one space are transported and transformed consciously or unconsciously in different and new spaces. What is required is a more realistic set of claims and criteria by which to characterise and evaluate those forms of participation
20
that seek merely to transform practice of development agencies and professionals rather than transformations to underlying forms of exclusion (Kumar and Corbridge, 2002; Williams, 2004 forthcoming). Such ‘imminent’ forms of participation can then be properly judged on their own merits, rather than being conflated with broader projects of transformation.7
However, having identified the forms of politics that underlie transformative approaches to participation, the key challenge is to try and relate these findings to broader conceptual and theoretical trends within development studies. As has been noted, ‘...thinking about participation (in development)...has lacked the analytical tools...and an adequate theoretical framework’ (Shepherd, 1998: 179), a failing that we argued has helped lead to its mainstream co-option and depoliticisation. In the following section we draw on two of the key findings here – concerning citizenship and a radical form of political project – to develop a more systematic conceptual and theoretical framework within which debates on transformative forms of participation can be located.
Relocating participation within a radical politics of development
‘...much of the theory construction in development studies has been introduced with no explicit considerations concerning basic ontological, epistemological, and methodological positions...Further, it is required of a theory that the normative premises and political priorities it embodies are thoroughly exposed’ (Martinussen, 1997: 345-6).
The notion of ‘citizenship participation’ has recently emerged as a means by which the convergence of people's agency and their participation in specific interventions might be understood, while also capturing the broadening of the participation agenda whereby the social and political agendas of ‘participation’ and ‘good governance’
7 See White (1996) for a typology of participation, ranging from the ‘nominal’ through to the ‘transformative’.
21
have increasingly converged (Gaventa, 2002).8 The links between ‘citizenship’ and ‘participatory development’ can be conceptualised in terms of the interaction between a series of institutional norms and agency-led practices, whereby,
‘Citizenship can be defined as that set of practices (juridical, political, economic or cultural) which define a person as a competent member of society, and which as a consequence shape the flow of resources to persons and social groups’ (Turner, 1993: 2).
Relocating ‘participation’ within citizenship situates it in a broader range of sociopolitical practices, or expressions of agency, through which people extend their status and rights as members of particular political communities, thereby increasing their control over socioeconomic resources. The question for participatory interventions becomes how they can enhance the capabilities of participants to project their agency beyond specific interventions into broader arenas, thereby progressively altering the ‘immanent’ processes of inclusion and exclusion. However, we want to move beyond an exhortation that ‘citizenship matters’ for participation towards a more thorough analysis of the specific form/s of citizenship that are likely to underpin the transformative potential of participation, and of the theoretical underpinnings that this requires.
Towards a radical theory of citizenship The links between participation and citizenship are most clearly expressed within ‘civic republican’ theories of citizenship. Civic republicanism is founded on ‘the collective and participatory engagement of citizens in the determination of the affairs of their community’ (Dietz, 1987: 13-15, in Lister, 1997: 24), whereby citizens as members of a political community are actively in ‘political debate and decision- making’ (Miller, 1995: 443). While liberal conceptions tend to rely on legal definitions concerning the formal status of citizens,9 and focus on narrow forms of ‘political participation’ (e.g. voting), ‘membership in a community can be a broader,
8 Citizenship lies alongside other conceptual advances that have sought to confront both the critique ranged against participation and the broadening of the participation agenda. These include ‘political capital’ (e.g. Baumann, 2000), ‘political space’ (Webster and Engberg-Pedersen, 2002), and ‘political capabilities’ (Whitehead and Gray-Molina, 2003; Williams, 2004).
9 This juridical focus tends to mask the fact that the ‘sociological realities are those of subjects, clients and consumers, not those of citizens of equal worth and decision-making capacity’ (Stewart, 1995: 74).
22
more inclusive category’ (Silver, 1997: 79). Here, ‘citizenship’ constitutes not only a set of legal obligations and entitlements ‘but also the practices through which individuals and groups formulate and claim new rights or struggle to expand and maintain existing rights’ (Isin and Wood, 1999: 4). This participatory notion of citizenship is particularly ‘attractive to women and other marginalised groups’ (Lister, 1997: 28), as it offers the prospect that citizenship can be claimed ‘from below’ through their own efforts in organised struggles (e.g. the MST’s notion of ‘substantive’ citizenship), rather than waiting for it to be conferred ‘from above’. Moreover, the grounding of citizenship in actual political communities also helps avoid the risk of imputing a specifically Western conception of citizenship into different contexts (Tilly, 1995).
Two further moves are required for a notion of participatory citizenship linked to transformative forms of politics. The first is to overcome the ‘public/private’ problem whereby dominant forms of citizenship have tended to exclude ‘many classes of potential citizens’ (Werbner and Yuval Davis, 1999: 7), including women, minorities, colonial subjects and the working classes. This requires a broader concept of the ‘public’, and a recognition of those participatory arenas relied upon by subordinate or excluded social groups who are denied access to more public forms of participation (Lister, 1997: 24-9; Young, 1990: 118-120). In some cases, this marginality may ‘allow those who have systematically been disprivileged a ‘central space’ of their own in which to organise the expression of their needs’ (Fardon, 1988: 774), and lead to the development of alternative forms of citizenship. The second (and related) move is to recognise the political character of group-based citizenship claims as well as those tied directly to the nation state. As such, ‘rather than regarding citizenship and identity as antinomic principles’ it might be necessary to ‘recognize the rise of new identities and claims for group rights as a challenge to the modern interpretation of universal citizenship’ (Isin and Wood, 1999: 4). Here, the particularist claims of identity are gradually transformed into more universalist democratic gains through claim-making and pursuing the political process (Foweraker and Landman, 1997).
From this conception of citizenship, it is important to explore the extent to which this ‘recognition politics’ develops into what Iris Young termed an ‘emancipatory politics of difference’ (Young, 1990: 163), a project that requires engaging with questions of
23
difference, multiple standpoints, and a politics of justice. In terms of difference, Young (1993) sees groups as relational, meaning that “Groups should be understood not as entirely other, but as overlapping, as constituted in relation to one another and thus as shifting their attributes and needs in accordance with what relations are salient” (1993: 123-4). While differences exist this recognition of groups as relational means that each group must engage with the other, rather than simply dismiss it, since groups have a mutual stake in one another’s existence. This also opens up the possibility that alliances exist since only some differences are intractable.
The key to this politics of difference is that it ‘requires not the melting away of differences, but institutions that promote reproduction of and respect for group differences without oppression’ (1990: 47, cited in Harvey, 1993: 105). If development is committed to a politics of social justice, how can it resolve the problem of which or whose difference claims are valid and which are not? For Harvey this epistemological task requires a renewed engagement with political economy; what we later develop as critical modernism. Understanding the political economy of the processes shifts the focus in two ways. First, political economy alerts us to the similarities as much as the differences, which then provides a basis for alliances and connections between different groups. Second, by understanding the relational formation of group identities we do not ignore claims by groups which we find oppressive, but look at how their presence shapes and is shaped by those groups seeking emancipation. Therefore, rather than get mired in an impasse over universalism and anti-universalism we locate our epistemology within a socialist political economy, which seeks social justice through a transformation away from capitalism as currently expressed.
Development from the left: critical modernism In this section we elaborate on critical modernism as a socialist-inspired framework that seeks to balance a normative vision with a political praxis that is sensitive to different rationalities and modernities. Critical modernism emerged as a response to the failure of either populism, postmodernism or political economy approaches to adequately capture the complex positioning of structure and agency within contemporary development arenas. As an approach, it is primarily distinguishable from the postmodern/postdevelopment rejection of development, in part to stress that
24
most countries of the South have never been ‘modern’ in the sense understood by postmodernists (Schuurman, 1993; Peet, 1997). Rather, critical modernism begins from the premise that rather than reject development tout court we need to ‘rethink’ it (Peet and Hartwick, 1997). It retains a belief in the central tenets of modernism – democracy, emancipation, development and progress – but, theoretically rooted in Post-Marxism, feminism and post-structuralism – it begins from a critique of existing material power relations, particularly a critique of capitalism ‘as the social form taken by the modern world, rather than on a critique of modernism as an overgeneralized discursive phenomenon’ (Peet and Hartwick, 1997: 200). This faith in modernism is also ‘scientific’ in that it requires evidence for analysis and action, rather than faith. This avoids romanticising the capacity of the poor and treating all ‘local knowledge’ as pure and incontrovertible. As Peet and Watts (1996: 38) argue within critical modernism ‘rationality is contended rather than abandoned’.
This assertion rests on the belief that modernity is not a singular entity that unfolds in a linear fashion. Rather, the ‘ideas and practices of modernity are themselves appropriated and re-embedded in locally situated practices, thus accelerating the fragmentation and dispersal of modernity into constantly proliferating modernities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 1). These ‘multiple modernities’ (Comaroff and Comaroff, 1993) destabilise and provincialise the notion of an ideal European modernity and replace it with one that seeks to understand ‘the encounters between multiple and divergent modernities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 159) in societies containing a ‘multiplicity of rationalities’ (Arce and Long, 2000: 160). Seen thus development is a ‘resolutely dialectical process..(which is)..a sort of mixing, syncretism and cross- fertilization rather than a crude mimicry or replication’ (Watts, 2003: 23).
The pressing question in terms of realising the critical modernist project of development is what or who will be the key agents and in which institutional arenas? According to Heller’s review of participatory governance reforms, neither the state nor the party can be agents of ‘sustained transformative projects’; rather what is required is an ‘ecology of agents’ which blends ‘the institutional capacities of the state and the associational resources of civil society’ (2001: 152, 158). This is not in the sanitised and simplistic sense of state-civic synergies as promoted under the rubric of partnership (Evans, 1997), but in the more political sense of party-social movement
25
dynamics and within the context of a shared political project. What we get is a form of radical democracy that transcends the local and forges alliances with a range of regional, national and globalised movements. Alliances as we noted earlier can come from a revivified political economy that, rather than posit endless differences (as with post-structuralism) or seek totalising sameness (as in some modernisms) finds similarities of experience around which to coalesce and campaign. Hence, coalitions around certain forms of exclusion and subordination emerge.
However, these strategic questions are difficult to answer unreservedly since it is neither possible nor proper to think of strategy in the abstract. The nature of strategy is such that it depends upon concrete openings and possibilities found in ‘real’ places so we cannot specify a priori by whom and in what ways such a politics will be realised. The examples of participatory transformation analysed in the earlier sections offer crucial clues to the types of agency, strategic approach and context that we would argue are associated with a broader project of critical modernism.
Conclusion
The critical backlash against participatory approaches to development and governance has quite rightly raised a number of important concerns regarding problems within such approaches and of their uncritical promotion. However, there is a real danger of throwing the baby out with the bathwater, and losing those elements of participation that retain the potential to catalyse and underpin genuine processes of transformation. This paper has argued that recent advances within and across the several fields of development and governance where participation plays a major role have re-affirmed the empowering potential of participation. However, the conditions within which participation can be transformative, and the forms of politics that underpins such approaches, need to be closely delineated and analysed. The corollary is that not all criteria for transformative participation need to be in place for participatory processes to be enacted since politics rarely unfolds in such programmatic ways. This work has been started here, but requires further elaboration from both empirical and theoretical perspectives.
The intention here has been to locate a radical home for the participatory project that secures its autonomy, room for innovation and links to a transformative project.	We
26
develop the notion of citizenship as a meso-level concept linking popular agency with politics, culture and place. Citizenship analysis arguably has a significant contribution to make towards development theory and practice. As befits development theory, it is an inherently multidisciplinary concept, relating to socioeconomic, political, legal and cultural practices and spheres. Operating at the meso level of social theorising, citizenship represents the type of ‘conceptual innovation’ demanded by this post- impasse discipline (Booth, 1994), with its need to find a path between the failure of metanarratives and the methodological individualism of the more voluntaristic actor- oriented approaches, and also between the political and the cultural. Furthermore, the notion of citizenship maintains a ‘universalist’ normative appeal, while maintaining a capacity to be operationalised within particular contexts.
More specifically, citizenship represents a significant conceptual advance within understandings of participatory governance and development for several reasons. First, it offers a means of covering the convergence between participatory development and participatory governance (Gaventa, 2002). Second, citizenship links to rights-based approaches since it helps to establish participation as a political right that can be claimed by excluded or marginal peoples, and thus provides a stronger political, legal and moral imperative for focusing on people’s agency within development than is currently the case. Moreover, citizenship analysis may also provide a means of transcending the distinction between imminent and immanent forms of participatory development, particularly as it seeks to situate participation within a broader political, social and historical perspective that draws attention to the politics of inclusion and exclusion that shape popular agency beyond particular interventions. The notion of citizenship thus offers a useful political, social and historical form of analysis within which to situate understandings of participation, as located within the formation of a social contract between citizenry and authority in particular political communities. Importantly, and although used across ideological divides, citizenship has a radical political trajectory that can be read most clearly off the claims and programmes of both old and new social movements over the past two centuries (Tilly, 1995). More broadly, then, citizenship is an inherently political perspective on participation, arguably the chief requirement of transformative approaches to participation.
27
Finally, we argued that such a politics of citizenship must be tied to a project that is radical but which does not reject modernity tout court since modernity has never been a coherent and teleological process, but one fractured and multiply realised. This ontological reasoning allows for a view of development such that political communities can pursue their different experiences of and desires for modernity. Having said this, we would argue that capitalist modernity cannot easily be relativised away as one among many modernities, but must be critically engaged with as the pre- eminent force shaping contemporary and future development processes and the role of popular agency therein.
28
References
Abers, R. (1998) ‘From clientelism to cooperation: local government, participatory policy and civic organising in Porto Alegre, Brazil’, Politics and Society, 26(4): 511-523.
ActionAid. (2003) ‘Our priorities: education: REFLECT’. At http://www.actionaid.org
Arce, A. and Long, N. (2000) ‘Reconfiguring modernity and development from an anthropological perspective’, in Arce, A. and N. Long (eds) Anthropology, Development and Modernities, pp1-31. London: Routledge.
Archer, D. (1998) ‘The evolving conception of literacy in REFLECT’, PLA Notes, 32, 100-108.
Archer, D. and S. Cottingham. (1996) The REFLECT Mother Manual: a new approach to adult literacy. London: ACTIONAID.
Barten, F., R.P. Montiel, E. Espinoza, C.M. Carbonell. (2002) ‘Democratic governance – fairytale or real perspective? Lessons from Central America’, Environment and urbanization, 14(1): 129-144.
Bebbington, A. (1996) ‘Movements, Modernizations and Markets: Indigenous organizations and agrarian strategies in Ecuador’, in Peet and Watts (eds), op. cit, pp 86-109.
Bebbington, A.J. and D.H. Bebbington. (2001) ‘Development alternatives: practice, dilemmas and theory’. Area, 33(1): 7-17.
Blair. H. (2000) ‘Participation and accountability at the periphery: democratic local governance in six countries’, World Development, 28(1): 21-39.
Booth, D. (1994) ‘Rethinking social development: an overview’, in Booth (ed) Rethinking Social Development: theory, research and practice, pp 3-41. Harlow: Longman.
Brett, E.A. (2000) ‘Development theory in a post-socialist era: competing capitalisms and emancipatory alternatives’, Journal of International Development, 12: 789-802.
Campbell, B. (2001) ‘Governance, Institutional Reform and the State: International Financial Institutions and Political Transition in Africa’, Review of African Political Economy, 88: 155-176.
Carmen, R. (1996) Autonomous Development. London: Zed Books. Castells, M. (1997) The Power of Identity. London: Blackwell.
29
Chambers, R. (1983) Rural Development: Putting the Last First. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Chambers, R. (1997) Whose Reality Counts? Putting the first last. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Cleaver, F. (1999) ‘Paradoxes of Participation: Questioning Participatory Approaches to Development’, Journal of International Development, 11: 597-612.
Comaroff, J. and J. Comaroff (1993) ‘Introduction’, in Comaroff, J. and J. Comaroff (eds) Modernity and its Malcontents: Ritual Power in Postcolonial Africa, pp xi-xxxvii. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cooke, W. and U. Kothari (2001) Participation: the New Tyranny? London: Zed. Cowen, M. and Shenton, R. (1996) Doctrines of Development. Routledge, London. Crook, R.C. and A.S. Sverrisson. (2001) Decentralisation and Poverty-Alleviation in
Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis or, is West Bengal Unique?
IDS Working Paper No.130. Brighton: Institute of Development Studies. Dechalert, P. (1999) ‘NGOs, Advocacy and Popular Protest: A Case Study of
Thailand’, C.V.O. International Working Paper no.6. LSE.
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/CCS/publications/iwp/int-work-papers.htm Edwards, M. (2001) ‘Global civil society and community exchanges: a different form
of movement’, Environment and Urbanization, 13(2): 145-149. Escobar, A. (1995) Encountering Development: the making and unmaking of the
Third World. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Esteva, G. and Prakash. M.S. (1992) 'Grassroots Resistance to Sustainable
Development: Lessons from the Banks of the Narmada'. The Ecologist, 22(2):
45-51. Evans, P. (1997). ‘Introduction: Development Strategies Across the Public-Private
Divide’, in Evans, P. (ed) State-Society Synergy: government and social capital in development, IAS Research Series 94, pp 1-10. Berkeley: University of California.
Fardon, R. (1988) ‘Centre, periphery, boundary: some problems with spatialising problems’, in Geschiere, P. and P. Konings (eds.) Proceedings/Contributions, Conference on the Political Economy of Cameroon: Historical Perspectives, pp757-775. Leiden: African Studies Centre.
Ferguson, J. (1994) The Anti-Politics Machine: 'Development', Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press.
30
Foweraker, J. and T. Landman. (1997) Citizenship Rights and Social Movements: a comparative and statistical analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Francis, P. (2001) ‘Participatory Development at the World Bank: The Primacy of Process‘. In Cooke and Kothari, op cit., pp,72-87.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Penguin. Fung, A. and E. O. Wright (2001) ‘Deepening Democracy: Innovations in
Empowered Participatory Governance’, Politics and Society 29(1): 5-41. Gaventa, J. (2002) ‘Exploring Citizenship, Participation and Accountability’, IDS
Bulletin, 33(2): 1-11. Gaventa, J. (2004)	‘Towards Transformative Governance: Exploring the
Transformative Possibilities’. In Hickey and Mohan (eds.), op cit. London:
Zed Books. Ghanem, E. 1998. Social movements in Brazil and their educational work’,
International Review of Education, 44(2-3), 177-189. Harper, C. (2001) ‘Do the facts matter: NGOs, advocacy and research?’, in M.
Edwards and J. Gaventa. (eds.) (2001). Global Citizen Action. 247-258.
London: Earthscan. Harriss, J. (2000) ‘How much difference does politics make? Regime differences
across Indian states and rural poverty reduction’. LSE Working Paper Series 1,
No.1. http://www.lse.ac.uk/ Harvey, D. (1993) ‘Class relations, social justice and the politics of difference’, in
Squires, J. (ed.) Principled Positions: Postmodernism and the rediscovery of
value, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 85-120. Heller P. (2001) ‘Moving the State: The Politics of Democratic Decentralization in
Kerala, South Africa, and Porto Alegre’, Politics & Society, 29(1): 1-28. Hickey, S. (2002) ‘Transnational NGDOs and Participatory forms of Rights-based
development: Converging with the local politics of citizenship in Cameroon’,
Journal of International Development, 14(6): 841-857. Hickey, S. and G. Mohan (eds) (2004, forthcoming) Participation: From Tyranny to
Transformation? Exploring New Approaches to Participation. London: Zed
Books. Hudson, A. (2000) ‘Making the connection: Legitimacy claims, legitimacy chains and
northern NGOs’ international advocacy’, in Lewis, D and Wallace, T. (eds)
31
(2000) New Roles and Relevance: Development NGOs and the Challenge of
Change. Kumarian Press. Isin, E.F. and P.K. Wood. (1999) Citizenship and Identity. London: Sage. James, R. and P. Francis. (2003) ‘Balancing Rural Poverty Reduction and Citizen
Participation: The Contradictions of Uganda’s Decentralization Program’,
World Development, 31(2): 325-337. Jordan, L. and P. van Tuijl. (2000) ‘Political Responsibility in Transnational NGO
Advocacy’, World Development, 28(12): 2051-2065. Kapoor, I. (2002) ‘The devil’s in the theory: a critical assessment of Robert
Chambers’ work on participatory development’, Third World Quarterly,
23(1): 101-117. Kapoor, N. (2000) ‘Women and Governance’, Participation and Governance,
November Issue. New Delhi: PRIA. Kothari, U. (2001) ‘Power, knowledge and social control in participatory
development’, in Cooke and Kothari, op cit., 139-152. Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: towards a radical
democratic politics. London: Verso. Lister, R. (1997) Citizenship: Feminist Perspectives. Hampshire: MacMillan. Mamdani, M. (1996) Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of
Late Colonialism. Oxford: James Currey. Marcos. (1994) ‘The long journey from despair to hope’. ZALN Communique,
Supplement for the Anniversary of "La Jornada". 22nd September.
http://struggle.ws/zapatista.html Marcos. (2001) ‘7 years from what we call "the other uprising’, ZALN Communique.
http://struggle.ws/zapatista.html Martinussen (1997) State, Society and Market. London: Zed Books. Mayo, P. (1999) Gramsci, Freire and Adult Education: possibilities for
transformative action. London: Zed. McGee, R. (2001). ‘Participation in Development’, in Kothari, U. and M. Minogue
(eds), Development theory and practice: critical perspectives, pp.92-116.
London: Palgrave. Metcalf, K. and G. Gomez. (1998) ‘Gender and REFLECT’, PLA Notes, 32: 95-99. Miller, D. (1995) ‘Citizenship and Pluralism’, Political Studies, 43: 432-450. Miraftab, F. (1997) ‘Flirting with the enemy’, Habitat International, 21(4): 361-375.
32
Mohan, G. (2001) ‘Beyond Participation: Strategies for Deeper Empowerment’. In Cooke and Kothari, op cit., 153-167.
Mohan, G. and K. Stokke. (2000) ‘Participatory Development and Empowerment’, Third World Quarterly, 21(2): 266-280.
Mosse, D. (1994) ‘Authority, Gender and Knowledge: Theoretical Reflections on PRA’, Development and Change, 25(3): 497-526.
Nyamugasira, W. (1998) 'NGOs and advocacy: how well are the poor represented?', Development in Practice, 8, 3, 297-308.
Patel, I. (1998) ‘The contemporary women’s movement and women’s education in India’, International Review of Education, 44 (2-3): 155-175.
Patel, S. and D. Mitlin. (2002) ‘Sharing experiences and changing lives’, Community Development Journal, 37(2): 125-136.
Peet, R. and E. Hartwick (1997) Theories of Development. New York: Guilford. Peet, R. and M. Watts (1996) 'Liberation Ecology: Development, sustainability, and
environment in an age of market triumphalism', in Peet and Watts (eds.) Liberation Ecologies: Environment, development and social movements, pp.1- 45. London: Routledge.
Peet. R. (1997) ‘Social theory, postmodernism and the critique of development’, in Benko, G. and U. Strohmayer (eds) Space and Social Theory: Interpreting modernity and postmodernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
PLA Notes No.43, (2002) Advocacy and Citizen Participation. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
Rafi, M. and A.M.R. Chowdhury. (2000) ‘Human rights and religious backlash: the experience of a Bangladeshi NGO’, Development in Practice, 10(1): 19-30. Rahman, M.D.A. (1995) 'Participatory Development: Towards Liberation and Co-
optation?', in G. Craig and M. Mayo (eds.) Community Empowerment: a
reader in participation and development, pp.24-32. London: Zed Books. Rahnema, M. (1992) 'Participation', in W. Sachs (ed.) The Development Dictionary:
A Guide to Knowledge as Power, pp.116-131. London: Zed. Robles, W. (2001) ‘The Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST) in Brazil’,
Journal of Peasant Studies, 29(2): 146-161. Routledge, P. (2001) ‘‘Our resistance will be as transnational as capital’:
Convergence space and strategy in globalising resistance’, Geojournal, 52: 25- 33.
33
Routledge, P. (2003) ‘Voices of the damned: discursive resistance amidst erasure in the Narmada valley’, Political Geography, 22: 243-270.
Santos, B.S. (1998) ‘Participatory budgeting in Porto Alegre, Brazil: towards a redistributive democracy’, Politics and Society, 26(4): 461-510.
Schneider, A. and B. Goldfrank. (2002) ‘Budgets and ballots in Brazil: participatory budgeting from the city to the state’, IDS Working Paper 149. Brighton: IDS. Schuurman, F. (1993) ‘Modernity, postmodernity and the new social movements’, in
Schuurman, F. (ed.) Beyond the impasse, Zed Press, London. Scott, A. (1990) Ideology and the New Social Movements. London: Unwin/Hyman. Shepherd, A. (1998) Sustainable Rural Development. Hampshire: Macmillan. Silver, H. (1997) ‘Poverty, exclusion and citizenship rights’, in C. Gore and J. B.
Figueiredo (eds.) Social Exclusion and the anti-poverty policy: A debate. Research Series 110, pp.78-82. Geneva: International Institute of Labour Studies/UN Development Programme.
Souza, C. (2001) ‘Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities in building democratic institutions’, Environment and Urbanization, 13(1): 159-184.
Stewart, A. (1995) ‘Two conceptions of citizenship’, British Journal of Sociology, 46(1): 63-78.
Tilly, C. (1995) (ed.) Citizenship, Identity and Social History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Townsend, J. (1999) ‘Are Non-governmental Organizations Working in Development a Transnational Community?’, Journal of International Development, 11: 613-623.
Townsend, J. et al (2002). ‘The Role of the Transnational Community of Nongovernment Organisations: Governance or Poverty Reduction?’, Journal of International Development, 14(6): 829-839.
Tripp, A.M. (2000) Women and politics in Uganda. Oxford: James Currey/Kampala: Fountain Publishers.
Turner, B.S. (1993) ‘Contemporary Problems in the Theory of Citizenship’, in Turner (ed.) Citizenship and Social Theory, pp1-18. London: Sage.
Uphoff, N. (1996) 'Why NGOs are Not a Third Sector: a Sectoral Analysis with Some Thoughts on Accountability, Sustainability and Accountability', in Edwards
34
and Hulme (eds.), NGOs: Performance and Accountability, pp.17-30. London:
Earthscan. Veltmeyer, H. (1997) ‘New Social Movements in Latin America: The Dynamics of
Class and Identity'’ Journal of Peasant Studies, 25(1): 139-169. Waddington, M and Mohan, G. (2004), ‘Failing Forward: going beyond imposed
forms of participation’, in Hickey, S. and Mohan, G. (eds) Participation:
From tyranny to transformation? Zed Books, London. Watts, M (2003) ‘Development and Governmentality’, Singapore Journal of Tropical
Geography,24, 1, 6-34. Webster, N. (2002) ‘Local organizations and political space in the forests of West
Bengal’, in N. Webster and L. Engberg-Pedersen (eds.). In the Name of the Poor: Contesting Political Space for Poverty Reduction, pp 233-254. London: Zed Books.
Webster, N. and L. Engberg-Pedersen. (eds.) (2002) In the Name of the Poor: Contesting Political Space for Poverty Reduction. London: Zed Books.
Werbner, P. and N. Yuval-Davis. (1999) ‘Women and the New Discourse of Citizenship’, in Yuval-Davis and Werbner (eds.), Women, Citizenship and Difference, pp.1-38. London: Zed.
White, S. (1996) ‘Depoliticizing Development: The Uses and Abuses of Participation’, Development in Practice, 6(1): 6-15.
Whitehead, L. and G. Gray-Molina. (2003) ‘The long term politics of pro-poor policies’, in M. Moore and J. Putzel (eds.) Changing Paths: International Development and the New Politics of Inclusion. Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
World Bank. (2000) World Development Report 2000/01: Attacking Poverty. Washington DC: World Bank.
Young, I. (1990) ‘The ideal of community and the politics of difference’, in Nicholson, L. (ed.) Feminism/Postmodernism. London: Routledge.
Young, I. (1993) ‘Together in difference: Transforming the logic of group political conflict’, in Squires, J. (ed.) Principled Positions: Postmodernism and the rediscovery of value, pp121-150. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Youngman, F. (2000) The Political Economy of Adult Education and Development. Leicester: NIACE/London: Zed.
35"
