2009
History
The Americas
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil
Peter M. Beattie

The Americas, Volume 65, Number 4, April 2009, pp. 625-627 (Review)
Published by The Academy of American Franciscan History
DOI: 10.1353/tam.0.0125
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/tam/summary/v065/65.4.beattie.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/16/11 2:42AM GMT
BOOK REVIEWS	625
In his most substantive contribution, Lara’s focus on ritual provides an authentic entry into how native cultures retained and communicated knowledge. As much as friars subscribed to the view that liturgical practices and public spectacles were a mechanism for religious inculturation and social solidarity, they ignored or, more likely, suppressed the degree to which it could open up resistant notions and inten- sify difference. Lara adopts some of these mendicant blindspots, insulating the activities he describes as though monasteries were self-contained universes immune to outside pressures and asymmetries of power. Thus, Lara restates his earlier con- clusion, that is, worship had a more profound impact than political hegemony on the native population, without noting, in my view, that they are inseparable. Aware that native Americans were co-opting popular festivals to assert their own ethnic ances- try and claim certain prerogatives, colonial authorities were constantly on their guard that rituals not devolve into unseemly behavior, or worse, help instigate heretical or subversive activity. Although the dynamism of intercultural dialogue has been notoriously resistant to labeling, Lara has chosen to reinstate Hugo Nutini’s “guided syncretism,” a term that seems to underscore the unilateral inten- tionality of the European friar. And what of the unguided and random, the inadver- tent and surreptitious, surely components that also characterize the high passions aroused by ritual activity?
In the end, this work is a monumental achievement, as hefty in content as in weight, and luxuriously illustrated. A host of readers will benefit from the author’s insightful scholarship and the intertextuality of his sources, from murals and codices to morality plays. Lara has achieved his goal, that is to “visualize and bring to life Christian worship” for the indigenous proselytes in the New Spanish world.
University of California, Santa Barbara	JEANETTE FAVROT PETERSON Santa Barbara, California
RURAL SOCIAL HISTORY
Land, Protest, and Politics: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform in Brazil. By Gabriel Ondetti. University Park: Penn State University Press, 2008. Pp. xviii, 281. Maps. Tables. Figures. Notes. Appendix. Bibliogra- phy. Index. $60.00 cloth.
The Landless Movement (Movimento Sem Terra, MST) became one of Brazil’s most influential grass roots social movements at a time when similar organizations struggled to survive. The end of authoritarian military rule in 1985 produced a new environment in which social movements strained to maintain the attention and sup- port of constituents and policy makers alike. Gabriel Ondetti seeks to explain the emergence and rise of the MST from 1978 to 2006.
To make his case, Ondetti surveys four schools of social movement theory that seek to explain why and how these organizations emerge, thrive, and/or dissipate:
626	BOOK REVIEWS
Grievance/Discontent, Organizational Capacity, Activist Strategy, and Political Opportunity Theory. He then provides a cogent narrative of the MST’s history through the first mandate of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (Lula). The narra- tive approach is suited to his efforts to understand why MST experienced growth while many other social movements experienced decline from 1985-1994. He then explores three other periods in MST’s history: takeoff (1995-1999), decline (2000- 2002), and resurgence (2002-2006). Each chapter concludes by evaluating the explanatory capacity of the four schools of social movement theory. He concludes that a modification of Political Opportunity Theory offers the best explanatory model for the rise, decline, and ressurgence of the MST.
Rather than simply champion one school of thought, however, Ondetti uses this case study to test and borrow elements from different theoretical schools as well as add his own insights. One example can be found in Ondetti’s analysis of the MST’s main activist strategy: the development of settler camps on or adjacent to unpro- ductive land to pressure officials to settle workers there. The isolated camps pro- vided activists with a privileged opportunity to create strong bonds among rank and file members, indoctrinate them in MST’s philosophy, discipline them by requiring them to participate in camp actions and governance, and groom and recruit talented leaders from the organization’s base. Here Activist Strategy Theory helps to explain why the MST was able to grow in an environment where many social movements floundered. The success of this strategy for most MST campers made them loyal to the organization even after they won a land title.
For Ondetti, however, MST was most successful when the political opportunity structure changed in their favor. The election of President Fernando Henrique Car- doso in 1995 led to an acceleration of MST land occupations. Cardoso had prom- ised to increase the settlement of landless workers, and MST mobilized on an unprecedented scale in response. The MST gained favorable media attention and public sympathy after two massacres of landless protestors in Corumbiara, Rondô- nia in 1995 and Eldorado de Carajás, Pará in 1996. These massacres pressured the Cardoso administration to jump start efforts to settle landless workers across Brazil. MST mobilization and government efforts to settle landless workers mushroomed from 1996 to 1999. By 2000, however, the number of occupations and the rate of landless workers given title to land abruptly dropped. MST responded by adopting new confrontational protest strategies, such as the looting of stores and the occupa- tion of government buildings which garnered negative press for the MST. This facil- itated Cardoso’s ability to put policies in place in May 2000 “that rendered land occupations useless, if not counterproductive, as a means for obtaining land” (p. 199). Still, by the end of his administration, Cardoso claimed to have settled 608,000 landless families, more than all previous administrations combined.
From 2003 to 2006, MST augmented the number of its land occupations, and for Ondetti, this came about in part because President Lula, a longtime sympathizer of the MST, had not enforced the anti-land occupation measures that Cardoso put in
BOOK REVIEWS	627
place. Still, Lula has not returned to the pace of settling landless families set under Carodoso’s administration. While MST has voiced their disappointment in these results, they have shown restraint from returning to the confrontational tactics they used during Cardoso’s administration.
Ondetti’s modification of Political Opportunity Theory demonstrates that it really does matter who is President for social movements like MST. While this might seem rather top down, this political scientist does incorporate how the actions of MST leaders and rank-and-file, among other factors, have influenced Presiden- tial policy and vice versa. As a historian, I found the need to run through each theory at the end of each chapter a bit repetitive and tedious. I also thirsted for a stronger sense of the identities of rank-and-file MST members beyond general data about income, education level, or family size. A few vignettes and photographs in each chapter could have helped give the reader a better sense of the movement’s diverse membership, their aspirations, and the setting.
These minor critiques are rather minor and should not deter anyone from read- ing the best synthetic analysis of the MST to date. I know it will enhance my lec- tures on modern Brazilian and Latin American history.
Michigan State University	PETER M. BEATTIE Lansing, Michigan
U.S. & INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Colombia and the United States: The Making of an Inter-American Alliance, 1939- 1960. By Bradley Lynn Coleman. Kent: The Kent State University Press, 2008. Pp. xix, 303. Maps. Illustrations. Abbreviations. Notes. Bibliography. Index. $49.95 cloth.
Bradley L. Coleman is Command Historian, Headquarters of the U.S. Southern Command, and this book expands upon his 2001 dissertation. He argues that World War II, the Korean Conflict, and the Cold War contributed to transforming the U.S.- Colombian alliance from one that was primarily military to one that placed anti- Communism at the center of a new security policy. Colombian politicians on the left and right saw World War II and the Cold War as a clash of civilizations in which Colombia must ally with the U.S. and the West. Aside from ideology, they prag- matically sought to strengthen their military partnership with the U.S. by sending troops and a frigate to Korea. Their reward would be the military training and per- haps materiel necessary to defeat the guerrillas at home. Thus, Coleman portrays Colombia as the initiator of changes in the bilateral relationship.
The heart of Coleman’s book revolves around Colombia’s military participation in the Korean Conflict, the only Latin American country to do so. Colombia’s pre- vious experience and training allowed their soldiers to mesh well with the U.S. mil- itary organization in the multinational UN coalition in Korea. The author stresses
