2003
Economics
Journal of Developing Societies
The Concept of Sem Terra and the Peasantry in Brazil
Luca Fanelli and Sarah Sarzynski 

ABSTRACT
This article explores the meanings and uses of the term sem terra (land- less) in relation to the social movement MST and tries to provide provisory answers to the following questions: What is the relationship between small landholders, rural workers, and the term sem terra? Is the idea of sem terra class-based or does it stretch beyond “class”? Which rural popula- tions use the term sem terra to identify themselves? Does sem terra continue to be a useful tool for MST participants who have already obtained stable access to land? Finally, do different (and conflicting) meanings of sem terra exist for the leaders of the MST and the rank-and- file members? The sources for the present article are the interviews collected during field research, some texts published by the MST, and general sources about the matter.
Introduction
This article explores the meanings and uses of the term sem terra (landless) in relation to the social movement MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, Landless Workers Movement). It looks at the process of how the term sem terra has been shaped by the movement and, at the same time, how this term has constructed the identity of the MST. In order to arrive at this understanding, I will outline briefly how rural workers have been defined in Brazil from the 1950s until the present. The term sem terra is not simply a new name for “peasant.” Sem terra has been used to overcome the contradictions between small landowners (or peasants) and rural (wage) workers and these classifications have influenced the creation of the broader identifying concept of sem terra.1
*	corso Brunelleschi, 167, 10141 Torino, Italy, luca.fanelli@photowo.net. **	University of Maryland at College Park, Department of History 2115 Francis Scott Key Hall College Park, MD 20742-7315, USA, ssarzynski@earth
link.net. © de Sitter Publications 2003	JDS 19(2-3):334-364
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	335
I aim to investigate the concept of sem terra as an analytical category, and as a tool of self-representation or subjectivity, as well as examining the connections between the theory and the practice of the term sem terra. I will try to provide provisory answers to the following questions: What is the relationship between small land- holders, rural workers, and the term sem terra? Is the idea of sem terra class-based or does it stretch beyond “class”? Which rural populations use the term sem terra to identify themselves? Does sem terra continue to be a useful tool for MST participants who have already obtained stable access to land? Finally, do different (and conflicting) meanings of sem terra exist for the leaders of the MST and the rank-and-file members?
Representation of the Peasantry from Division to Unity
There are many different ways to define “peasant” in Brazil. This stems from the diversity of rural activity that has developed and changed throughout Brazilian history. The main distinction lies in the contractual forms of rural labor: a rural wage earner has been referred to as opérario rural, assalariado rural, diário, and later, boia-fria; a tenant farmer as arrendatário; a sharecropper as meeiro o parceiro, and a colono is yet a different type of sharecropper. There are also some terms that refer to a specific job, such as corta- dor de cana (sugar cane cutter), boiadeiro (cowboy), or carroceiro (teamster).
A collective noun for the peasantry does not exist, unlike the Spanish campesino or the English peasantry. More general labels for the rural include: rurícola (obsolete), homem do campo, camponês, lavrador, trabalhador rural, agricultor. Each of these terms has a distinctive meaning. The term camponês has a “tradi- tional” or archaic connotation as opposed to the “modern” term of agricultor; lavrador is related to lavoura, or the cultivation of land itself; rurícola means “of the rural,” with a dehumanizing shade of meaning; while homem do campo means country man. Trabalhador rural (rural worker) is currently the most commonly used term.
The different terms and their relationships evolve along history, marking both turning points and continuities. The first time
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
336	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
the term camponês emerged the first time to describe rural people in Brazil within the BOC (Bloco Opérario e Camponês), a social movement linked with the PCB (Partido Comunista Brasileiro) that emerged when the party was declared illegal, in 1927. As noted by Cliff Welch (1999:50), the focus of this movement was new for the party and, we can say, for the whole of politics in Brazil.
The term camponês gained popularity in Brazil in the late 1950s, with the rise of the Ligas Camponesas in Northeastern Brazil. Before the end of the 1950s, rural people had been described in legal instances as rurícola, or by their specific job cortador de cana (sugar cane cutter), or by their relations to land ownership such as foreiros—subsistence farmers who paid rent and gave an uncertain amount of unpaid labor to the landowner. In January of 1955, leader and engenho administrator of the SAAPP (Sociedade Agrícola e Pecuaria dos Plantadores de Pernambuco, Agricultural and Cattle Raising Society of Pernambucan Planters) José Francisco de Souza met with lawyer Francisco Julião Arruda de Paula (Julião 1977). Shortly after the families of the Engenho Galiléia had formed this organization with the approval of the landowner to provide their deceased with individual coffins (instead of the borrowed communal coffin from the municipality of Vitória de Santo Antão), the landowner revoked their right to organize based on fears that the workers were meeting to discuss issues other than funerals and threatened to throw them off his lands.2 Francisco Julião agreed to represent the SAPPP in court, and used the Brazilian Civil Code to fight for their legal right to this land. In 1959, they won the case that allowed for the redistribution of the Engenho Galiléia. By this time, the “Galileus” had gained regional attention and a rural social movement began to develop. Journalists covering the court case labeled this movement the Ligas Camponesas.
According to Francisco Julião, this name was used in order to provoke opposition to the movement by associating it with previ- ous groups known as Ligas Camponesas associated with the PCB.3 According to a later-recorded interview with Francisco Julião, he introduced the term camponês in the courtroom instead of the more common “legal” term rurícola because of the political and ideolog-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	337 ical connotation of camponês in relation to latifundista (large
landowner). He recalled stating in the courtroom,
I cannot use the expression because the camponeses do not know what rurícola means and they could think I am using a bad word. I say camponês because they come from the countryside (campo). (Julião 1977:71)
On the contrary, the term camponês is not present in the name of ULTAB (União dos Lavradores e Trabalhadores Agricolas do Brasil, Farmers’ and Agricultural Laborers’ Union of Brazil). ULTAB —which for nearly ten years “was to be the only organiza- tion of national scope in the rural labor movement” (Welch 1999:196)—was born in 1954, during the Conferencia dos Trabalhadores Agricola (Agricultural worker conference) that took place in São Paulo, mainly for the initiative of the PCB, an organi- zation deemed illegal except during the short period between 1945 and 1947. The use of the broader term trabalhador rural comes from the ULTAB federative character, but reveals a diversity of atti- tudes between the Ligas and the PCB. Noting this diversity is important in order to understand the role assigned to the countryside inhabitants by the actors that operate in the field.
The PCB believed that the development of a revolutionary consciousness in the countryside required the integration of the peasantry into the proletariat. Thus, the PCB was more concerned with promoting programs of legal aid, education, health care, and burial funds than an extensive agrarian reform project. All the same, since agrarian reform is a step toward a capitalistic transformation of society and a premise for socialist revolution, it is necessary to promote agrarian reform together with the bourgeoisie and all the forces which fight against pre-capitalistic labor relations. The Ligas Camponesas diverged from the PCB in that the Ligas based their struggle in the idea that the peasants alone were a “revolutionary” force. Therefore, alliances with the urban proletariat or the rural bourgeois were not necessary (Medeiros 1989). However this ideo- logical difference does not have an actual correspondence with the behavior of the Ligas and the groups linked to the ULTAB. These
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
338	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
groups took radical positions according to circumstances and based their struggles on the claim that the existing laws needed to be enforced.
The literature about these rural movements traditionally has argued that there were strict ideological and membership divisions between the different movements. However, the 1961 Belo Horizonte Congress, organized by ULTAB and characterized by high attendance of Ligas members, is marked by a concurrence among the different actors (Medeiros 1989; Welch 1999:250-253). The Ligas and the ULTAB proposed a unified agenda for the coun- tryside, but neither set themselves in actual fact as hegemonic actors within the peasantry. To some government leaders, and to interna- tional actors such as the United States, all rural inhabitants were “peasants”—a generalized classification directly related to the Cold War and the threat of the spread of the Cuban Revolution, which was construed as a “peasant revolution.” None of the actors involved in the rural struggles could claim to represent the entire peasantry and most of the struggles were not inserted in a common framework.
On the contrary, the government emphasized the settling of rural workers in a single organizational framework as a priority. Through such a strategy, the government aimed to incorporate these workers into the body of the State. Rural unions—legal since the introduction of the rural unionization statute in 1944 and tool of social agency during the 1950s—were the main instruments of this policy.
Because of the intense interest in the organization of rural workers, the Ministry of Labor...published a pamphlet... containing instruction for union organization. In addition, the Agency for Agrarian Reform—SUPRA—was created in 1962 precisely to work with the growing peasant movement. By 1963, 500 unions with over a half million members were grouped under a National Confederation of Rural Workers. (Forman 1971:9)
In 1963, the ETR (Estatudo do Trabalhador Rural, Rural Workers Statute) was enacted, which “brought existing rural labor
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	339
legislation into a single body of law, just as the CTL (Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho, Consolidated Labor Law) has done for urban labor in 1943” (Houtzager 1998:108). In this statute, the need for the government to agree to some of the demands of the rural social movements coexisted with the strongly argued intent to re-establish government control over the same peasant movement. The ETR divided the countryside actors into two broad categories: workers and employees. At the beginning the worker category was divided into five sub-categories, but by 1965 these extra categories disap- peared.
According to this statute, “small property holders were lumped together with salaried workers, renters and squatters, while the inclusion of the sharecropper as an independent worker mili- tated against his negotiating with his landholder as an employee” (Forman 1971:21). By seeing the peasantry as an unitary actor and, at the same time, ignoring the specific claims of rural workers, sharecroppers, smallholders, and so on, the ETR reduced the action strength of the unions; in this way, the ETR also avoided creating a coalition of rural and urban workers, as was happening in the state of São Paulo. At the same time, “revolutionary” strength of the peasantry itself was stripped by being co-opted by the State (Welch 1995:161-187).
According to Peter Houtzager (1998), the Brazilian military, “after having eliminated the Left as an organized force, deliberately stimulated the growth of the union movement as a part of the large transformative project of the countryside” (p.104). The main goals of this project were “increasing agricultural production, fostering national interaction and incorporating rural labor into national soci- ety” (p.104). The rural unions were a key part of the strategy to achieve the third goal (Houtzager 1998).
The structure of the rural unions established in 1962 allowed each community to have only one union representative, which responded hierarchically to a confederation at the state level and the federal level. When the military came to power, they continued to use this same structure, replacing or violently repressing the major- ity of the leadership and rank-and-file organizers. The CONTAG (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura,
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
340	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
National Confederation of Agricultural Workers)—founded in Rio de Janeiro in 1963—maintained a certain independence during the military regime, whereas the “majority of rural unions...became pseudo-state agencies because of their dependence on the state, inability to mobilize members, and delivery of social services” (Houtzager 1998:105). The term camponês disappeared from public speech, substituted by the more modern agricultor in the legislation and as a name associated with CONTAG. The suppression of the idea of camponês—of the non-capitalist, non-mechanized, feudal, and “backwards” type of agriculture—was actively desired and pursued by the government: the farmer had to replace the peasant in Brazil. At the same time, the rural unions promoted an implicit unification of all peasants (even those not formally considered “peasants”) to be the only tolerated and recognized representatives of this rural population. Moreover, the leaders of CONTAG believed this unification was possible.
In 1973, the government passed a law that repealed the 1963 ETR and partly rewrote the law, once again negating the great contractual differences and the internal productive reality of the rural population.4 This unity imposed “from above” began to explode in the late 1970s when political action also increased. The CONTAG leaders wavered in their stance toward the unitary repre- sentation of the rural workers. In the Third Congress (1979), CONTAG adopted the International Labor Organization’s 87th convention, which compels governments to guarantee the right of union organization. In the Fourth Congress, CONTAG rejected the same convention.5 At first CONTAG wanted to allow a differentia- tion within the peasantry to foster the effectiveness of the struggles. Later, the fear of losing hegemonic control as well as the fear of the proliferation of the different categories won legitimacy. According to CONTAG leaders, this proliferation would have dismantled the articulation of interests of the different actors, a goal laboriously pursued during the dictatorship.
The wave of increased activism and the push for a renova- tion of union practices came at the same time as the political opening (abertura) along with a persistent call for unity in rural union representation. No new unions emerged from the State-led
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	341
rural unions, known as the pejorative pelegos, or co-opted unions.6 Instead, in the place of the largest mobilizations, new forces took over the local unions and gave them new direction. These combat- ive new unions did not become incorporated into the CONTAG but they became associated with other confederations: primarily the CUT (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores, Unified Laborers’ Central) and, to a lesser extent, the CGT (Central General dos Trabalhadores, General Confederation of Labor), which emerged from industrial trade union movements in a purely urban sphere. This merger occurred in a mixed system: at the federal level more than one confederation existed, while at the local level only one union existed. This situation continues today, only changing slightly after the merging of the CONTAG and the CUT. The outcome of this confederation is still not clear. Interestingly, camponês unity was broken but not divided according to the different types of rural workers or peasants. The combative rural unions that united under the CUT were composed of small landowners, landless workers, and rural workers. The difference between the organizations thus is not determined by the kind of peasants (small holders versus rural workers); instead, what matters is the greater or smaller level of political action.
The Construction of the Idea of Sem Terra
With the end of the dictatorship came the end of the experiment of the “representative unity” of the entire peasantry, characterized by a high level of duress and coercion. In the new political scene, while the majority of the rural unions continued along the same lines as aid societies and a small number of rural unions took up direct action, a new actor emerged: the Movimento Sem Terra. The MST formed within some of the more confrontational rural unions and in relation to the CPT (Commissão Pastoral da Terra, Pastoral Commission for Land Rights) and other entities.
What stance did the MST take in the beginning about this matter of the unity or the diversity of the rural population, particu- larly between the small landowners and the rural wageworkers? The answer to this question is found in a text published in 1986 by the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
342	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
MST in the series Cadernos de Formação no. 11, Elementos sobre a teoria da organização no campo by Clodomir Santos de Morais, a former Ligas camponesas member and then MST theorist. According to some of the leaders’ testimonies, the MST considered the thesis sustained in this booklet—written a short time after the MST official constitution was agreed upon—somewhat out-of-date. However, it was in print until 1993. Also, it had a high level of circu- lation and the militants and organizers who trained during these years studied and absorbed the ideas in the booklet, as they do with most of the cadernos de formação. Finally, as this booklet is “ancient,” it allows us to isolate some of the original characteristics of the ideologies of the MST.
The author divided the peasantry in the following way:
First, the artisan, or the producer [the peasant (camponês parceleiro)] who is active in the productive process of a specific product from start to finish...Second, the wage worker, or the producer who intervenes in a small part of the productive process to produce a specific article; for instance, the factory worker who only makes buttonholes or a leg on a pair of pants. The rural worker is a wageworker who intervenes in just a small part of the productive process necessary to produce a bunch of bananas or an ear of corn on a farm...Third: the semi-wage earner, or the worker who works in the factory during the day, but who works in famil- ial production or artisan work during the night, or during a few days of the week...Fourth: The lumpen-proletariat, or an individual who is not involved in any of the productive processes described earlier. The lumpen generally does not work and when he/she works, it is only for a period and when he/she wants to work. (Morais 1986:11-12)7
Once he distinguished the different rural actors, he high- lighted the differences in fundamental attitudes:
The ideological behavior of the peasant (camponês) is the organizational process of the artisan form (tipo artesanal),
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	343
because the peasant (this rural artisan) works in an individ- ual productive process (without a division of labor) in which the producer starts and finishes the production of a product. The ideological behavior of the rural wageworker is the organization al process of the worker form (tipo operário) because the rural wageworker works in socially divided productive process, in which each worker participates in only one part of the production of a product. (Morais 1986:12)
Then, he focused on the smallholder and describes their particular ideology:
The structure of the productive process in which the peasant is involved greatly determines their social attitudes and the traces of their ideological behavior when they participate within a social group. Their isolationist attitude, apparently alien to association (rural union, cooperative, etc.) it is not only a consequence of the very low level of education among the peasant. It is as consequence of a structural form of incompatibility that marks this kind of nature and social participation. (Morais 1986:13)
Morais reached a type of “condemnation”:
The internal enemies of an associative enterprise and even more of a political enterprise are the vices of the artisan forms of work. They reveal themselves undermining little by little the unity and the discipline. (Morais 1986: 27)
This argument was not new when the booklet was published; in fact, it resembles a simplified version of a Marxist thesis, espe- cially how Kautsky and Lenin interpreted Marx. Morais did not deny that the small holder could become a revolutionary force under specific conditions, as Lenin claimed. The title of a booklet chapter is “Mechanism and Tools” to Fight Against the Vices of the Work Artisan Forms. In it, the author states:
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
344
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Within the known “instruments or mechanisms” that we have employed to avoid or combat the corruption generated by the artisan forms of work, we point out the following: vigilance, criticism, and reunion. (Morais 1986:37)
As this arguments state, in the basic class struggle between peasants and landlords, a gap of class-consciousness continues to exist. This gap is the difference between small landowners and rural wageworkers. While the smallholder has the possibility of filling this gap and obtaining a form of class-consciousness, unlike the rural workers, they could not reach this consciousness naturally.8
It is significant that the term sem terra almost does not exist in Morais’s text. However, at the time of the publication, and during the first “national” meeting of the MST, a debate occurred regard- ing this term. According to João Pedro Stedile, the choice of the name sem terra—similar to the history of the name of the Ligas Camponesas—was partially determined by journalists.
We never discussed the origin of the term of the movement. I believe that the mark, the name, was what the press adopted, baptizing it as the “Landless Movement” (Movimento Sem Terra), because it was in the time of MASTER, or a bit later, when we resumed the struggle with the land occupation on the Fazenda Macali and with other struggles in a number of different states. (Stedile and Fernandes 1999:39)
Stedile stated that the official decision to use the name sem terra dated from the meeting in Cascavel in 1984:
The first debate was over the name MST. The press had already called us the Movement of those without Land (Movimento dos Sem Terra), but the leaders did not have this inclination. If it were done by voting, I think that the name of “Movement for Agrarian Reform” would have won, even though the movement was already larger than just a struggle for land. We began a profound reflection over this matter and
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	345
we took advantage of the nickname that we had already been given by society, “the landless” (“os sem-terra”). We unani- mously approved the name Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Landless Rural Workers Movement). To be honest, the selection of this name was an ideological debate. At the same time, we were reflecting on the feeling that we should have reinforced our class-based character. We are workers, living in a society with different classes and we belong to one of these classes. This was the debate. It never was only over the selection of the name because we thought it was better this way, or simply for us to differentiate ourselves by saying: “the landless we are” (“os sem-terra somos nós”). (Stedile and Fernandes 1999:47)
The debate that took place was over whether to call the movement Movimento pela Reforma Agraria (Movement for Agrarian Reform) or Movimento Sem Terra (Landless Workers Movement) and, according to Stedile, the majority supported the first one. Nonetheless, the second name won in the end, partially because of the influence of the media. The leaders at the conference preferred the “Movement for Agrarian Reform” because it stood for a broader goal: a struggle that was not simply limited to rural popu- lations but also included a fight for citizenship rights. At the same time, this name is tied to a specific objective that could “get old.” However, as the above quotation suggests, the reason for selecting the “Landless Workers Movement” was related to the fact that the “Movement for Agrarian Reform” did not clearly identify the actors participating in the struggle, but only the goal that compels the movement. The “Landless Movement” is the movement of the people without access to land: the stress shifts from the objective to the social group involved and, as Stedile argued, to the class that fights for this goal. It is important to note that most people who joined the MST at this time did not have an identity of “landless” or sem terra in the present-day understandings of these terms. The focus thus passes to the social group involved, and yet the class- consciousness of this group is only just beginning.
In the face of the notion suggested by Morais, the construc- tion of the sem terra identity involves a substantial change in
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
346	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
previous debates about the dichotomy between small landowners and rural wageworkers. This concept goes beyond that opposition, creating a multifaceted category that encompasses more than simply “to be without land.” The concept of sem terra gives a name to the ongoing process of rural struggle in a new and original way. In a Caderno de Formação addressed to the militants José de Souza Martins describes well this process:9
It is basically the sugarcane in the Northeast that shows us with greatest clarity the process of the peasant throughout Brazilian history: marginalized worker (agregado marginal) in the regime of slave labor, occasionally laboring in the production of sugar cane, who became the principal labor force with the end of slavery, as small renter (morador de condição). In this way, as the rent grew and their free or cheap labor in the cane became the rent that paid for the land where they planted their subsistence crops, they had their labor converted into wages. (Martins 1999:12; Martins 1981:62-80)
It is possible to argue that this quote differs greatly from Morais’s original arguments: in this case, the theory is applied to a particular reality of the sugar cane workers in Northeastern Brazil. It is worthwhile to mention that Martins points out a process while Morais had emphasized a steady reality. Most importantly, it is necessary to understand that this is a process that shapes and constructs the sem terra concept: an actor somewhere between the de-capitalized small landowner and the rural wage worker, or the de-capitalized small landowner who is in the process of becoming a rural wage worker.
According to Stedile, another debate about the name of the MST existed between Movimento dos Camponeses Sem Terra (Landless Peasant Movement) and Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of the Landless Rural Workers). At the end of the 1960s, as we have seen, the word camponês disappeared in spite of the consolidation of the corporative union system. Other than the rare use of the term camponês by the peasants and its
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	347
learned nuance, by deciding to use rural worker over camponês the MST tried to make a marked difference between the Ligas Camponesas and the new rural social movement. It is important to note that the term trabalhador rural implies a broader social group than camponês. According to Stedile:
The essence of the MST emerged as a peasant movement (movimento camponês) that had as its flag three main prior- ities: land, agrarian reform and general changes in society. When we ourselves began to conceptualize this, we perceived that the MST was different from other peasant movements that had only struggle for land. (Stedile 1999:31-32)
The leaders proposed these options to the rank-and-file, oscillating between the arguments of Morais and Martins. Through the direct testimonies of some militants, we will show how their very arguments introduced the term sem terra for the participants in the MST, a term that gained its strength and meaning as a concept of self-representation or as a subjective identity. Before touching upon this subject we may linger over a quote from a long interview with João Pedro Stedile published in the New Left Review in Spring, 2002:
In our movement, we try to use terminologies that take account of the fact that there are a great many lumpen in the country areas—the numbers living in misery there have risen with the economic crisis. The agrarian proletariat constitutes around a third of the rural population, but their numbers are dropping sharply with mechanization...Then there is the classically defined layer of small farmers, the campesinato—those who work with their families on a little bit of land, whether it belongs to them or not. Of this frac- tion, a third are landless—our base of four million families. They work as sharecroppers, or tenants; or they could be farmers’ children, who need to earn a wage. Another third— again, around four million families—are small farmer-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
348
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
proprietors, owning up to 50 hectares, about 120 acres. There is also an agrarian petty bourgeoisie, whose properties can vary from 50 hectares in some regions to 500, or 1,200 acres. Over that—the big ranchers and landowners—we’d consider as part of the agrarian bourgeoisie. (Stedile 2002:89-90)
This quotation reveals an interesting connection to Morais’s argument. In this case, the analysis is more complicated but it is still possible to identify the lumpen, no longer with a negative connota- tion; the rural workers, said to be gradually disappearing; and, the small landowners referred to as the campesinato.
The second element worth mentioning is that Stedile identi- f ies	the	de-capitalized	small	landowners	as	the	rank-and-f ile members of the MST. As it turns out, in the larger Brazilian politi- cal debate, the term sem terra is applied to this group and a strong conflict occurs about quantifying this social group. Opponents of a serious or “real” agrarian reform project define sem terra as people who claim the rights to land through forms of protest. On the contrary, proponents of wide-scale agrarian reform argue that the sem terra includes all the de-capitalized small landholders in addi- tion to a wide range of rural and urban working class people (proletarians). What is most interesting about this debate is that it is still unclear what is meant by sem terra. For this answer, we will provide an analysis of oral histories and field interviews.
Sem Terra from the Bottom
To better understand the meaning of these interviews that we pres- ent, it is necessary to put them in context. I conducted these interview during the summer of 2000 in the Santa Maria rural settle- ment (assentamento) in the Northern area (of the Southern Brazilian State) of Paraná.10 This settlement is very small in comparison to others—only 98 alqueires or 23,535 hectares—and the soils are relatively poor. The proximity of the settlement to the nearby town, Paranacity is only 10 kilometers away, proves to be beneficial. Paranacity is a small town of approximately 9,400
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	349
people, 57 percent of whom live in the urban area. Forty-eight percent of the inhabitants are involved in the service sector, and the remaining percentage are involved in either agricultural work, such as cattle ranching, or non-agricultural work in the countryside, perhaps employed by the local sugar cane mill (usina).11
The crisis experienced by the coffee plantations in this region in the early 1970s caused wide-scale extirpation of these plantations. Sugar cane plantations and cattle ranching moved in afterwards. As in other rural regions of Brazil, a small number of the population own most of the land in the form of large estates, and the majority of the population has no access to land. The towns are quite poor. During this time, there was a temporary emigration from this region to Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso do Norte, and the fron- tier region, such as the state of Pará.
The group, which came to occupy the fazenda, developed from within the MST in the early 1990s, aiming to create a completely collective settlement and start a process of territorial- ização, or the spread of the MST in the region.12 All of the families that occupied the fazenda in 1993 came from previously established MST settlements that left either because they had not yet become legal settlements or to initiate a new project in favor of this type of completely collective settlement. From 1993 to 2000, there was a high turnover rate of families in the settlement. Only a “historical” group persists—about half of the original families—but other fami- lies joined the settlement, so the number of families remained just about the same throughout this period. This turnover rate was the result of the difficulty of collective management, personal conflicts, and the engagement of the MST families in state or federal branches. According to recent sources, from 2000 to the present, there is not such a high turnover rate.
Almost half of the adult members of the Santa Maria rural settlement come from small landowner households unable to give land to their children.13 Other members come from situations in which they or their families have had access to land but have lost these lands due to influences such as the modernization of agricul- ture and diminishing access to credit for small producers, processes that began in the 1970s. Still others come from families that worked
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
350	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
on coffee plantations, in São Paulo and Paraná. A few of the adult members of the settlement had been employed in non-agricultural lines of work in the countryside; for instance, working in a sawmill. A minority of the MST settlers had been born and raised in urban areas. Almost half of the adult population had lived for some period of time in a town—from a few months to twenty years—working as bricklayers, waiters, guards, or tailors.
When these people first occupied the fazenda in Santa Maria, the majority of the land was planted with sugar cane. In its nascent stages, the settlers had to free the fields of sugar cane and they supported themselves by selling their labor to some of the large farms in the area. A few months after the original occupation, they founded the COPAVI (Cooperative de Produção Agro Pecuaria Vitória, Cooperative of Agricultural Ranching Victoria) and almost all of the settlers joined the cooperative. The settlement manage- ment is completely collective. The families all live in a conglomeration of close houses (agrovila) and they do not have any individual self-subsistence plots. Each settler works to produce and feed the members, either by production or by selling at the local market. At the end of each month, each family receives a payment based on the number of hours worked by everyone in the family minus the co-op products consumed. The settlement produces milk, pork, and chicken, and has a thriving garden. Most of the grain crops are intended for ranching and beans are the main subsistence crop. There is also some non-agricultural production occurring, such as the production of rapadura (a hard square of raw brown sugar), doçe de leite (caramelized milk), yogurt, and cachaça (sugar cane brandy). In addition to the production sector, there is a commercial sector responsible for sales and a “support” sector— secretariat, refectory care, and militant people. They sell the goods door-to-door most commonly but also in some local (Paranacity, Cruzeiro do Sul) and regional (Maringá) markets.
Tension exists concerning the impressive development of the settlement and its low capitalization; over the improvement of material life conditions of the settlers and the difficult psychologi- cal stresses related to any high level job specialization; in relation to conflicts over the self versus the collective; and over the collective management of many facets of private lives. In addition, problems
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	351
exist for the children who grow up in the collective and then come to consider the settlement too narrow for their expectations and understand the “professional militancy” within the MST as the preferred way to fulfill their expected participation. The reasons for this have to do with the strong ideological commitment of their families and their realization that there are few job opportunities in urban areas. However, the settlement cannot afford a greater number of militants, already employing two full-time militants and one part- time position.
The Santa Maria settlement carries out the goal of increas- ing the MST at a local and regional level. From 1998 to 2000, four to eight land occupations occurred in the micro region; the occu- pants come from local areas and from many different regions. Most of them are brasiguai.14 The settlement is one of the few collective settlements in Brazil; thus the MST considers it a model settlement and promotes visitations.15
Most of the settlers that I interviewed have had a long history of struggle and, in some cases, have participated in the creation of the MST as mid-level organizers. From these partici- pants, it is possible to understand how the sem terra concept is understood in the relevant rank-and-file sector, but it is difficult to determine how the less politically aware participants of the MST perceive the idea of sem terra.
Regina
Regina said that she first joined the settlement by following her husband. Her family is one of the only families that has a long mili- tancy standing in the PT (Partido dos Trabalhadores, Workers’ Party) and did not participate actively in the MST. Ruben, her husband, was invited to join the settlement because of his experi- ence and skills with cultivating market crops. So, Regina is outside of the settlement but, at the same time, she is more and more accept- ing of MST ideology.
Interviewer: So, you are on a MST settlement but you have never been a “sem terra”?
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
352
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Regina: ...No, I’ve never been “sem terra.” Interviewer: ...and when we speak about “sem terra” you feel like... Regina: I think this way and I believe this precisely because they are speaking about sem terra settlement. It’s only that here the people have already won the right to land and shouldn’t be considered sem terra any longer. Sem terra is for those who have not yet obtained land, understand? For those who are already “settled,” I think that they are now “with land”. It’s like what Mauro says...he says that now that we have land we are no longer “sem terra” so I think that it should be the opposite as well. (Regina 2000, 35:23-36:00)
For Regina, sem terra has a literal, technical meaning. People who gained access to a plot of land should change their name, according to her. Her status as outsider to the MST does not necessarily influence her argument. Instead, she cites Mauro who is the “authority” and one of the original settlers. Mauro makes a very similar argument in his interview, although he states this in a joking manner.16 Stedile himself, in the previously cited interview with the New Left Review, actually defines it literally as person without land.
Hamilton and Jorge
In Hamilton and Jorge’s comments, we find a different understand- ing of sem terra. Jorge was born in 1950 and he is 23 years older than Hamilton. During his childhood, Jorge grew up on coffee plan- tations, taking unstable rural jobs afterward. When he was 30 years old, the Itaipú Dam project hired him. He then moved to a nearby town and then, later, moved on to the settlement. Hamilton has urban experiences as well. In 1993, his family moved between Santa Catarina and Paraguay. He worked as a waiter until 1998 when he joined a MST occupation:
Interviewer: So, how did you come to join the MST? Hamilton: How is it that I became aware? Well, to begin, when I was working as a (wage earner), I always watched on TV the conflicts between the MST and the police and
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	353
landowners and I always said, “What is this group of idiots doing? Why aren’t they going to find work?” But at the same time I thought the opposite as well: “But where will they go to find work? If their only option is to have land to plant and to produce, to be able to grow their own food, their subsistence?” And so at this moment, I started to change, well, my expectations. I also knew, I was certain that I was also a “sem-terra” because I never had [land]—I was employed. (Hamilton 2000 47:10-48:16)
In this testimony, there is a cliché: a shift from a negative view of the MST to a more positive one. Nonetheless, it is neces- sary to re-emphasize Hamilton’s last phrase. Hamilton considers himself a sem terra a posteriori, because he is an employee and not an employer. Jorge’s testimony expands upon this idea.
Interviewer: What does the word “sem terra” mean to you? Jorge: Sem terra? I think it means reality, sem terra is people that don’t have anything, understand? Interviewer: But do you feel like a sem terra?
Jorge: Me? Yeah...I always said I was a sem terra, even when I was living in the city with a job, I always spoke about sem terra, I would say “To me, I am sem terra because I have never had land, get it?” So this means I didn’t have any equity, the only equity I had in Cascavel was a house, a bit of land with the house but not land for agricultural produc- tion...simply land for the house, for the home residence, so I didn’t have land, and I would say, “I am also sem terra.” (Jorge 2000, 102:00-102:59)
This testimony demonstrates how the MST ideology func- tions; people remember and frame their past experiences as sem terra even before joining the movement. This is very important for the newcomers to the settlement. Also, it is apparent that in the second part of Jorge’s testimony he uses the term sem terra more literally.
In this testimony, it is clear that there is a strong perception that sem terra means poor and exploited person. This broadening of
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
354	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
the concept of sem terra apparent in the testimonies of Hamilton and Jorge is crucial. A couple of years before they joined the move- ment, they understood themselves to be sem terra showing that the term is no longer limited to rural populations. They may have thought that the countryside could have provided a better way of life, but this line of thinking did not result in direct action. This situ- ation changed dramatically when, in the case of Hamilton, one of the leaders of the settlement invited him to join with the understand- ing that he could already be sem terra or proletarian.
This is not an isolated case. Throughout the 1990s, the base or grassroots part of the MST developed, growing to include more rururbanos (people who live in a town and work as agriculture workers during the daytime), more favelados (people who live in the favelas or “slums”), and more migrants who left the countryside a few decades earlier. For these new members, the sem terra term came to represent a tool of identity construction and, for this reason, had to be assimilated with the concept of exploitation.
The broader meanings attached to sem terra make it useful when constructing an identity for MST struggles in urban areas, or in places where urban counterparts are also partaking in MST strug- gles. These struggles include rallies in urban areas focused on the extension of social and citizenship rights. They have an even broader appeal to international counterparts, as seen in the rallies against neoliberalism.17
The conceptual depth of the MST allows it to represent urban grassroots movements, but it still does not resolve the conflict brought up in Regina’s testimony involving the use of sem terra for both people who received plots of land and for those who continue to be landless. This is relevant to understanding the MST and its coherence as a movement. Historically, in agrarian reform move- ments, the divisions between those who have already obtained access to land and are no longer interested in supporting the social movement and those who have not yet received land created great internal conflict and resentment. As Heidi Tinsman (2002) shows in the case of rural Chile in Partners in Conflict, part of the reason why the agrarian reform movement in Chile became divided and weak- ened was because of divisions between those who had received land and those who continued to fight for land.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	355
In the case of the MST, this conflict has three dimensions. First, a debate exists about whether or not the settlement should invest human and economic resources in new occupations or in the support of the settlement. This choice is highly contested in the Santa Maria settlement where cooperative support for full-time militants is an important cost which rests on the cooperative budget. This same debate also occurs at the central level but to a larger extent since the leaders must decide how to allocate larger quanti- ties of economic and human resources. The second dimension involves the public image of the MST. A radical image does not encourage economic growth and performance of the rural settle- ments since their goal is to integrate into the local society. So, on the one hand, the image is one of radicalism and opposition, but on the other hand, the goals of economic growth and development of the settlements depend on the settlements not being considered radical or oppositional but integrated into the larger community. The third debate involves the extent to which there is a need to support new occupations for those who have already obtained land. Support for new occupations involves economic assistance as well as participa- tion in accompanying mobilizations, causing losses in terms of lost working hours on the already established settlements.
Emma
A new semantic shift of the term sem terra overcomes, at least on a subjective or self-representative level, these latent and everyday conflicts that are present in the MST. Emma clearly expresses this shift in her testimony. She was born in the countryside in the munic- ipality of Nova Prata de Iguaçu, and she grew up there working as an agricultural laborer, difficult work, especially for a child. Her father had developed a grassroots rural union. Emma’s family was evicted from their land when the dam was being built and so they moved to a new plot of land, which was part of an MST occupation.
Interviewer: I would like to ask you a question about the word sem terra, because in your life you have never been a sem terra; well, did you ever feel like a sem terra?
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
356
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Emma: From the time that I began to understand this strug- gle, 11 years...12 years ago...I began to participate. I went to some meetings in my father’s community and I saw them talking about this, you see? We saw discussions about the settlements and such, I always—until today, until today that I am settled here I still feel like I am a sem terra. It seems to me that if I were...While I was a person without land, it seems to me that I was also a sem terra, no? It’s not because today I am settled that I leave a protest, or if there is an occu- pation that someone has invited me to participate in, I will say, “no, if I’m not going to live on these lands, I won’t go.” This thought has never passed through my mind, so if there is an occupation that needs me, I will go help because I think that today I am “settled” but I still have to fight for the people who still aren’t settled, understand? (Emma 2000, 54:40-56:10)
According to Emma, sem terra does not have a connection with the material condition of land scarcity or even a more generic meaning of poverty or exploitation. Sem terra is a person who joins the MST, a person who struggles for land and once they obtain access to land, continues to struggle for the greater MST cause so that other landless people can also obtain land.
Conclusion
In the beginning of the democratic opening (abertura) in the early 1980s, increased mobilization took place in addition to a growing number of political forces claiming to represent the peasantry. Each actor tried to carve out popular support and a space for feasible political action. The MST was a part of this process, identifying its popular support in complex and heterogeneous social groups, and well delineated. Their grassroots constituency evolved over time; at first, it was limited to the de-capitalized small landowner who had lost their lands due to the incorporation of the lands into the market economy, the children of small landowners who no longer had access to new lands because of the closing of the frontier, and the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	357
peasants displaced from their lands because of the construction of dams. Then, it grew to incorporate favela inhabitants, rural workers recently forced to sell their lands, people who are slightly integrated into urban society but are unemployed, and women who want to have a subsistence plot while their husbands and sons are day agri- cultural laborers elsewhere. Making this broad political claim and being represented as such in the media, the MST positions itself as a political actor that represents all of the political forces of rural Brazil. However, this goal falls short in its concrete application and action. Admittedly giving up the claim to represent all of the rural population in a “horizontal” way, the MST aims at a different coali- tion of forces. In this framework, both the fundamental division between small landowners and rural workers and the idea of a singu- lar “peasantry” become inadequate to describe the participants in the MST.
The sem terra concept, on the contrary, goes beyond even including the entire rural population. It is a “new” term that can apply to all the social groups previously mentioned and, at the same time, it gives this social group a meaningful tool for constructing a unifying identity. At an analytical level, the process of uniting these different social groups is different from the process of uniting the urban and rural proletarian; the connection between these different social groups is therefore not a connection between the modes of production, but a similar experience of poverty and exploitation. Some participants, however, do not feel that this identity is depend- ent on their indefinite deprivation, but rests upon their acquisition of class-consciousness, if it is at all possible to redefine class according to entirely new parameters and different cleavages. This “vertical” depth of the sem terra idea stems, in part, from the inter- action between the rank-and-file members and the leaders. For the grassroots members, it is a flexible tool of self-representation, useful in a variety of social circumstances. At the same time, the term allows the leadership to continue to press for greater political struggles, such as for a new world economic order and for citizen- ship rights.
The idea of sem terra allows for the homogenization of differences between the original members of the MST and the
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
358	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
newcomers. An occupant can be a de-capitalized small landholder, or a boia-fria. It does not necessarily refer to any definite social condition or even, necessarily, an exploited condition: sem terra becomes the membership mark of a broadly defined organization. Is this category socially homogeneous?18 No, but in the concept it is possible to find the originality of the idea. The leveling of the differ- ences among a variety of social actors who are able to relate and use the term sem terra is the result of a joint effort by the rank-and-file members and the leaders to overcome the strong, though enlivening, MST contradictions such as the diversity of backgrounds of the participants and the conflict between those who have land and those who continue to struggle for land. Perhaps this is the way to state, in an obscure manner, that in this general crisis of the peasantry and rural populations, the only peasant who can survive economically, politically, and culturally, is the militant peasant.
NOTES
1	This article stems from field research Luca Fanelli did in Brazil during the year 2000. From this research comes the book La scelta della terra. Studio di un insediamento rurale del Movimento Sem Terra in Brasile (The Choice of Land. Study of a Rural Settlement of the Movimento Sem Terra in Brazil) (Fanelli 2003). The matters of the article were discussed with Sarah Sarzynski. This article is based on some texts produced by the Movimento Sem Terra and, above all, on interviews done at a specific rural settlement. Therefore, it is absolutely preliminary. For future studies, it would be important to develop research exploring how this concept is used in other rural settlements in different regions and how it is used among the middle strata of Movement organizers. Although this analysis of sem terra has focused primarily on how this new identity has allowed partici- pants—and the movement itself—to overcome divisions based in class differences, more research is needed to under- stand how this term works in relation to differences based on other socially constructed identities such as region/commu-
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	359 nities, gender, race/ethnicity, and religion. Sarah Sarzynski
edited the translation of the article.
2	Many versions of this story appear in the literature on the Ligas Camponesas, which is generally contradictory. Gerrit Huizer, for instance, argues that the coffin story was invented in order to prevent repression from the landowner. The real reason for the formation of the SAPPP, according to Huizer, was to organize to collect money to be able to buy the land from the landowner (Huizer 1972:124). Authors who agree on the coffin story include Josué de Castro (1967:23-24); Eduardo Coutinho (1965-1984); Joseph Page writes that the SAPPP began with fireworks, dancing and other festivities as Beltrão offered wood to build a chapel for the Sociedade on January 1, 1955 (Page 1972:36-37). See also Julião (1977).
3	Francisco Julião never considered the 1959 Ligas Camponesas “communist” in part because he was not a member of the Brazilian Communist Party. He considered himself Socialist. This distinction is confusing in the litera- ture because of the confusion in the United States about the difference between Socialist and Communist. Most often, Francisco Julião is referred to as “communist” and the Ligas Camponesas as “communist.”
4	Law 5.889, July 8, 1973. Rules about rural labor. “Article 2. Rural worker is the person who works not temporarily on a rural property or on a rural building, as an employee of an employer, receiving a salary. Article 3. For this law the rural employer is the person or the corporation (which could own or could not own a land), which develops an agribusiness, permanently or temporar- ily, directly or by intermediary and employees. §1. The agribusiness above-mentioned could also be an industry, within a rural property, that is not included in the Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho..Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
360
5
6
7 8
9
10
LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
Article 4. The person or the corporation, which permanently performs an agricultural work on behalf of another person and employing other peoples, is considered as a rural employer.” (Non literal translation by the authors).
C87. Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize Convention, 1948. “Article 2. Workers and employers, without distinction whatsoever, shall have the right to establish and, subject only to the rules of the organisation concerned, to join organisa- tions of their own choosing without previous authorisation. Article 5. Workers’ and employers’ organisations shall have the right to establish and join federations and confederations and any such organisation, federation or confederation shall have the right to affiliate with international organisations of workers and employers.” (ILO 1948).
Pelego is the bit of young lamb hide that used to be put between the saddle and the horse. Because of this, the term has come to mean “servile person” or “hidden officer of the Ministry of Labour within the trade unions” (cf. 1999. Dicionário Aurélio Eletrônico. Século XXI. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira).
The italics in the Morais citation are bold in the original text.
Many texts and statements of militants and leaders of the MST could bear out this argument. When the organizers cope with the question of the collective groups often refer to the “individualist peasantry mentality.”
The Movimento Sem Terra published in a Caderno de Formação (Martins 1999) an excerpt from the book Os camponeses e a política do Brasil (Martins 1981).
The interviews are partly transcribed and used in Fanelli (2003). For the researcher who want to use it, it is available
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	361
the original recording. In the textual citations I indicate the minute and the second of the starting and end point of each recorded interview. The symbol † means “not understand- able word.”
11	For the population, cf. Ibge (1991). For the occupation ratio, cf. the database “Paranacidade” (http://www.paranacidade. org.br) and the interviews done in place.
12	For the concept of territorialização, cf. Fernandes (1996).
13	The grandparents of these members of the rural settlement moved from the state of Rio Grande do Sul or Santa Catarina toward the south or the west Paraná when the land was virgin and covered with forest.
14	The brasiguai are Brazilian people who moved, in great numbers, toward Paraguay during the 1980s and 1990s, searching for cheap plots of land and jobs in tree chopping and in sawmills.
15	The I Censo da Reforma Agraria takes a sample of 151,678 settlers. 86.6 percent of them live in individual settlement, 8 percent in mixed ones and 5.4 percent in collective settle- ments. Cf. Incra, Crub, UnB (1997).
16	Stedile claims that at the beginning they debated about call- ing the people who gained a plot of land Movimento Pé no Chão (feet on the ground). Cf. Stedile (1999:92.
17	Besides new meanings being attached to the term sem terra, a number of related terms emerged. For instance, the sem- teto is the urban component of the MST, a social movement that uses occupations of old buildings in their struggle for appropriate urban housing. Other new identities that emerge are not related to the MST, such as the sem-sem, a term used by scholars and journalists to refer to the marginal popula- tions. Cf. José Graziano da Silva (1999).
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
362	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
18	José de Souza Martins poses this question in a recent essay. Cf. Martins (2002:300-335).
REFERENCES
Castro, Josué de. 1967. Sete palmos de terra e um caixão: ensaio sôbre o Nordeste, área explosiva. (Seven Feet Underground and a Coffin: Essays about the Northeast, an Explosive Area). São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense.
Chayanov, Alexander Vasil’evich. 1966. The Theory of Peasant Economy. Edited by Daniel Thorner, Basile Kerblay, and R. E. F. Smith. Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin Inc.
Coutinho, Eduardo, director. 1965-1984. Cabra Marcado para morrer. (Goat Branded for Dead). 119 mins, colour and b&w, Brazil, 1965-1984.
Fanelli, Luca. 2003. La scelta della terra. Studio di un insediamento rurale del Movimento Sem Terra in Brasile. (The Choice for Land: Study of a Rural Settlement of the Landless Movement in Brazil). Torino: Zamorani.
Fernandes, Bernardo Mançano. 1996. MST - Formação e territori- alização em São Paulo. (Formation and Land Spreading in São Paulo) São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, Shepard. 1971. “Disunity and Discontent: A Study of Peasant Political Movements in Brazil.” Journal of Latin American Studies 3(1):3-24.
Houtzager, Peter P. 1998. “State and Unions in the Transformation of the Brazilian Countryside, 1964-1979.” Latin American Research Review 33(2):103-142.
Huizer, Gerrit. 1972. The Revolutionary Potential of Peasants in Latin America. Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books.
Ibge. 1991. Censo demografico do Brazil. Datos gerais. Paraná (Brazilian Census of Population, General Data, Paraná) Ibge.
ILO. 1948. Convention n. 87, Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention.
Incra, Crub, UnB. 1997. I Censo da Reforma Agraria no Brasil. (I Census of the Agrarian Reform in Brazil). Brasilia.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
THE CONCEPT OF SEM TERRA	363
Julião, Francisco. 1951. Cachaça. (Sugar-Cane alcohol). Recife: Editora Nordeste.
––––––. 1968. Cambão: La Cara Oculta de Brasil. (Cambão: The Hidden Face of Brazil). Mexico: Siglo XXI Editores.
Mallon, Florencia. 1978. “Peasants and Rural Laborers in Pernambuco, 1955-1964.” Latin American Perspectives 4
Martins, José de Souza. 1999. “Os movimentos camponeses e as lutas camponesas no Brasil” (“Peasant Movements and the Peasants Struggles in Brazil”) in Caderno de Formação no. 31. O movimento camponês no Brasil e a luta pela reforma agrária: (The Peasant Movement in Brazil and the Struggle for Agrarian Reform.) São Paulo: Movimento Sem Terra.
––––––. 1981. Os camponeses e a política do Brasil. (Brazil Peasants and Politics) Persepolis: Vozes.
––––––. 2002. “Representing the Peasantry? Struggles for/about land in Brazil.” The Journal of Peasant Studies 29(3/4):300-335. Medeiros, Leonilde Sérvolo de. 1989. História dos movimentos sociais no campo. (History of Social Movements in the
Countryside). Rio de Janeiro: Fase. Morais, Clodomir Santos de. 1986. Caderno de formação no. 11.
Elemento sobre a teoria da organização no campo. (Training notebook n. 11. Elements about the Theory of Organizations in the Countryside). São Paulo: Movimento Sem Terra.
Nenci, Giacomina. 1997. Le campagne italiane in età contempo- ranea. Un bilancio storiografico. (The Italian Countryside in the Contemporary Age. An Historiographical Outcome). Bologna: Mulino.
Page, Joseph. The Revolution that Never Was. 1972. New York: Grossman Publishers.
Procacci, Giuliano. 1970. Le lotte di classe in Italia all’inizio del secolo XX. (Class Struggles in Italy at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century). Roma: Editori Riuniti.
Shanin, Teodor. 1990. Defining Peasant. Essays Concerning Rural Societies, Expolary Economies, and Learning from the Contemporary World. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blakwell.
Stedile, João Pedro and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes. 1999. Brava gente. A trajetória do MST e a luta pela terra no Brasil.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
364	LUCA FANELLI AND SARAH SARZYNSKI
(Brave People: The Trajectory of the MST and the Struggle for Land in Brazil). São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo.
––––––. 2002 “Landless Battalions. The Sem terra Movement of Brazil.” New Left Review 15:77-104.
Tinsman, Heidi. 2002. Partners in Conflict: The Politics of Gender, Sexuality, and Labor in the Chilean Agrarian Reform. 1950- 1973. Durham: Duke University Press.
Welch, Cliff. 1995. “Rivalry and Unification: Mobilising Rural Workers in São Paulo on the Eve of the Brazilian Golpe of 1964.” Journal of Latin American Studies 27(1):161-187.
––––––. 1999. The Seed was Planted. The São Paulo Roots of Brazil’s Rural Labor Movement, 1924-1964. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Primary Sources
Emma. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine 13, Torino, Italy.
Hamilton. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Jorge. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Julião, Francisco 1977. Transcript in Fundação Getúlio Vargas/Centro de Pesquisa e Documentação (hereafter abbreviated as CPDOC/FGV), interviewed by Aspásia Camargo in Yxcatepec, Morelos, Mexico, 1977.
Regina. 2000. Interview by Luca Fanelli. CD-rom. Paranacity, Paraná, Brazil, March. Repository: Istituto Storico per la storia della Resistenza e della Società Contemporanea, via del Carmine13, Torino, Italy.
Downloaded from jds.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
