2010
Economics
Journal of Health Psychology
Heeding the Push from Below : How Do Social Movements Persuade the Rich to Listen to the Poor? 
Catherine Campbell, Flora Cornish, Andrew Gibbs and Kerry Scott

J Health Psychol 2010 15: 962 originally published online 14 July 2010 DOI: 10.1177/1359105310372815
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://hpq.sagepub.com/content/15/7/962
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Journal of Health Psychology can be found at: Email Alerts: http://hpq.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://hpq.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://hpq.sagepub.com/content/15/7/962.refs.html
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
Heeding the Push from Below
How Do Social Movements Persuade the Rich to Listen to the Poor?
CATHERINE CAMPBELL
London School of Economics, UK
FLORA CORNISH
Glasgow Caledonian University, UK
ANDREW GIBBS
University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
KERRY SCOTT
Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI), India
Journal of Health Psychology
Copyright © 2010 SAGE Publications Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, Singapore and Washington DC www.sagepublications.com
Vol 15(7) 962–971 DOI: 10.1177/1359105310372815
Abstract
This article discusses three successful pro-poor social movements: the Brazilian Landless Workers’ Movement, the Indian wing of the People’s Health Movement and the South African Treatment Action Campaign. These have mobilized poor people to demand access to land, health services and life-saving medical treatment respectively. We show how each group has succeeded not only through building the ‘voice’ of the poor to make forceful demands, but also through facilitating the development of ‘receptive social environments’ in which the rich are willing to take these voices seriously. Community psychologists need to pay more attention to the latter challenge.
Keywords
I community psychology I Landless Worker’s Movement I People’s Health Movement I social movements I Treatment Action Campaign
ADDRESS. Correspondenceshouldbedirectedto: CATHERINE CAMPBELL, London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK. [email: c.campbell@lse.ac.uk]
962
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
Introduction
THIS article examines the processes through which social movements succeed in empowering poor people and facilitating social change. Mass move- ments, such as the feminist movement in the West, and anti-colonial movements in countries such as India, have long been linked to positive social out- comes. With globalization creating new forms of poverty and inequalities, and the failure of ‘tradi- tional’ forms of development to change these (Hoogvelt, 2001), there is currently a renewed inter- est in the potential of social movements as a means of challenging inequalities.
Escobar (1992, 1995) argues that social move- ments are of interest because they offer an alterna- tive form of development and politics to ‘conventional’ or mainstream non-governmental organizations (NGOs), whether local or interna- tional. He argues that many of the disappointing outcomes of mainstream development approaches are the result of the ‘depoliticization’ of poverty by NGOs and other organizations such as the World Bank and bilateral donors. These organizations’ focus on technical solutions, such as income gener- ation projects or welfare grants, fails to challenge the wider inequalities undermining the ability of poor people to improve their life chances (Ferguson, 1994).
Social movements are argued to open up new possibilities for social change insofar as they
tend to bypass established development organi- sations, local elites and parties, or engage them on different terms. But they are by no means apolitical; instead of a depoliticized develop- ment, they politicise the rights of the poor. (Escobar, 1992, p. 422)
Social movements seek to reshape power rela- tions rather than gain power. They offer an alterna- tive, political and locally grounded vision of the struggle for development and poverty reduction compared to mainstream NGOs.
Social movements and community psychology
Psychology, particularly community psychology, stands to gain significantly from greater attention to people’s participation in successful large-scale social movements. The little attention that has been given to social movements in psychology has focused on
social psychological questions concerning why individuals do or do not affiliate themselves with par- ticular social movements (e.g. Klandermans, 1997), or on community psychological concerns regarding processes of participation. Neither the social psy- chology of collective action nor community psychol- ogy have given much attention to the processes through which social movements have an impact in society, or how social movements create an environ- ment in which the demands of marginalized people are heard and acted upon.
This article contributes to the community psy- chology literature on collective action. In principle, community psychology is strongly committed to understanding the role that collective action can play in facilitating the empowerment of the poor through challenging large-scale power relations (Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2006; Seedat, 2001). However, in practice, community psychologists tend to engage in analysis and action at the level of small-group activism and empowerment through small, bottom-up projects, usually involving nar- rowly defined excluded groups (Orford, 2008). While their efforts may improve the lives of project participants, they seldom result in significant sus- tainable or generalizable social change. In final pro- ject write-ups, wider social hierarchies (based on factors such as gender or socio-economic status) are depicted most often as obstacles to long-term pro- ject sustainability and to the ‘scale-up’ of innova- tive project strategies to other similar communities. Such final reports often conclude that such power hierarchies are too entrenched for small-scale groups of marginalized people to mount an effec- tive and sustainable fight against their ill-effects (Campbell & Cornish, forthcoming 2010).
In the terminology that we seek to develop in this article, such projects are frequently successful in building the ‘voice’ of the poor, but less successful in building ‘receptive social environments’. ‘Voice’ includes the capacity of poor people both to develop critical analyses that link their poverty to wider social inequalities and to articulate forceful demands on the basis of these critical understand- ings. Projects develop voice through providing ‘transformative social spaces’ for dialogue (Campbell & Scott, in press), in which poor people are able to engage in critical thinking about the social roots of what might previously have been regarded as individual problems (we use the term ‘critical thinking’ to refer to Freire’s (1973) ‘consci- entisation’). This builds their sense of empowerment
963
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
and their confidence to challenge the negative social relations that place their well-being at risk (Gaventa & Cornwall, 2001).
Such projects are often less successful in creating ‘receptive social environments’ in which the power- ful are willing to listen to the voices of the poor— which would be a precondition for sustainable and generalizable change (Campbell & Cornish, forth- coming, 2010). The projects assume that poor peo- ple themselves will be able to capture the attention of the powerful, once they have been empowered (Jones, 2001). Yet frequently, this is not the case. Community psychologists still have much to learn about how best to supplement their bottom-up work with marginalized communities with appropriate parallel efforts to create receptive social environ- ments in which powerful social actors are willing to heed the demands of the marginalized.
Against this background, successful social move- ments are of particular interest because they are dri- ven by similar aims and strategies to those of small-scale community psychology projects seek- ing to build the confidence and capacity of the poor. However, they implement them on a much wider scale and are more ambitious about the power rela- tions that they seek to challenge. Social movements seek not only to build the voice of the poor to make forceful and articulate demands, but also to create social settings in which powerful people—locally, nationally and globally—are open to hearing what the poor have to say and to supporting them in achieving the movement’s goals.
In this article we explore three different social movements, each of which, we will argue, has suc- ceeded through not only building the voice of the poor, but also creating receptive environments in which the powerful are willing to take these voices seriously. The Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST; Landless Workers’ Movement), has mobilized some of Brazil’s most marginalized and dispossessed inhabitants to suc- cessfully demand the redistribution of land from the rich to the poor. Through its constituent organiza- tions, Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (JSA), an Indian wing of the global People’s Health Movement (PHM), has successfully organized more than one million poor people to demand better health services from government, and played a key role in wider social movements to put primary health care back on the global public health agenda. Finally, the Treatment Action Campaign (TAC) has channelled the voice of one of South Africa’s most marginalized
groups—young, black, unemployed, HIV positive women—into a movement which has successfully challenged their highly resistant government to pro- vide free universal access to otherwise unafford- able, life-saving anti-retroviral therapy (ART).
These three social movements address issues that are wider than economic poverty per se, but all of which are urgent concerns for people living in poverty. Sen (1999) argues that poverty should be defined beyond a narrow focus on economic resources, instead being understood in terms of human capabilities, such as the ability to make effective political demands around issues such as health and education. However, drawing on the work of Bourdieu (1986), Nair and Campbell (2008) emphasize that poor people are seldom able to bring about effective social change without the support of actors and agencies holding the political and economic power that is necessary for the poor to achieve their goals. Spivak (1988) refers to the vital role that such ‘strategic alliances’ need to play, if marginalized groups are to be heard and flourish.
In this article we examine how these three social movements have succeeded in creating environ- ments which have both developed the political capabilities of groups of poor people in Brazil, India and South Africa, and mobilized significant politi- cal and economic actors to heed their demands.
Three case studies
We discuss our three case studies in the light of our review of the published academic literature on each one. However, one co-author has interned with one of JSA’s leading constituent NGOs and another has volunteered for TAC in South Africa. Inevitably, these experiences will have informed our accounts of these two social movements. We present our dis- cussion of each case study around four themes in turn: the aims and achievements of the group; strate- gies for building the voice of its members; strategies for building receptive social environments; and the key challenges faced by the movement.
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra In Brazil, 70 percent of agricultural land is owned by 3 percent of the people. Since 1984, MST has fought for agrarian reform and a more just society. It pressures the government to redistribute idle farmland to landless workers, reverse land concen- tration, and reallocate state resources to benefit
964
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
small cooperative farms. It draws its legal argument from the Brazilian constitution’s statement that ‘land has a social responsibility to be productive’ (Walford, 2003, p. 506), arguing that it should be redistributed from landowners who are not using it to landless people who are willing to work it.
MST has more than one million members. It has organized more than 230,000 land occupations, winning 15 million acres for land reform, creating 1500 agricultural communities, and settling more than 250,000 families. It has established schools and clinics on occupied land, running more than 1200 schools, and educating approximately 150,000 children and 25,000 adults in literacy courses (Brandford & Rocha, 2002).
MST’s activism has included road blocks and long-distance mass marches to government min- istries. In 2005, 12,000 landless peasants marched 200 kilometres to Brazil’s capital, demanding speed- ier action on land reform promises (Kingstone, 2005). MST leaders readily meet government minis- ters and actively seek media attention to publicize its demands (Hammond, 2004).
Building strong voice MST’s success has depended on its ability to unite the geographically isolated and economically marginalized rural poor and to offer a strong organizational framework and coherent action strategy for change. Beginning in 1979, local autonomous land occupations mush- roomed throughout Brazil. In 1983, two Catholic groups hosted a conference of land reform activists and agreed to form one national organization: MST.
MST develops strong ‘voice’ through promoting critical thinking among its members. When inviting the landless poor to take part in occupations or demonstrations, it builds momentum through con- sciousness-raising meetings about the injustices of Brazilian society, introducing land occupation as part of a potential solution (Welch, 2006). Rather than focusing on individual legal battles, the move- ment gains momentum from its conceptualization of landless and small-scale farmers as engaging in class struggle with the large landowners who stole land from society as a whole.
At this advanced stage, most of MST’s members are no longer landless, opening up the risk that it might become a victim of its own success. However, landed workers have continued to support the movement, using their improved circumstances to donate resources and to express solidarity with continuing struggles. This continuity is generated through linking MST membership not only with
land, but also with a strong rural identity and sense of community. Coordinators communicate with membership through meetings, a newspaper and magazine, and numerous pamphlets.
Building a receptive social environment MST gained recognition in the Brazilian public sphere through favourable media coverage emphasizing peaceful activism, and the legality, economic logic, and moral correctness of its actions. Mass marches in cities gained it the support of urban groups and elites. It reached the ‘the pinnacle of recognition by Brazilian popular culture’ (Hammond, 2004, p. 81) by being portrayed favourably in a popular national telenovela.
MST has emphasized its legal correctness by using the Brazilian constitution to formalize rights to occupied land and engaging the legal system. Furthermore, the common-sense economic argu- ment that unused land ought to be used to increase food production and stem urban migration has appealed even to those with little ideological soli- darity with the rural landless. The violent oppres- sion faced by the landless activists, especially the widely publicized murder of 19 activists by police in 1996, generated much sympathy, positioning the movement firmly on the moral high ground (Hammond, 2004).
However, there is still some resistance to MST, particularly from wealthy landholders, urban elites and the mainstream media, some of whom have branded occupiers as ‘unemployed vagabonds’ or dangerous radicals (Walford, 2005). Nevertheless, MST remains a popular organization regarded as a credible and authoritative voice on land issues. A Brazil-wide poll in 1997 found that 52 percent had a positive view of MST, with 85 percent approving of occupations provided that they were non-violent (SEJUP, 1997 in Hammond, 2004). Another poll ranked them the fifth most esteemed institution in Brazil (Welch, 2006).
MST’s successes can be partially understood within the wider context of Brazilian activism, especially the ‘liberation theology’ preached by the Catholic Church’s radical wing in the 1960s and 1970s—a religious worldview encouraging activism among the poor. As MST’s founder put it:
Before, the line had been: ‘No need to worry, you’ll have your land in heaven.’ Now it was: ‘Since you’ve already got land in heaven, let’s struggle for it here as well.’ (Stedile, 2002, p. 79)
Support from other Brazilian grass roots move- ments, the Catholic Church, unions and international
965
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
organizations have strengthened MST further. It has developed a close relationship with the Brazilian Homeless Workers Movement, consoli- dating urban support (Duffy, 2007). Brazilian trade unions and churches, as well as international sup- porters such as the US-based Friends of MST, have helped MST with training courses, funding and pos- itive publicity.
MST’s horizontal and collective structure empha- sizes the equality of all its members. Neighbourhood groups form its base units, sending two representa- tives to the ruling council of its cooperative, settle- ment or temporary encampment. Each ruling council sends representatives to regional and state con- gresses. The National Coordinating Council is made up of 102 representatives, illustrating how, even at national meetings, leadership is shared among many members (Vanden, 2005).
Challenges A significant and ongoing ideological conflict exists between the more affluent and edu- cated leaders and the rank-and-file member base. Leaders support a vision of rural communal life characterized by peace and communitarianism, while workers point out that historically, Brazilian rural life has been characterized by exploitation on plantations, actively resisting this idyllic ‘mytholo- gizing’ of rural life (Caldeira, 2008). Despite differ- ences of this nature, MST leaders and members have managed to work together successfully: settlers have gained land and leaders have sustained political and legal debate on Brazilian agrarian reform.
The People’s Health Movement: India’s Jan Swasthya Abhiyan The PHM is an international network of organiza- tions seeking to place primary health care back on the international health agenda and challenge the impact of neo-liberal policies on health and devel- opment since the mid-1970s. PHM operates as a loose network, with individual organizations sign- ing up to its broader objectives but operating autonomously. There is ongoing communication between different member groups for support and knowledge-sharing (Turiano & Smith, 2008).
One particularly prominent member of PHM is the JSA, meaning ‘people’s health movement’ in Hindi. JSA is particularly active in advancing the comprehensive primary health care agenda in India. Along with PHM, JSA supports a social determi- nants approach emphasizing how poverty, privati- zation and gender inequality undermine health. Indian member organizations join the JSA by
endorsing the Indian People’s Charter for Health, rooted in similar primary health care tenets as the PHM Charter.
Rather than a unitary organization, JSA is a national coalition of Indian NGOs, people’s organi- zations, activists, health professionals and acade- mics, all working towards the goal of ‘Health for All’ via universally accessible, accountable, high- quality public health care incorporating meaningful community participation in health services (Turiano and Smith, 2008). Since its inception in 2000, JSA has organized or supported more than 15 nationally coordinated initiatives, including the Right to Food Campaign, Rural Health Watch, Hunger Watch, and a campaign against the practice of gender-selective abortion.
JSA’s most significant achievement has been its role in shaping and monitoring the Indian govern- ment’s National Rural Health Mission. This included lobbying to create spaces for community monitoring of the programme, and setting up a par- allel independent monitoring system called People’s Rural Health Watch. Another success has been JSA’s Right To Health Care campaign where, with large political support, it has set up tribunals enabling poor people to express their discontent with local primary health care services to central government.
Building voice JSA developed out of India’s first National Health Assembly in 2000. The Assembly united 2000 Indian health activists who were frus- trated at government failure to make significant progress towards Health for All by 2000, the World Health Organization (WHO) campaign adopted by all WHO member countries in the 1978 Alma Ata Declaration (Beaglehole, Bonita, Horton, Adams & McKee, 2004). The Assembly aimed to prevent the Indian government from forgetting its pledge, and to enable civil society actors to play a stronger, more coordinated role (Richards, 2005). By joining JSA, small and medium-sized groups across India working on local issues could amplify their mes- sage, increasing their access to media, expert advice, and government attention.
Building receptive social environments JSA has become the primary voice for health issues in India, gaining legitimacy through its representation of a large group of activists, including politically promi- nent members and well-known doctors and acade- mics. Its representation of so many respected organizations has forced the government and media to take its campaigns seriously. In addition, JSA has
966
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
been supported by the wider PHM. The success of PHM’s publication Global Health Watch 2 (People’s Health Movement, 2008)—which was supported by many influential international organi- zations, including The Lancet—has helped to create a broader symbolic context that is increasingly receptive to claims around primary health care.
JSA has succeeded in building support for project goals within small communities, and building effec- tive bridges between health rights activists and pow- erful external agents. It has forged alliances between middle-class or well-connected activists and poor people fighting for social justice through people’s organizations and community-based organizations.
JSA has used its middle-class support base to access government and media attention, and funnel the voices of the poor to the heart of government pol- icymaking: for example, these contacts ensured vital support for the 2003 Right To Health Care campaign by India’s National Human Rights Commission. Such contacts facilitated the campaign’s extraordi- nary success in communicating firsthand accounts of ordinary peoples’ negative experiences of health care facilities to influential government policymakers. With the Commission’s support, JSA asked local member organizations to run people’s health tri- bunals across the country, where community mem- bers were able to express their personal experiences of systemic failure of the Indian health care system (Labonte, 2005; Shukla, 2005).
Using these findings, JSA convinced the govern- ment to hold a national public hearing on the right to health care in 2004. India’s top health ministers and officials attended. More than 100 JSA represen- tatives from 22 states testified to the depth, scale and range of health violations occurring in the pub- lic health care system (Turiano & Smith, 2008). Rural people were able to tell stories of their ill- treatment and neglect to some of the country’s most powerful government health ministers.
In 2005, the PHM picked up on the success of JSA’s Right To Health Care campaign, launching the international Right to Health and Health Care Campaign, drawing on JSA’s experiences (Labonte, 2005; People’s Health Movement, 2007). In this way, the PHM network enabled JSA to extend the scope and scale of its successful strategies from India to many other countries.
Challenges JSA has ongoing debates about how closely to work with government. For example, the government’s National Rural Health Mission has promoted many of JSA’s aims, including a primary
health focus and community participation. Some members are willing to work with the government, while others fear that such involvement compro- mises JSA’s critical stance. These conflicts have been overcome, at least temporarily, by enabling different JSA members to choose different paths of involvement.
Treatment Action Campaign
The TAC has been described as the most successful social movement in post-apartheid South Africa. Founded in 1998, TAC has been at the forefront of shaping the government’s HIV/AIDS policy through pushing the African National Congress (ANC) government to provide universal access to ART through the public health system (Ballard, Habib & Valodia, 2006). In addition, it has been involved in challenging former President Mbeki’s and former Health Minister Tshabalala-Msimang’s views that there is no relationship between HIV and AIDS, and their denial of the efficacy of ART.
TAC’s membership is around 8000, but it can mobilize many thousands more when necessary. TAC’s membership is primarily urban young black unemployed women, although it also includes students, academics and medical professionals cut- ting across lines of ‘race’, education and class. The central aim of achieving universal ART access has united these groups, with each drawing on different relationships, power and connections to advance the organization’s agenda. TAC has succeeded in attracting highly marginalized women by providing them with support and hope, and it has been remark- ably successful in placing this group at the heart of the body politic (Robins & von Lieres, 2004).
TAC has been extremely successful in shaping South African policies around HIV/AIDS and access to ART. In 2002, via TAC’s court action and mass public protest, the Constitutional Court con- firmed that the South African government had to provide Nevirapine to reduce the transmission of HIV from mother to child during birth in all public facilities. The following year, TAC effectively forced the government to sign a national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS, including an initial treatment programme (Deane, 2002). Subsequently, TAC was central in negotiating a widely praised national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS and sexually-transmitted infections (STIs), with TAC pushing to ensure the plan achieves 80 percent coverage of ART by 2011. These achievements have been remarkable in the context of a highly stigmatized illness, where the
967
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
ANC government sidelined social movements from policymaking, and where universal ART access was deemed financially unrealistic. To achieve such policy change, TAC has drawn on strategies such as court challenges, utilizing the constitution to secure socio-economic rights, mass public demonstrations, marches and civil disobedience, including occupa- tions of government offices and peaceful mass arrests, all supplemented by extensive grass roots mobilization.
Building voice TAC has worked hard to facilitate voice, critical thinking and collective agency among its members (Endresen & von Kotze, 2005). Increasing treatment literacy about HIV/AIDS and ART has been a central goal, and members are encouraged to use this knowledge to demand appro- priate care and medicines in public clinics and from the state more broadly. Also, it has been successful in working with members to link their personal troubles to the wider public challenges of building a democratic South Africa, incorporating human rights, democratic accountability and a just political economy (Endresen and von Kotze, 2005).
Building receptive social environments TAC—a household name in South Africa—has been excep- tionally successful in constructing a social environ- ment that is receptive to its demands, establishing itself as the central, legitimate non-governmental actor around HIV/AIDS. It has become the media’s civil society ‘voice of choice’ in South Africa for its ability to provide considered responses on a range of HIV/AIDS issues (Finlay, 2004). TAC has used the media strategically to provide clear information on its activities. When TAC started a civil disobedi- ence campaign in 2003, it took out full-page adver- tisements in newspapers explaining why it had decided to use such tactics. By framing its struggle as an uncontestable moral issue, it has mobilized the support of a wide range of prominent national and international constituencies, making it very difficult for the government to challenge its claims (Friedman & Mottiar, 2004).
TAC has relied heavily on a small group of prominent leaders whose individual talents have been central to TAC’s success. TAC’s leaders have managed skilfully to keep TAC rooted in a politics of mass mobilization while at the same time using more ‘elite’ processes, such as court actions, to push the organization’s agenda.
The organization often draws on anti-apartheid symbols and imagery, and has located its goals within South Africa’s wider anti-colonialist struggles
(Robins & von Lieres, 2004). The respected role played by certain key TAC leaders in the 1980s anti- apartheid movement has contributed to its legitimacy in post-apartheid South Africa. In addition, TAC founder Zackie Achmat played a pivotal role in coa- lescing widespread respect and support for TAC through his much-publicized and principled decision to not take ART, which he could well afford, until state-run, universal-access pilot ART programmes were established throughout South Africa.
TAC has forged strategic bridging relationships including academics, South African churches, inter- national activist organizations, the government at times, and trade unions. These alliances have been central to success, increasing its legitimacy nation- ally and internationally and allowing TAC to access high-quality research on HIV/AIDS.
The Congress of South African Trade Unions— the largest union coalition in South Africa and member of the ruling ANC tripartite alliance—has given strong support to TAC and occupied a seat on its national executive committee (Friedman & Mottiar, 2004). In 2003, when TAC moved towards civil disobedience, the Congress publicly announced that it was considering joining the action. While it did not, this expression of support added legitimacy and strength to TAC’s claims.
In addition, TAC has worked with the ANC government when appropriate. In 2001, TAC was a ‘friend of the court’, siding with the South African government when the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association took the government to court over its attempt to stop South Africa importing generic drugs. Furthermore, Zackie Achmat has always openly stated that he is an ANC member, and TAC has con- sistently tried to work with allies in government to change policies.
Challenges Other social movements and activists have criticized the TAC for being elitist and failing to be adequately antagonistic towards the state. Currently it has moved into a supportive relation- ship with the government. While remaining critical of government, Mark Heywood, a key TAC orga- nizer, is now the deputy chair of the South African National AIDS Council (a government body). TAC has taken on a role in supporting and monitoring the implementation of the new national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS and STIs, which resonates with TAC’s aims and objectives. The organization’s efforts to replace its original cadre of elite male leaders with women emerging from its poor grass roots membership are proving fraught and challenging
968
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
(Stephen, 2009). The organization’s ability to remain rooted in its grass roots membership, as well as con- tinuing to articulate a strong voice of conscience in its new relationship with the government, remains to be seen.
Conclusion
Globalization has created new patterns of inequality and new forms of struggle by the excluded. We have highlighted three social movements that have built what Sen (1999) would characterize as the ‘capabilities’ of the poor to make successful demands, using access to land, health care and life- saving drugs as the springboard for their activities.
Many community psychologists have tended to throw the bulk of their energies into small-scale, community-level activities to empower poor peo- ple from the bottom-up, without enough attention to the challenges of creating the wider environ- ments most likely to hear and support the voices of the poor. We argue that promoting receptive social environments is vital for the success of social movements, and thus should be a key concern for community psychologists.
While the goals and contexts of the three case studies are very different in many ways, a cross- case comparison highlights commonalities in their modes of operation that enable us to make some general comments about their pathways to success.
In relation to building the voice of the poor, each movement has devoted a great deal of time and energy to promoting critical thinking. As a result, members have come to see their poverty and social disadvantage as the result of social inequalities rather than the outcomes of factors such as individ- ual or community-level bad luck or incompetence. Each movement has been driven by a compelling political philosophy, with action strategies flowing out of critical analysis.
All these factors have served to motivate and enable the poor to engage in various forms of col- lective action, such as public protests, tribunals, and land or government building occupations. Moreover, the commitment of the poor to each movement’s particular core issue has been strengthened by the additional empowerment resulting from the provision of other forms of education and capacity-building, such as adult education and treatment literacy.
How have the movements managed to get power- ful politicians to listen to their demands? Here we dis- tinguish between the relational and symbolic aspects
of a receptive social environment (Campbell & Cornish, forthcoming, 2010). At a relational level, each movement has been able to unite a broad range of people behind its objectives both horizontally, among similar activists committed to similar issues, and vertically, involving strategic alliances with polit- ically and economically powerful actors, often at the national and international levels. By uniting different interest groups, the movements gained a strength in numbers that demanded politicians’ attention.
As well as providing resources to keep social movements going, alliances have provided links into elite political and legal networks. Such elite net- works have often played a key role in assisting poor communities to use the courts in order to challenge unjust social policies—drawing on existing laws or constitutional frameworks which may have been breached or not implemented. Elite contacts can channel the voices of the marginalized to the heart of high-level political debate and decision-making.
Furthermore, the successes of these alliances have had a symbolic dimension, using moral force to engage high-level decision-makers. For example, it is difficult to deny the claim that people with AIDS deserve access to life-saving ART, or that unused land should be used to facilitate the survival of the poor rather than lying idle. Clear and simple messages of this nature—skilfully transmitted via a ‘politics of the moral high ground’—allow different constituencies to coalesce around a clear objective. Highlighting connections to valued national ideals (such as the anti-apartheid movement, in the case of TAC) further enhances the legitimacy of the movements’ demands. The skilful framing of the demands as morally uncon- testable made unity possible and resistance difficult.
A cross-cutting theme, also at the symbolic level, relates to the success through which each move- ment gained wide social legitimacy as the most credible agents of their particular struggle. The media have played a key role in all three cases, pro- viding an arena in which topics are framed, and through which individuals and groupings are accorded the right to speak on particular issues.
At a broader level, and one that has been only hinted at in the case studies, is the role that the inter- national symbolic context has played in supporting these social movements. As international discourses evolve, they open and close spaces on which social movements can capitalize. Both TAC and JSA have benefited from changes in the international discourses on HIV/AIDS and primary health care respectively. For JSA, the re-emergent discourse on
969
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
JOURNAL OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 15(7)
primary healthcare, led by its global network PHM and clearly seen in the supportive international reception of PHM’s Global Health Watch 2, illus- trates how this changing international environment may open up receptive spaces for the claims of JSA within India. Similarly, TAC’s claims for universal access to ART have been significantly supported by increasing support for universal treatment access within international health and donor organizations. These international changes create a context in which such ideas are more likely to be listened to when advocated from below.
We hope that our characterization of the successes of MST, JSA and TAC has illustrated our claim that community psychology could learn from greater attention to the strategies they have used to create receptive social environments in which the voices of the poor are most likely to be heard. We are not sug- gesting that every movement will be able to replicate each of the success factors we have drawn attention to here. Furthermore, the success factors that we have highlighted in these case studies could be argued to suggest, for example, that only national organizations can build media support, develop links to other organizations, and channel the voices of the poor to the heart of national government in ways that significantly contribute to expanding human free- doms and challenging poverty.
While larger social movements are most likely to get widespread attention, we argue that smaller, local social movements could develop similar, con- textually-specific strategies for promoting receptive social environments in the local context. Gains in human freedoms are not only achieved nationally, but also may be achieved through struggles that never move beyond the local arena. However, sim- ilar challenges of building the voice of the excluded, and promoting a receptive social environ- ment is which this is heard, would be as necessary in these local settings as they are in national ones.
References
Ballard, R., Habib, A. & Valodia, I. (Eds.) (2006). Voices of protest: Social movements in post-apartheid South Africa. Pietermaritzburg: UKZN Press.
Beaglehole, R., Bonita, R., Horton, R., Adams, O. & McKee, M. (2004). Public health in the new era: improving health through collective action. The Lancet, 363, 2084–2086.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). New York: Greenwood.
Brandford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire. London: Latin American Bureau.
Caldeira, R. (2008). ‘My land, your social transforma- tion’: Conflicts within the landless people movement (MST), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Journal of Rural Studies, 24, 150–160.
Campbell, C., & Cornish, F. (forthcoming, 2010) Towards a 'fourth generation' of approaches to HIV/AIDS man- agement: Creating contexts for effective community mobilization. AIDS Care.
Campbell, C., & Scott, K. (forthcoming, 2010) Building transformative social spaces through mediated health communication. In D. Hook, B. Franks, & M. Bauer (Eds.) Communication, culture and social change. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Deane, N. (2002, May 2–8). Government cosies up to TAC. Mail & Guardian, p. 2.
Duffy, G. (2007, April 17). Brazil’s homeless and landless unite. BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/ 6563359.stm (accessed January 2009).
Endresen, K., & von Kotze, A. (2005). Living while being alive: Education and learning in the Treatment Action Campaign. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 24, 431–441.
Escobar, A. (1992). Reflections on development: Grassroots approaches and alternative politics in the Third World. Futures, June, 411–436.
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The mak- ing and unmaking of the third world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ferguson, J. (1994). The anti-politics machine: ‘Development’, depoliticization, and bureaucratic power in Lesotho. Minnesota, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Finlay, A. (2004). Shaping the conflict: Factors influenc- ing the representation of conflict around HIV/AIDS policy in the South African press. Communicare, 23, 68–93.
Freire, P. (1973). Education for critical consciousness. New York: Continuum.
Friedman, S., & Mottiar, S. (2004). A moral to the tale: The Treatment Action Campaign and the politics of HIV/AIDS. Centre for Civil Society, University of Kwazulu-Natal. http://www.ukzn.ac.za/ccs (accessed November 2008).
Gaventa, J., & Cornwall, A. (2001). Power and knowl- edge. In P. Reason and H. Bradbury (Eds.), Handbook of action research: Participative inquiry and practice (pp. 70–80). London: Sage.
Hammond, J. (2004). The MST and the media: Competing images of the Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Movement. Latin American Politics and Society, 46, 61–90.
Hoogvelt, A. (2001). Globalization and the postcolonial world. London: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Jones, E. (2001). Of other spaces. Situating participatory practices: A case study from South India. IDS Working Paper 137.
970
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
CAMPBELL ET AL.: HEEDING THE PUSH FROM BELOW
Kingstone, S. (2005, January 20). Modest gain in Brazil land reform. BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/ americas/4190335.stm (accessed January 2009).
Klandermans, B. (1997). The social psychology of protest. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labonte, R. (2005). Global right to health campaign launched. British Medical Journal, 331, 252.
Nair, Y., & Campbell, C. (2008) Building partnerships to support community-led HIV/AIDS management: A case study from rural South Africa. African Journal of AIDS Research 7, 45–53.
Nelson, G., & Prilleltensky, I. (2006). Community psychology: In pursuit of liberation and well-being. London: Palgrave- Macmillan.
Orford, J. (2008). Community psychology: Challenges, con- troversies and emerging consensus. Chichester: Wiley. People’s Health Movement (2007). Right to Health and
Health Care Campaign. http://www.phmovement.org/
cms/en/campaigns/145/page (accessed 10 January 2009). People’s Health Movement (2008). Global Health Watch 2: An alternative world health report. London: Zed Books. Richards, T. (2005). Assembly meets to tackle health
needs of the poor. British Medical Journal, 331, 128. Robins, S., & von Lieres, B. (2004) Remaking citizenship, unmaking marginalization: The Treatment Action Campaign in post-apartheid South Africa. Canadian
Journal of African Studies, 38, 575–586. Seedat, M. (Ed.). (2001). Community psychology: Theory,
method and practice. Cape Town: Oxford University Press. Sen, A. (1999) Development as freedom. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
CATHERINE CAMPBELL is Professor of Social Psychology at the London School of Economics, and Director of the MSc in Health, Community and Development. She is a community health psychologist who works on the links between collective action and health.
FLORA CORNISH is a Reader in the School of Health at Glasgow Caledonian University. Her research interests focus on community agency in promoting health and reducing inequalities. She has a longstanding research engagement with sex worker-led HIV prevention programmes in India.
Shukla, A. (2005). Jan Swasthya Abhiyan’s protracted fight for public care. Combat law, 4. http://www. combatlaw.org/information.php?issue_id=25&article_ id=651 (accessed January 2009).
Spivak, G.C. (1988). Can the subaltern speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.), Marxism and the inter- pretation of culture (pp. 271–313). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Stedile, J.P. (2002). A movement of movements? Landless battalions: The Sem Terra Movement of Brazil. New Left Review, 15, 77–104.
Stephen, J. (2009). ‘Saints and sinners’: The Treatment Action Campaign. In K. Cullinan & A. Thom (Eds.), The virus, vitamins and vegetables: The South African HIV/AIDS mystery (pp. 157–174). Johannesburg: Jacana.
Turiano, L., & Smith, L. (2008). The catalytic synergy of health and human rights: The People’s Health Movement and the Right to Health and Health Care campaign. Health and Human Rights, 10, 137–147.
Vanden, H. (2005, March–April) Brazil’s landless hold their ground. NACLA Report on the Americas, pp. 21–28.
Walford, W. (2003). Producing community: The MST and reform settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3, 500–520.
Walford, M. (2005). Agrarian moral economies and neoliberalism in Brazil: Competing worldviews and the state in the struggle for land. Environment and Planning A, 37, 241–261.
Welch, C. (2006). A preliminary history of the MST. Latin American Research Review, 41, 198–210.
ANDREW GIBBS is a Researcher at Health Economics and HIV/AIDS Research Division (HEARD), University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa. His research interests include the role of the media in creating an enabling environment for health promotion and community responses to HIV/AIDS.
KERRY SCOTT is a recent graduate of the MSc Health, Community and Development programme at the London School of Economics. She is currently living in Pune, India and working for Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI), an Indian health advocacy NGO.
Author biographies
971
Downloaded from hpq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CHICAGO on March 15, 2011
