2007
Ethnomusicology
Latin American Music Review
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil
Moehn, Frederick

Latin American Music Review, Volume 28, Number 2, Fall/Winter 2007, pp. 181-219 (Article)
Published by University of Texas Press
DOI: 10.1353/lat.2007.0032
For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/lat/summary/v028/28.2moehn01.html
Access Provided by University Of Chicago Libraries at 03/15/11 11:32PM GMT
Frederick Moehn	Music, Citizenship, and Violence in
Postdictatorship Brazil
ABSTRACT: This essay shows how individuals approaching debates over citizenship, development, civil society, and prob- lems of violence in Brazil evoke music as a kind of audiotopia (from Josh Kun, 2005)—or a sonic space of an imagined country where inequalities are leveled out. It explores these themes in a variety of contexts, such as a con- cert in Carnegie Hall; the work of Nega Gizza (of the urban hip-hop organi- zation CUFA); music recordings associated with the Rural Landless Workers Movement (MST); a televised MPB song festival; and the cultural policies of the Lula administration. The essay traces a web of horizontal and vertical linkages between radically different sectors of Brazilian society and between
cultural practices, social structures, and the state.
RESUMEN: Este artículo demuestra cómo es que los individuos implicados en éstos debates sobre ciudadanía, desarrollo, so- ciedad civil y problemas de violencia en Brasil evocan la música como si fuera un tipo de audiotopía (de Josh Kun, 2005)— o espacio sónico de un país imag- inario en donde las desigualdades son equilibradas de cierta forma. Algunos de los contextos aquí explorados son: un concierto en Carnegie Hall, el tra- bajo musical de Nega Gizza (de una organización de origen hip-hop urbano, CUFA); grabaciones de canciones asociadas con el Movimiento de los Sin Tierra (MST); un festival televisado de la canción MPB; y las políticas cul- turales de la gestión presidencial de Lula. El artículo traza una red de eslabones horizontales y verticales entre sectores radicalemente diferentes, y entre cos-
tumbres culturales, estructuras sociales y el estado.
With how many Brazils do you make a Brazil?
–Lenine/Lula Queiroga1
We need to know what message Brazil wants to send the world—as an example of opposites living side-by-side and of tolerance of differences, at a time when fierce discourses and banners of war are being raised across the globe.
–Gilberto Gil (2003a, 43)
Latin American Music Review, Volume 28, Number 2, December 2007 © 2007 by the University of Texas Press, P.O. Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819
182 : Frederick Moehn
A 2004 concert review in the New York Times by Larry Rohter bore the headline “The Two Brazils Combine for a Night at Carnegie Hall.” It de- scribed how classical pianist Marcelo Bratke, from a prominent family in São Paulo, and young musicians from the percussion ensemble Charanga came together to perform pieces by the composers Darius Milhaud, Heitor Villa-Lobos, and Ernesto Nazareth. Professional musician Marcelo Alves formed Charanga with five youths he met at the Despertar Com- munity Center in Jardim Vilas Boas of São Paulo city, which Rohter iden- tifies as “one of the toughest sections of this metropolis of 20 million people.” In a society as stratified as Brazil, he writes, “there is no reason for people from such markedly different backgrounds ever to meet, much less perform together.” They did, however, meet to make musical sound, in Carnegie Hall no less. This essay explores how discourses about music as well as musical practices themselves narrate the figurative space be- tween the proverbial two Brazils (the term space here should be under- stood as a conceptualized location, while I use the term place to refer to specific physical and cultural geographies). Shared and sometimes con- tested beliefs about music, national identity, the historical trajectory of development in Brazil, and the country’s role on the global stage are powerfully intertwined, with the result that music plays a prominent role in current re-imaginings of Brazilian citizenship.
My analysis here is based in part on my reading of a variety of sources that might be described as texts (documents, recordings, Weblogs, etc.); it is intended to offer a broadly comparative perspective on specific dis- courses about music and society in Brazil. This perspective is also, how- ever, informed by my experiences visiting and conducting fieldwork in Brazil beginning in the 1990s, when I was able to observe and interview pop musicians such as singer-songwriter Lenine and producer Dudu Marote; or in 2004 at the Hutúz Rap Festival at the Bank of Brazil Cul- tural Center in Rio de Janeiro, where I met hip-hop activist Nega Gizza; and finally at the Caiubí Composers Club song festival in São Paulo in 2006, where I encountered singer-songwriter Max Gonzaga, all of whom I discuss below. The essay also grows out of a seminar I taught on social movements in Brazil at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs, where I was able to meet visiting members of the Rural Landless Worker’s Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais sem Terra, or MST) in 2004, and to participate in a meeting with Brazil’s Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil pertaining to his Culture Points project in 2005. I thus seek here to draw together a variety of my personal points of engagement with topics Brazilian, as they reflect on key issues of citi- zenship, class, race, and expressive culture.
The idea of “two Brazils” has been a refrain in interpretations of Brazilian society since Euclides da Cunha proposed a distinction between
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 183
the modern and urbanized coastal regions and the archaic but authen- tic interior in his classic book Rebellion in the Backlands (Os Sertões, 1944 [1902]). Today the expression is used to refer more generally to the different national spaces inhabited by the privileged few and the disad- vantaged many. Sometimes people speak of “many Brazils” when urban- rural or other regional distinctions are being highlighted.2 Because music is so closely associated with national identity in Brazil, it enjoys special currency as a mediator between different social classes and spaces on the one hand, and between the state and civil society on the other. It is also the most effective expressive medium for evoking that imagined com- munity of Brazil which privileges mixture and the juxtaposition of con- trasts. The above-mentioned Marcelo Bratke explained his use of a street percussion group for the performance of art music pieces in Carnegie Hall thus: “The hallmark of Brazilian culture is its miscegenation, its mal- leability, its ability to blend seemingly antagonistic elements” (Rohter 2004). Culture, and music in particular, is in this conception a reagent for mixture with the capacity to sound a national space unmarred by so- cial division.
I see discourses about music, and practices associated with making, consuming, and even legislating music, as framing a “third Brazil” be- tween the two Brazils. This space in between bears comparison with what Josh Kun calls audiotopias, or the “spaces that music helps us to imagine” and in which one can take “refuge” (2005, 14).3 Psychologist Maria Rita Kehl, for example, writes of having “dual citizenship”—one in the Brazil “of widespread injustices and futile struggles,” the other in the country of popular song, “where all Brazilians have the right to exile when real life becomes too insipid” (2002, 60). Arthur Nestrovski, similarly, main- tains that Brazilians “live daily in two countries: a few minutes with inten- sity, imagination, and carelessness in Brazilian popular music; the rest of the time, in the other one” (2002, 12). Kehl and Nestrovski are ambiva- lent about their national political citizenship, but popular music consti- tutes an alternative “country” to which one has the “right” to exile for a few transcendent minutes. The choice of words here is significant, for not too long ago exile from the “real-life” Brazil of injustices was an in- voluntary violation of one’s rights as a citizen, not an exercise of those rights. We might recall, for example, that two of Brazil’s musical super- stars, Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil, endured political exile for two years (1969–71) early in their musical careers, while celebrated song- writer Chico Buarque, an adept critic of the military regime in his music, voluntarily chose exile in Italy in the late 1960s for about a year.
For Kun, audiotopias are “sonic spaces of effective utopian longings where several sites normally deemed incompatible are brought to- gether” (23). They are “identificatory ‘contact zones,’ in that they are both
184 : Frederick Moehn
sonic and social spaces where disparate identity-formations, cultures, and geographies historically kept and mapped separately are allowed to interact with each other” (23). Kun’s desire to engage problems of na- tion, identity, and citizenship in the United States through audiotopic spaces, in which difference is not erased but is instead listened to, res- onates with my analysis here. I appreciate also his interest in the emotive sounds of the spaces of citizenship. I tried to evoke this sonic space my- self when reading this at a colloquium by first performing on guitar and singing a couple songs that I knew would generate sentiments of national belonging among Brazilians or Brazilophiles present in a way that read- ing a paper or even playing a recording cannot (e.g., the famous 1939 samba “Aquarela do Brasil,” by Ary Barroso).
Kun is concerned with the way music is intertwined with problems of race and identity in an America that has often struggled with its own multiculturalism, where musical homes of “dual belonging, dual culture, dual identity” coexist in audiotopic tierras that supposedly destabilize dominant discourses of assimilation (2005, 221). In Brazil, by contrast, the prevailing narratives of nationhood have tended to emphasize hetero- geneity and the juxtaposition of contrasts, the capacity to choose not to choose between oppositions but rather to combine them (the “virtue” of the middle ground, in Roberto DaMatta’s phrase, 1995 [1978]). It is a discourse not of assimilation into a supposedly already existing “Ameri- can” identity, but of continual (racial) mixture and transculturation into ever new formulations.
Yet discourses of mixture and heterogeneity may obfuscate certain persistent structures of inequality and opposition in Brazil, enabling a sense of dual belonging, comparable to what Kun describes for the United States, as suggested by Nestrovski’s “we live daily in two countries” and the metaphor of the two Brazils in general. Recently enacted poli- cies for affirmative action in government hiring and university admissions in Brazil—made possible in part by a clause in the 1988 constitution allowing for what is known as positive discrimination—reflect new levels of awareness of the fissures in received narratives of relatively harmonious race relations, such as that suggested in Barroso’s “Aquarela do Brasil,” with its apparent nostalgia for a bygone plantation setting. Notwithstand- ing, some policy makers have interpreted affirmative action policies as a U.S. import that is out of place in the Brazilian context. In appreciation of such heterogeneous views, I am interested in emphasizing the insta- bility of audiotopias and the competing interests in and different uses of them by individuals and groups variously situated in the fabric of civil so- ciety. Whereas Kun harnesses popular music to remap existing dynamics of difference and national identity in the U.S. context into “effectively enacted” heterotopias (from Foucault) that help us cope with this world
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 185
(Kun 2005, 23), my elaboration here reveals a parallel but differently inflected musical space traversed by distinct dynamics of race, class, vio- lence, nation, and state. Some may seek refuge in this space in order to cope; others may mobilize it for more radical change in a society of ex- treme social stratification.
I highlight postdictatorship Brazil (1985 onward, but especially since the mid-1990s) as a time frame marking several developments—both positive and negative—that bear upon questions of citizenship and cul- tural expression. These include democratization and political stabiliza- tion (with a new constitution in 1988); currency reform and the taming of hyperinflation; market-oriented economic policies (generally referred to as neoliberalism) with limited economic growth and modest progress in reducing inequality; the increased importance of social movements and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs); a sharp rise in violence as- sociated in part with escalating drug trafficking, and seen by many as a threat to the full realization of modern citizenship; and various develop- ments associated with globalization such as the increasingly complex in- ternational dynamics of finance, communications, the media, and social activism and policy. The election to the presidency of long-time labor leader and Workers Party (PT) founding member Luís Inácio da Silva— or Lula—in 2002, and his reelection in 2006, signaled that social issues were central to politics in Brazil at the beginning of this millennium, and this is reflected in Minister Gil’s policies. Yet the Lula administra- tion was crippled by scandal in its first term, and thus far has not been able significantly to alter the durable social stratifications that continue to make the metaphor of two Brazils meaningful.
Among the questions that motivate me here are the following: Why and how does musical sound evoke an alternative Brazil? What role do different kinds of musical sound play in this Brazil in between the two (or many) Brazils? Precisely how do aesthetic and performative practices work to rethink and even reconfigure citizenship? What kinds of rela- tionships exist between the individual, the group, and the state in these scenarios? Or between live performance, recorded sound, and the pub- lic sphere? How do Brazilian audiotopias speak to regional concerns, or to global dynamics of difference and inequality? In my aim to visit these questions in a variety of settings, I sacrifice detailed analysis of the spe- cific music cultures involved, but I hope to provoke further thinking about these issues. I consider musical examples of a variety of genres, in- cluding what is known as MPB (música popular brasileira), a broad category of music encompassing various styles and often (although not exclu- sively) associated with a middle-class public; Brazilian rap and hip-hop; and certain rural traditions in connection with the Landless Movement (MST).
186 : Frederick Moehn
Citizenship, Social Class, and Audiotopic Rhythms
Most writing on citizenship begins with the typology famously outlined by Thomas H. Marshall in his essay “Citizenship and Social Class,” originally presented as a lecture in 1949. Focusing on the English case, Marshall argued that there are three components to citizenship: the civil, the po- litical, and the social, which historically emerged roughly in that order. A citizen possesses a set of rights and duties associated with each of these components as defined, protected, and enforced by the legal-political ap- paratus of the nation-state. The civil component pertains to legal inclu- sion into the definition of citizenship. The political part of citizenship, in this definition, refers primarily to participation in democracy through voting; while the social is generally understood as pertaining to those rights and duties associated with the modern welfare state.
In Marshall’s analysis, there is a progressive historical expansion of these components to citizenship. Increasing levels of democratic repre- sentation would seem to go hand-in-hand with the extension of citizen- ship rights and duties to greater portions of the population. However, as Teresa Caldeira and James Holston have argued, in Brazil there is a dis- junction between the expansion of democratic representation since the end of the military dictatorship in 1985 (the political component of citi- zenship), and the extension of civil and social components—in particu- lar, egalitarian legal protection of citizens and the right to decent living conditions, which have actually become even less accessible for many citizens (1999). José Murilo de Carvalho argues that Marshall’s typology is in fact inverted in Brazil, as many civil rights—which formed the foun- dation of Marshall’s sequence—remain inaccessible to the majority of the population (2001, 219–20).4
In the present analysis I find it worthwhile to retain Marshall’s empha- sis on social class in relation to citizenship, for what most obviously sepa- rates the two Brazils is a highly polarized class structure. The average income in Brazil is about $374 per month, and about 20 percent of the population lives below the poverty line. In the United States the median income is about 90 percent of the average income, while in Brazil it is only about 30 percent of the average, which is to say that the average is skewed upward by excessive wealth at the top, and about half the population earn considerably less than that (Rothkopf 2005). A standard index of income inequality used by economists for the purposes of comparatively gauging development is the gini coefficient. At .57 in 2005 (estimated), Brazil’s gini coefficient is among the worst in the world, although it is slightly better than it was in 2000 (Germany and Swizerland, by contrast, have coefficients of .25, while the United States has a strikingly poor .47, having worsened dramatically in the past ten years). The lowest 20 per- cent of income earners account for just over 2 percent of total income in
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 187
Brazil, while the highest 20 percent earn 64 percent of the total income in the country (and the top 10 percent of earners account for 45 percent of income).5
Class should be understood in relation to various other determinants such as race, with the poorest Brazilians tending to be phenotypically darker; or to violence, which disproportionally affects poorer, darker- complexioned (and also younger) Brazilians. Class status, of course, also bears directly on level of education (including access to formal musical training and instruments, and musical tastes), and consequently on the kinds of work available to different sectors. It indexes access to the media and political leadership, and the degree of integration into consumer and information society. Finally, class is also intertwined with place. Hip- hop in Brazil, for example, emerged in the favelas (shantytowns) in and around major cities (particularly São Paulo), and it has been incorpo- rated into a number of urban NGOs in recent years. The MST (Rural Landless Worker’s Movement), on the other hand, is a social movement oriented precisely around the problems of place and class as these per- tain to ownership of cultivable land.
To refer again to the Carnegie Hall concert, it is the relatively privi- leged, white, educated, and well-traveled Marcelo Bratke who is the “award-winning pianist” appearing at Carnegie Hall, while the (mixed- race) percussionists of Charanga have little formal musical training and were awed at the opportunity to see New York. They conceded that they hadn’t heard of Milhaud, Villa-Lobos, or Nazareth, so “it was hard at first to understand what was going on in this music.” (Ernesto Nazareth com- posed numerous now classic choros, waltzes, polkas, schottisches, and other “salon” genres popular in Old Republic Rio de Janeiro; Darius Milhaud, the French composer, traveled to Brazil in 1917 and was influ- enced by the music of Nazareth and his contemporaries; Villa-Lobos was Brazil’s preeminent modernist-nationalist composer.)6 Bratke explained that what the compositions from Milhaud, Villa-Lobos, and Nazareth have in common is that they draw on the rhythms of Brazilian popular music in their blending of the erudite and popular (what is referred to as “art music” in English is música erudita in Portuguese). The political economy of music making in this particular audiotopia has the poorer black youths—who would have had little opportunity to play piano— provide the rhythmic swing for the music of relatively privileged mod- ernist composers: Bratke told the members of Charanga that even though they would be playing for a select audience, “the music should always swing.” Percussionist Santos observed, “That, fortunately, is something we don’t lack.”
The two sonic Brazils that combined at the Carnegie Hall concert, then, can be described roughly as erudite, cosmopolitan, musically liter- ate, harmonically complex, and featuring orchestral instruments and
188 : Frederick Moehn
arrangements on the one hand; and musically “non-literate,” compara- tively local, subaltern, “authentic,” rhythmically swinging, and featuring percussion instruments on the other. While these are oversimplified dis- tinctions, they do have interpretive meaning for participants who view music making as a symbolic and aesthetic practice in which radically dif- ferent classes of citizens can participate jointly in the production of na- tional culture. It is an idea formulated in the period of Brazilian modernism in the 1920s and 30s. The influential intellectual and musi- cologist Mário de Andrade, for example, envisioned an aesthetic nation- alism that navigated the received contradictions between popular and erudite, local and cosmopolitan culture. Importantly, as Mariza Veloso and Angélica Madeira observe, Andrade conceptualized Brazilian culture as a “synthesis that was not a mere sum of the parts, but a process of so- cial relations in transformation” (2000, 127).
This emphasis on the process of constructing Brazilian national cul- ture, on the aesthetic and symbolic negotiation of social, structural, and cultural differences, and this confidence that art can do the identity work of nation- and citizen-building are also present in the cases I explore below. Andrade granted rhythm the ability to do much of this identity work (a term I borrow from Isin and Wood 1999). In his Essay on Brazilian Music (1928), for example, Andrade wrote: “We are in a stage of rhyth- mic predominance,” and he suggested that “in accommodating and adapting foreign elements to his own tendencies the Brazilian acquired an imaginative way of ‘rhythmicking’ [jeito de ritmar]” (1962 [1928], 21). The connection between syncopated (and racialized) rhythms and na- tional identity would help propel urban samba to the status of Brazil’s national music in the 1930s and 40s. Even today Brazilian music in gen- eral tends to be regarded internationally as rich in rhythms, as Afro- diasporic sounds continue to have a privileged place in world music markets (Brazilian music that is not particularly “rhythmic” seems to enjoy little exposure outside of Brazil).
Rhythm and drumming also participate on some level in what might be termed the symbolic economies of NGOs (nongovernmental organ- izations) and citizens’ action groups, some of which enjoy funding from international sources, such as the AfroReggae Cultural Group in Rio de Janeiro, which has received Ford Foundation support. AfroReggae even terms its identity work batidania, combining batida (beat) with cidadania (citizenship). The group, based in the Vigário Geral favela of Rio de Janeiro, initiated a rather remarkable series of residencies in 2005 that joined the military police in the city of Belo Horizonte with favela residents. Said Lt. Col. Josué Soares of the 34th Battalion: “Not long ago, a lot of officers believed we had to use force to stop criminality. Our men- tality has changed in the way we approach favelados [favela residents]” (Reardon 2005). Journalist Christopher Reardon reports, “The 23-year
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 189
police veteran figured he’d mastered the tools of his trade: a two-way radio, handcuffs and a 9-millimeter service pistol. He never imagined that one day he would add a bass drum or a can of spray paint [for graffiti]” (2005). The sound of drumming here replaces the sound of guns—at least on a small scale—literally taking over both the space and the place dividing the police and the favela residents, and having a real effect on civil society.
In the northeastern state of Bahia, which has the highest concentra- tion of African Brazilians in the country, the Olodum cultural group has centered its community activities and commercial enterprise around drumming since the late 1970s, taking an active role in redefining the civic landscape of Salvador, the capital of that state. Also focused on Bahia is the “Rhythmic Uprising” project coordinated by a team of Brazilian and U.S. media professionals who aim to “tell the world the in- spiring tale of how a powerful grassroots movement based in the arts is overcoming social and economic depression.” Another organization with international ties and working in Bahia is called “Rhythm of Hope,” an “informal network association” that aims to “strengthen social programs in the Bahia community, to better the quality of life of its marginalized populations, and to foster awareness, tolerance, and understanding on the part of non-Brazilians.”7
In the song “Under the Same Sky” (“Sob o mesmo Céu,” 2005), MPB singer, songwriter, and guitarist Lenine (Osvaldo Lenine Macedo Pimentel), along with his songwriting partner Lula Queiroga, describe rhythm as mediating between—and bringing together—the various Brazils. Following are excerpts from the lyrics:
With how many Brazils does one make a country called Brazil? Under the same sky every city is a village, a person, a dream, a nation. ... My heart has no frontiers nor clock, nor flag, just the rhythm of a greater song We come from the drum of the Indian We come from Portugal; from the black drumming... We come from samba, from forró We came from the future to learn about our past We come from rap and from the favela...from the center and from the periphery...We bring a desire for happiness and peace
These lyrics illustrate some of the conceptual architecture of this musical space in between. The question of how many Brazils it takes to make one unified country serves primarily as a device for introducing a subsequent list of differences (of which I have only excerpted a few); it is a way of songfully celebrating the juxtapositioning of contrasts in a complex national whole.8 There is also the suggestion in these lyrics of an embod- ied national geography, at the center of which is a “heart” beating with- out frontiers to the free rhythm of a “greater song.” The “country of the
190 : Frederick Moehn
future,” as Brazil is often called, is preoccupied with its past. Taken to- gether, these lyrics describe a temporally ambiguous space emanating from a simultaneously individual and national body whose heart beats out a rhythm that transcends difference, and whose mind dreams up a Brazil that in its inclusive diversity is also universal. The metaphor of the national “body” is pervasive in Brazilian cultural discourse. Minister Gil, for example, speaks of approaching the country as “a living, pulsating organism that is enveloped in contradictions and in constant need of being energized and balanced” (Turino 2003, 16).
A performance of this song can be seen on Youtube.com, with Lenine joined on stage by a small band of electric bass and guitar, drum kit, pan- deiro (a tambourine used in a wide range of Brazilian popular musics), and several female Brazilian singers from various parts of the country (and also racially diverse): Fafá de Belém; Margareth Menezes; Elba Ramalho; Sandy; Ana Carolina; Fernanda Abreu. Like Ary Barroso’s “Aquarela do Brasil” from the late modernist period, the tone in this song is nationalistic and celebratory, although the musical sound is less characteristically “Brazilian” than a traditional samba (the most obviously Brazilian aspect, aside from the language, is the pandeiro). It comes across as something like a pop anthem of the “country” of popular song to which Maria Rita Kehl says Brazilians have the right to exile. In fact, the song was composed for a French celebration of Brazilian culture cospon- sored by the Brazilian Ministry of Culture. The Ministry identifies it as the Anthem of the Year of Brazil in France, 2005. If Ary Barroso’s na- tionalistic sambas (sambas-de-exaltação) ended up fitting comfortably with Getúlio Vargas’s populist agenda in the 1930s and 40s, “Under the Same Sky” speaks to the aims of the culture ministry under one of Brazil’s greatest MPB stars, Gilberto Gil—clearly a radically different, albeit curi- ously analogous context.9 Notwithstanding, the opening question in these lyrics hints that work remains to be done before a single country called Brazil realizes its “audiotopic potential” as a fully inclusive space. In many ways, the modernist musical vision of the Brazilian nation is evident in this song (as in the Carnegie Hall concert), but in postdictatorship Brazil other musical spheres may interpret this space and its symbols differently, as the examples of Nega Gizza of CUFA and the recordings associated with the MST will show.
The United Favela Federation (CUFA) and Nega Gizza
According to the 2004 UNESCO Brazil report, Map of Violence: The Youths of Brazil, 92 percent of homicide victims are males between 18 and 24 years old, and of these 74 percent are black. Furthermore, between 1993 and 2002, there was an increase of 88.6 percent of homicides among the total
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 191
population aged 15 to 24 (Waiselfisz et al. 2004). For Júlio Tavares of the Fluminense Federal University in Niteroi, Rio de Janeiro, this violence amounts to a genocide of black and predominantly male bodies. Tavares sees hip-hop as a corporeal and narrative response to this genocide, col- laborating “in the construction of a new social landscape for Brazil,” and accelerating the “fight for civil rights and citizen-consciousness” (Tavares n.d.). Hip-hop, he argues, is a “third way,” negotiating between institutionalized, formal capitalism and the informal parallel economy of the drug trade, both of which he views as complicit in this genocide.
In Rio de Janeiro the United Favela Federation or CUFA (Central Única das Favelas), describes itself as an organization that unites residents of over 100 favelas as well as artists, producers, and people connected to residents associations.10 CUFA’s mission statement describes the Federa- tion as “a national organization that emerged in meetings of youths— generally black — from various favelas in Rio de Janeiro who were looking for a space in the city to express their attitudes, problems, or just their desire to live.” Most of these youths participated in or were oriented by the hip-hop movement, and they organized around the ideal of trans- forming “the favelas, their talents, and their potentials in the face of a society in which prejudice based on color, class, and origin had not yet been transcended.” Rap music can be useful in this effort, the mission statement argues, because it helps raise the consciousness of those who are on the periphery of their citizenship, and because it is gaining recog- nition in the media. There is, the statement adds, an affinity between the militancy of hip-hop and the work of CUFA: they both seek “to stim- ulate the residents of favela communities to take action; to promote a popular revolution in Brazilian culture.”11
In June 2004 I attended some events organized by CUFA and its partner group Hutúz at the Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in the mid- dle of the city. These featured hip-hop bands from various countries of Latin America and took place in a theater during the middle of the day, rather than at night in areas of the so-called periphery. Such linkages between potentially transformative movements and financial or corporate institutions are part of what George Yúdice has called the “privatization of culture” in neoliberal Latin America, a trend that risks the adoption of “expedient” culture-based programs at the expense of real changes to the structural causes of inequality (Yúdice 1999, 2003). Despite such risks, these music-based movements can potentially draw increased atten- tion to the problem of the two Brazils among the general population, and they provide a grassroots community-centered space of solidarity for favela residents to debate problems of citizenship and representation, and to organize actions that seek to remedy such problems. For exam- ple, in 2005 CUFA received $60,000 in Ford Foundation funds to sup- port a series of workshops on race, gender, human rights, and film with
192 : Frederick Moehn
youths from the hip-hop movement in Rio as part of the organization’s Citizenship and Audiovisual Project.
One of the founding members and current treasurer of CUFA is rap artist Nega Gizza (Gisele Gomes de Souza). She was born in the favela of the Hope Park (Parque Esperança) in Rio de Janeiro. Her brother is the rapper MV Bill (Alex Pereira Barbosa). She and MV Bill contributed to the soundtrack for the film City of God (Cidade de Deus, 2002), based on Paulo Lins’s 1997 novel by the same name, which portrayed the lives of two youths growing up amidst brutal violence in that neighborhood. Also in 2002, Nega Gizza released her album In Humility (Na humildade), which presents a black female favela resident’s perspective on rap, race, class, and Brazilian citizenship (Fig. 1). It is a subject position she regards as alienated by the discourse of miscegenation, and deprived of the full complement of rights associated with modern citizenship in the West. The album begins with “Horror Film” (“Filme de Terror”), a sparse, sim- ple, minor key ostinato, a beat that stutters before settling into a groove, and periodic chordal interjections on violins that evoke the suspense- inducing music of a horror film soundtrack—for from Nega Gizza’s perspective, that is precisely what Brazil looks like. I excerpt from the lengthy lyrics:
Country of racial democracy, of the mulata for export, of natural beauty Brazil! Happy nation, a tropical country... Brazil, who condemns us to live like irrational animals Let’s pretend that it will pass, that it is natural!
The time of conformism is over. I don’t want war, I only want love! ... Change this horror film... We are born to die of hunger. We are born without being proud of our own name How can Sarney’s family try to convince me
Figure 1. Front and back covers of Nega Gizza’s 2002 CD Na humildade.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 193
How can ACM’s family think I can believe That I would find all this lovely and natural?12... They concentrate wealth, and they don’t think it’s obscene Oh Maranhão, land of blacks transformed into doormats Oh Salvador, land of blacks already subdued by the ropes of the hangman Uncross your Arms, follow in my footsteps The sound is rap, this is the beat... We are part of a people without future, of folks without culture, without pride The whites on the seaside, the blacks on the hillside The Indians suffocated against the wall. Police persecution is not normal... A horror film is what I see...Lock the gates of the castles... Treat us like diseased ones, just because we don’t have teeth I won’t die for Brazil.
The general framework in these lyrics remains that of two Brazils— the elite and the poor, or alternatively, the whites and the blacks. Race mixture is mentioned but with deep irony (the racial democracy, the mulata), although it is noteworthy that there is brief mention of Brazil’s “Indians,” consistent with the “three-race” mixture in the foundational myth of the Brazilian people. The temporal dimension is racialized: poor black Brazilians are people without a future, and this is due, Nega Gizza argues, to the normalization of social and racial stratification and violence within a conformist social order. “Let’s pretend that it will pass, that it is natural!” The poor live like starving, diseased animals (not citizens) whose teeth are falling out, hunted by the police. They lack “culture” anyway, so it is natural to view them as animals. In this view the problem that Brazilian identity has with both the future and the past is race. More specifically, it is the naturalized correlation between race and class in Brazil that impairs the teleology of modernization and development. Rather than coming from the future to learn about the past, as in the Lenine/Queiroga song, the present reality makes the future almost be- side the point for many. There is also a geographical dimension, pertain- ing especially to Rio de Janeiro, where the wealthy live near the prized beaches and the poor build their shacks on the steep slopes, which lack roads and services (the contrast between the asphalt and the hillside slums that Zuenir Ventura analyzed, 1994). As in the Lenine/Queiroga song, the body enters into the picture, but it is black, hungry, perse- cuted, and relegated to the favela.
Yet Nega Gizza’s “Horror Film” and Lenine’s and Queiroga’s “Under the Same Sky” do have something in common: a different Brazil is evoked through the musical rhythm (the “rhythm of a greater song” in the Lenine/Queiroga piece). “Uncross your arms, follow in my foot- steps,” Nega Gizza sings. “The sound is rap, this is the beat.” Lenine, however, uses the first person plural: “We come from the center and the
194 : Frederick Moehn
periphery; we come from rap and from the favela.” Lenine speaks for the national “we.” Nega Gizza, by contrast, speaks for the black and eco- nomically marginalized “we,” while her musical beat has little direct con- nection to grooves traditionally associated with poor blacks and mulatos in Brazil, such as samba. Rather, the musical connection is more Black Atlantic; it is transnational and diasporic. Her track “Release the Ani- mal” (“Larga o bicho”) further elaborates on her subject position qua citizen: “Black woman with the warring spirit/.../I’m not a mulata, I’m not a drug mule [mula], I’m a cannon/... /African descendent preserving my faith/. . . /My dialect is rap, a tough bone to chew.” Her co-rapper on the song, Yeda Hills (alternatively written as Ieda), adds, “I’m black in skin and mind, this makes me courageous, because I know that I’m a descendent of the fighting Zumbi13/.../I go on living one day after an- other, in accordance with my rhythmology [ritimologia]/.../My micro- phone is my weapon.” The track ends with the following: “It’s the sound of black my brother [som de preto meu nego], the sound of black.”
In sum, the perspective offered by Nega Gizza here is indeed “periph- eral” to the dominant national narratives of miscegenation and the cele- bration of contrast, mixture, and the coexistence of differences. Instead of celebrating difference Nega Gizza wishes to mobilize it in order even- tually to negate it — not through mixture, but through the leveling out of social inequalities. The hip-hop “sound of black” provides a more “mili- tant” and politicized rhythm for conjuring this audiotopic space than would, for example, traditional samba (although Brazilian hip-hop does sometimes mix in samba rhythms). Rap production in Brazil is highly varied and Nega Gizza cannot be taken as representative of the full breadth of this output. Certain São Paulo hip-hop artists, for example, de-emphasize race and blackness while highlighting violence and mar- ginality (see Pardue 2004). Yet as already demonstrated, violence and marginality correlate strongly with race in Brazil, and most rap artists tend not to celebrate miscegenation and the harmonious juxtaposition- ing of differences, as MPB artists like Lenine often do. My choice of Nega Gizza as a case study is motivated by her association with the United Favela Federation (or CUFA) as a kind of social movement or cit- izens’ action network that emphasizes a black subjectivity and ostensibly black beats. I would like now to contrast this eminently urban perspec- tive with the rural activism of the MST.
Music and the Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST)
The MST was conceived in 1984, the last year of military dictatorship in Brazil. It was in large part an outgrowth of the Pastoral Land Commis- sion (CPT), an organization founded by progressive Catholic Bishops in
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 195
1975. According to the MST Web site, less than 3 percent of the popula- tion owns two-thirds of Brazil’s arable land.14 The principal work of the MST is oriented around land redistribution, specifically peasant occupa- tions of underutilized but privately owned land, and activism aimed at the subsequent legalization of community ownership and agricultural production on such land. Legalization is sometimes made possible by petitioning the state to redistribute land in accordance with Article 184 of the 1988 constitution, which states that land not “carrying out its so- cial function” can be appropriated by the federal government.15 Accord- ing to the MST’s own statistics, more than 350,000 families have won land titles to over 20 million acres after MST land takeovers, while more than 160,000 families are in encampments throughout Brazil awaiting government recognition.16 It is the largest social movement in Latin America, and one of the most successful grassroots organizations in the world. Once a given territory is occupied, the MST establishes food and agricultural cooperatives, as well as literacy and other educational pro- grams. Not surprisingly, such conquests have often come at the cost of lives. The members of the MST have often been in violent conflict with both the landowners (or their private security forces) and the police. Be- tween 1984 and 2004, more than 1,000 people were killed as a result of land conflicts in Brazil, one of the most notorious being the Eldorado de Carajás massacre of 1997, in which nineteen unarmed peasants were killed by the military.
An important part of the movement’s activities is the mística, a utopian and millenary vision of the world, and also a ritual celebration held at the start of MST events. The mística ceremonies with which all MST events begin feature various art forms, including theater, dance, and, most importantly, music and poetry. The music is typically drawn from rural styles such as cantoria—a sort of ballad singing—but sympathetic MPB and hip-hop artists have also contributed to the musical activities of the movement. Interestingly, at these events both the red MST flag— which features an outline of the Brazilian nation as a reminder that land reform is a national problem—and the Brazilian flag are present, again suggesting an ambivalent and dual sense of citizenship. I want to high- light how the movement reaches out to and collaborates with varied sectors of the population in audiotopic musical recordings, addressing in particular the issues of poverty, land redistribution, and violence. Malcom McNee, for example, analyzed an MST project proposal enti- tled “Musical Formation and Training in the Camps and Settlements.” The proposal calls music “an important and efficient channel of pene- tration into the social sphere” (cited in McNee 2003, 99). It argues that “contagious melodies and rhythms take control of groups and reaffirm on a daily basis their message and their behavior, divulging their ideas and reaffirming their positions” (McNee 2003, 99).17
196 : Frederick Moehn
The MST released five CDs between 1997 and 2002 featuring mostly songs written by people associated with or supporters of the movement, and sometimes performed by pop musicians not necessarily directly in- volved with it. The cover art for the first CD, Art in Movement (Arte em movi- mento), features a dramatic photo by Sebastião Salgado of peasants at an encampment on the lands of the Cuiabá plantation as they celebrate— hoes raised, with one of the peasants playing a flute—the latifundio ex- propriation decree adopted on May 6, 1996, that allowed them to form the community of 2,800 families (Fig. 2). Pop musicians not directly associated with the MST performed several of the tracks on the CD. Samba/MPB star Beth Carvalho, for example, sings “Order and Progress” instead of Zé Pinto, the song’s MST composer. Rather than prioritizing acoustic instruments and limited electronic manipulation in the studio, as one might expect of a recording associated with rural, agricultural peasant life, this first MST release has a rather “commercial” sound, owing pri- marily to the use of synthesizer and electric bass. Commenting about this disc music professor and MST supporter Graciano Lorenzi wrote that the recorded releases of MST music “should not be aggressive” but should “conquer the sympathy and the support of the people that listen to it” (cited in McNee 2003, 100). That is to say, the recording was intended to reach a broad public beyond local MST settlements, consistent with the movement’s adept usage of the media and its extensive networking with other spheres of civil society—in this instance the world of MPB, a sphere of pop music with considerable national visibility, market share,
Figure 2. Front cover of MST 1997 CD Arte em movimento with peasants at Cuiabá plantation.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 197
and status. Chico Buarque, another major MPB artist who has supported the landless movement, released a four-song CD called Terra (Earth) in association with Sebastião Salgado’s book of photographs of Brazilian landless workers. Although ultimately the MST CDs did not see wide cir- culation, in the case of these recordings music was viewed as a “channel of communication with society and as a space to be occupied by the MST” (Lorenzi cited in McNee 2003, 100).
This view of music’s communicative potential and the suggestion that music itself is a space that can be occupied is precisely what is proposed by CUFA, by AfroReggae, and by Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil. It recalls Artur Nestrovski’s “we live daily in two countries”—where one of those countries is the “space” of music itself—but for middle-class professionals like Nestrovski, the idea remains largely metaphorical. For landless peasants, by contrast, the metaphor of the space of music is ur- gently connected to the struggle to occupy places, in this case land for agri- culture, and also fully to occupy the space of citizenship to the extent that legal protection from violence and social welfare protection from starvation and lack of income, education, or medicine, etc., is wanting. The recorded CD, in this context, takes on a performative role parallel to the use of music at live mística events. In entering into market and media circuits and establishing links with popular music artists and other sympathetic publics, the CD Art in Movement seeks to “conquer”— to use Lorenzi’s word—the national (and even international) public sphere in which citizenship is debated.
The “Anthem of the Landless Movement” (“Hino do Movimento Sem Terra”) from this same recording is a remarkable track, for although the lyrics to the anthem are by MST poet Ademar Bogo, the music is written by Marxist avant-garde art music composer Willy Corrêa de Oliveira, a participant in the Música Nova movement that included Rogério Duprat (equally known for his participation in that movement as he is in the Tropicália movement as arranger and producer) and others. The song, a march with trumpet, flute, and snare drum arrangement, features the choir of the University of São Paulo singing an angular minor key melody constructed around a forceful descending fifth. It ends with a resound- ing choral modulation to the parallel major key. The piece sounds more Kurt Weil and Bertold Brecht than rustic camp song. Here the musical space in between joins a simple anthem for agrarian reform with an urban musical vanguard: “With arms raised, let’s tell our story/Smothering our oppressors with strength/Let’s raise the colored [MST] flag/Let’s awaken this sleeping fatherland/Tomorrow belongs to the workers!” MPB musi- cian Chico César—whose pop music draws heavily on traditional styles from the Nordeste (the Northeast), an area rich in folklore and very much associated with both agriculture and inequality in the national imagi- nary, sings the track “Flowering” (“Floriô”) featuring the characteristically
198 : Frederick Moehn
Northeastern xote rhythm and lyrics by Zé Pinto: “The rice is in sheaves and the beans have blossomed/The corn is on the husk, and the heart is full of love./. . . /Raising our voices shouting for agrarian reform/For the struggle does not end with taking over the land/[It continues with] mak- ing schools, bringing comrades together/Creating cooperatives to in- crease [agricultural] production.”
The second MST CD, Songs That Embrace Dreams (Canções que abraçam sonhos, 2002) features songs from the First National Agrarian Reform Festival, which took place in Rio Grande do Sul in 1999. It has a much more acoustic production sound than the first recording. The beautiful “Migrants Procession” by Martin César Ramires Gonçalves and Pedro Munhóz, for example, is sung in the cantoria ballad style, with the tradi- tional steel-stringed double-course viola guitar used in this “country music”: “Brazil-land, Continent, Motherland of my people/Today I want to ask—/If your arms are so great/Why deny a space/To those who want to have a home/I cannot understand/How in this immense land/ It is still kill or die/For a piece of earth.”
The CD A Song for Peace from 2001 features a mixture of traditionally rural and more popular sounds, evidencing various sympathies and al- liances across genre, nation, region, and class. The track “Latin prayer” (“Oração latina”), for example, sounds similar to the nueva canción group Inti Illimani from Chile, with the use of the Andean cuatro (a small, four- stringed, double course, ukulele-like instrument) and an open-throated vocal style.18 The song “The stones will scream” (“As pedras gritarão”), by contrast, is a jazz-rock fusion. To give one final example, the track “Eldorado dos Carajás” is performed by a hip-hop group based in a favela in Belém, capital of the northern state of Pará, near where the Amazon River meets the Atlantic Ocean. The group, MBGC (for Manos da Baixada de Grosso Calibre, or Brothers of Large Caliber Way), tells the story of the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre on April 17, 1996, when about 1,200 landless workers blocked a road in protest of delays of a rel- atively small land redistribution that had been promised by the National Institute of Colonization and Land Reform (INCRA).19 Powerful local landowners, fearing further MST invasions, pressured the state to remove the protesters forcefully. Colonel Fábio Lopes, commander-in-chief of the military police in Pará, sent two heavily armed squadrons. Evidence sug- gests that the military police intended to use violence “to teach the MST a lesson they would never forget,” as one journalist at the scene reported (Branford and Rocha 2002, 139). This musical track recounts the event in detail at a lugubrious tempo and in a solemn voice: “Fourteen minutes of dense shooting. Thick lead...and bone/Amidst that tumult one heard crying and shouting from those attempting to flee./.../Desperate peo- ple begged for help/All victims of a brutal, violent, and bloody police
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 199
action/With summary executions, a tragedy comparable with those of Carandiru, Candelária, Vigário Geral, Corumbiara.”20
The last line of the song connects the Eldorado dos Carajás massacre to other notorious police killings that received national and interna- tional attention. On October 2, 1992, over 100 prisoners were killed by the police at the Carandiru prison in São Paulo after a riot broke out at the facility.21 On July 23, 1993, eight street children were murdered by policeman in front of the Candelária Church, in the center of Rio de Janeiro. Vigário Geral refers to the 1993 massacre in the Rio favela by the same name (the AfroReggae Cultural Group formed in response to this tragedy). At Santa Elina Ranch, in the Corumbiara municipality in the interior of Rondônia state, a violent confrontation between police and landless squatters resulted in the deaths of nine peasants and two policemen. Again, evidence suggested that the peasants were shot at close range in the back or in the head.22 This musical example from a favela- based hip-hop group sympathetic to but not directly associated with the MST shows music as a key horizontal link between widely different ac- tivist groups—one urban, emphasizing race and racism, privileging the rhythms and styles of hip-hop culture and combating the drug trade; the other rural, Marxist-oriented, and millenary, shunning any formal al- liances with the state, political parties, or international foundations, and tending to favor the sounds of caipira country music for its live mística events. Both, however, see music as an important force in reimagining Brazilian citizenship in response to institutionalized violence, as well as to the “violence of everyday life” (Scheper-Hughes 1992).
“The New Music of Brazil”? An MPB festival, the middle classes, and a cyberdebate
If the musical output of Nega Gizza in association with CUFA, and of musicians connected in some way to the MST, interrogates problems of citizenship and class as they pertain to social welfare, violence, and civil rights, what of those social sectors that enjoy relatively higher economic security, specifically populations considered middle class? The middle class in Brazil is typically described as persons earning more than about US $450 per month per family, and the sector tends to be further sub- divided into lower middle class ($450–$1,200); “middle middle class” ($1,200–$2,300); and upper middle class (above $2,300). It is a demo- graphic group that, “although with relatively little property, is character- ized by high and intermediary positions both in the social-occupational structure and in the distribution of income and wealth” (Pochmann et al. 2005, 16). As such, the middle class is understood as “possessing
200 : Frederick Moehn
recognized social status and authority and a superior level of consump- tion” (ibid.). Middle-class intellectuals, creative artists, and professionals represent an important national public for a CD like the MST’s Art in Movement; they constitute that sector the sympathy and support of which Professor Lorenzi said the recording should “conquer.” Although the deeply Marxist MST speaks and sings of radical social revolution and an imagined utopian future, in the audiotopic present the organization has carefully established significant links with sympathetic members of the middle classes, as have CUFA and AfroReggae.
Middle-class music makers often serve a mediating role, such as, for example, the professional musician Marcelo Alves who put together the Charanga percussion ensemble; or Dudu Marote, one of the producers of Nega Gizza’s recording Na humildade.23 Such mediations can have im- portant aesthetic consequences. One reviewer of Nega Gizza’s album wrote that her sound has a greater musical richness than her brother MV Bill, “not exactly for her style of rapping...but for knowing how to put herself in the hands of the right producers. Zégonz, Ganja Man, and Dudu Marote provide a deep musical foundation for Gizza to rap over. They managed to create a rarity: a disc of Brazilian hip-hop that balances the strength of the verses with the musical part; electronic interventions in the perfectly exact measure mixed with acoustic instruments, scratches, and changes in the musical ambience on each track” (Barbosa n.d.). “The right producers,” in this case, are taste brokers who make sure the CD meets certain aesthetic standards of balance and proportion— much in the same way, I imagine, Marcelo Bratke negotiated the rhyth- mic foundation to the Carnegie Hall concert discussed above.
The role of mediator may include using publicity clout to support causes agitating for social reform, such as when Chico Buarque releases tracks for the Terra project, or when Caetano Veloso offers his support to the AfroReggae cultural group, or when pop musician Fernanda Abreu crosses from the so-called South Zone of Rio (where many of the city’s middle- and upper-class residents live) to the North Zone (where Rio’s favela-based hip-hop communities are typically located) to appear at events with artists like Nega Gizza, AfroReggae, and MV Bill, as she often does. There exists also a network of intellectuals, professionals, and government officials who may act in a mediating role between the haves and have-nots or between the state and civil society, such as jour- nalist and author Zuenir Ventura, who wrote about the Vigário Geral favela (1994) and who appears in the movie Favela Rising, or certain NGO staff, or Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil.
Yet there is also a heightened sense of ambivalence amongst the mid- dle classes, as suggested by the statements from Maria Rita Kehl and Artur Nestrovski about “dual citizenship” cited above. Economist Waldir José de Quadros at the University of Campinas (Unicamp) fears that
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 201
the Brazilian middle class is angry. “It just hasn’t exploded yet,” he says, “because it is also confused. The forces that succeed in channeling this anger will find a great ally for its interests. The problem is that we see disillusionment with the Lula government, creating conditions for the right to strengthen its position” (Sugimoto 2004, 8). According to Quadros, the middle class accounted for 42.5 percent of the country’s total population in 1981. By 2003, that figure had dropped to 33.2 per- cent, and those who left the middle class moved down, of course, rather than up. Another study showed small increases in the income of the poorest sectors in recent years, but a tightening of the labor market for the middle class.24 Economist Márcio Pochmann found that the median income of middle-class workers fell 19.4 percent in the past ten years, while in the same period taxes increased 20 percent.25 Carlos Antonio Ribeiro Costa, a specialist on social mobility at the State University of Rio de Janeiro, says “the fight to stay in the middle class is tougher. In the 1970s middle-class children had 2000 times better chances to get a good job than a farmer’s child. Today the difference is one fourth that.”26
Singer-songwriter Max Gonzaga, from São Paulo, captured the anxi- eties of this social sector in his song “Middle Class” (“Classe Média”), which he presented in a televised song festival in 2005, and which I was able to see him perform at a smaller song festival in November 2006 in São Paulo (Fig. 3). The Festival Cultura—the New Music of Brazil (Festi- val Cultura—A Nova Música do Brasil) took place in the SESC Pinheiros theater in São Paulo city from August 31 to September 14, 2005. The event was a song contest recorded in front of a live audience in the tradition of the legendary festivals of the 1960s that launched the ca- reers of Chico Buarque, Caetano Veloso, and Gilberto Gil, among many other household names of MPB, and that also became the main forum for protest song (canção engagada) that paralleled the new song move- ment (nueva canción) in the rest of Latin America. The event, broadcast on the public television station TV Cultura, commemorated forty years since the first such festival. The project was to be “open to all the musi- cal tendencies and rhythms of the country,” and it sought to “present, without restrictions, the best of what exists of a Brazil of living and vi- brant colors and rhythms.”27
“Middle Class” made it to the semifinals and seemed to strike a chord among many viewers, listeners, and bloggers in Brazil, despite the fact that it was eliminated in that round. Musically, the song is firmly in the MPB mold: Gonzaga’s smooth and practiced low tenor voice, and the rangy, well-constructed, pop melody “conquer” the listener; the altered chords he finger-picks on his nylon-stringed classical guitar evoke jazzy bossa nova harmonies with tempered syncopations, as does the discrete accom- paniment played on synthesizer. An “MTV Acoustic” sound predominates, with bongos and other light percussion completing a sophisticated pop
202 : Frederick Moehn
Figure 3. Max Gonzaga performing at the November 2006 Caiubí Composer’s Festival in São Paulo.
texture, and judicious amounts of reverberation added to the PA mix. One of the organizers of the event, Solano Ribeiro, said of the stage sound, “We have opted for subtlety, to show acoustic music, music that is a little more elaborated in terms of instrumentation [as in the original song festivals].”28 “Subtlety,” “acoustic,” “elaborated instrumentation”— these terms describe a fairly restrained and nostalgic aesthetic that re- calls the original song festivals of the 1960s, where electric guitars, for example, were at first notoriously rejected by the public. Notwithstand- ing, the lyrics to Max Gonzaga’s “Middle Class” (“classe Média”) frankly captured the interrelationships between consumption, violence, and the media from a perspective that Gonzaga suggests is shared by a significant portion of the Brazilian middle classes today:
I’m middle class, a parrot of every news program I believe in the impartiality of the weekly magazine I’m middle class, I buy clothes and gas with a credit card I can’t stand buses, I travel in my car that I bought with a loan
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 203
All I do is pay taxes, I’m always at the limit of my check overdraft... But I’m not concerned if the drug trafficker is the one who controls the favela Nor am I if there’s a flood or people are dying in Itaquera [a low income neighborhood in the East Zone of São Paulo city] I wish the entire periphery would explode But I am indignant with the state when I am inconvenienced By the starving beggar extending his hand, the windshield washer soaping my window... And if the assault is in Moema [an upper-middle-class neighborhood of São Paulo city] Or the assassination is in Jardins, and the executive’s daughter is raped to death Then the media show up. You begin to think about the death penalty again Or about reducing the age of majority And I who am well-informed agree and join a demonstration While the readership of the newspaper increases... Disasters only interest me when they knock at my door Because it’s easier to condemn someone already condemned to death
The contrast between the “smooth jazz” acoustic sound of this song and its primarily middle-class live performance setting on the one hand, and the biting irony of its lyrics on the other, disrupt the space in between that Marcelo Bratke described as a celebratory mixture of high and low in Carnegie Hall, or that Maria Rita Kehl describes as an “other” Brazil to which everyone has the right to exile. This Brazil in the middle is troubled by the two Brazils on either side of it: it is the coexistence of the grossly overprivileged and the embarrassingly impoverished that inhibit the full realization of a modern middle-class cosmo-consumer conscious- ness and way of life. “Middle Class” also subtly interrogates the premises of the festival itself: while the latter celebrated the great MPB artists of the 1960s—whom the military dictatorship censored or even forced into exile—Gonzaga sang about joining a demonstration in favor of the death penalty. The singer applied an extra-syrupy sincerity to his vocal timbre on this line, making it sound especially ironic. The clever usage of the first person singular—making it seem as if the singer himself has expe- rienced the emotions he cynically narrates—heightens the sense of a conflicted and ambivalent self-consciousness about being stuck between violence and consumption, between backwardness and development.
An MPEG video recording of Gonzaga’s performance of the song circulated through cyberspace and generated mixed reactions (it is now on Youtube.com). Several bloggers felt that Gonzaga captured an un- comfortable truth: “This song really says it all—Applause!” commented one; “A really good song,” wrote another, “the lyrics speak for them- selves.”29 Another well-educated blogger (he presented his commentary
204 : Frederick Moehn
as a quasi-Socratic discussion in which he cited Aristotle) observed that “the average middle-class type...can be summarized with the phrase ‘for the masses, charity or the police.’”30 On the other hand, one reporter wrote that this kind of pop music and criticism was simply out of step with the sound of today, which is better represented by rap music: “The sound [of rap] is electronic, accelerated, and “rhythmed” [ritmado] to the tempo of the big city, and the same for the lyrics, the concrete poetry of a reality marked by inequality. ...Rap and the whole hip-hop movement are not represented at the Festival Cultura.”31
Yet another blogger appreciated Gonzaga’s talent but was incensed by the lyrics and provided an important counterperspective on the Brazil- ian middle class, meriting a lengthy quotation:
The guy has creativity, but...the middle class in this country is being squeezed year after year and its ability to generate income and consump- tion has been reduced to an extent never before seen here. Taxes, interest rates, impunity in the government, the lack of an efficient health-care sys- tem, excessive embezzlements, the manipulations of the media, the absurd protectionism of the worker’s statutes [leis trabalhistas], and so forth, only managed to destroy the vitality of those who still held out any hope for this country (namely, the middle class). How else can the middle class... mobilize if not through public demonstrations and constant appeals for justice? ...Please, Mr. Gonzaga, be more attentive to the possibility that you might offend one who gives his blood for this land, ...who works, sometimes 12 to 14 hrs a day to pay for decent schooling for his children (as if he had not already paid for this in taxes), to stay employed despite being over 40, etc. Have more respect for those who have lost someone (middle class or not) to the violence so in vogue these days (what hap- pened to the security that we pay for with our taxes?). I myself had the sad luck to have to bury the daughter of a friend of mine who was a victim of rape and assassination.32
Clearly this blogger was unable to distance himself enough from the topic to appreciate Gonzaga’s irony and hence understandably seems to have missed the point of the song. His are important concerns that give a broader picture of the contexts of inequality into which music, vio- lence, social movements, and public policy are thrust in Brazil. I heard similar concerns during a visit to Mosh recording studios in São Paulo in 2006. The composer/arranger/producer Marco Pontes Caixote, for example, complained to me of rising taxes on the middle class, while he has to turn to private schooling to assure a good education for his chil- dren, and to private health care, while protection against violence re- mains a persistent concern.
Max Gonzaga’s song “Middle Class” is significant, therefore, not be- cause it is harnessed to a social movement seeking greater equality and basic citizens’ rights, but because it speaks to a fundamental problem
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 205
blocking the transformation of civil society in Brazil: on the one hand, many in the middle classes see themselves as living in a different coun- try from the rural farmworker or from “the periphery”—which some hope would just “explode”; on the other, social programs seeking to ele- vate the poor into the middle sectors are not supported by a sufficient amount of economic growth, and high taxation threatens the middle- class consumer-citizen lifestyle. This musical example is also significant for the aesthetic and media context in which it was presented. Not pe- ripheral, or marginal, MPB and the Festival Cultura are mainstream, and the sound of Gonzaga’s song is the kind of smooth pop that perhaps Pro- fessor Lorenzi sought for the first MST album in order to conquer the middle-class public. Yet contemporary singer-songwriters like Gonzaga (or Lenine and Lula Queiroga), who have been influenced by the great festival musicians of the 1960s and 70s (Chico Buarque, Gal Costa, Gilberto Gil, Caetano Veloso, Tom Zé, Os Mutantes, among others), no longer have a dictatorship to criticize, or a countercultural leftist student audience. Instead, they are stuck between violence and the rising cost of a secure, stable middle-class lifestyle, and between consumption and tax- ation. Chico Buarque himself ruffled a few feathers in a recent interview for the newspaper Folha de São Paulo when he made the following obser- vations: “The fear of violence in the middle class turns into a rejection not only of the so-called marginal individual, but of the poor in general, of the guy who has an old car, of the mulato, the one who is poorly dressed. To be reactionary became the popular tone to take” (quoted in Silva 2006). Max Gonzaga’s “Middle Class” is unusual in its destabilizing of the audiotopic “refuge” of MPB, described by Maria Rita Kehl as a coun- try to which one has the right to exile and given sonic form in Lenine’s and Queiroga’s “Under the Same Sky.” It reveals that audiotopia to be fragile, threatened especially by rising violence and persistent social in- equality. In the following section I briefly explore how the state has en- gaged the problems of citizenship, violence, social class, and the nation.
MinC: The State massaging the national cultural body
“Either Brazil does away with violence, or violence will do away with Brazil,” declared Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil at his inaugural ad- dress in Brasília on January 2, 2003. “We must complete the construc- tion of this nation, include the excluded groups, reduce the inequalities that torment us.” He continued:
Otherwise we will not be able to keep sending a message to the world of a nation which set the highest ideal that a collectivity can possibly set: the ideal of living side by side in tolerance, an ideal in which a wide array of beings and languages coexist amid differences and even contradictions.
206 : Frederick Moehn
The role of culture in this process...is not merely tactical or strategic—it is central: to objectively contribute to overcoming social inequalities, all the while focusing on the full realization of human potentials. (Gil 2003a, 42)
As might be expected of the state, questions of violence, inequality, differ- ence, and cultural expression are of critical importance in the manage- ment of national identity, development, and Brazil’s image in the global community. The Ministry of Culture (MinC) states that its activities are based on three interwoven dimensions: “culture as a symbol factory, cul- ture as a right and as citizenship, and culture as part of the economy” (Gil 2003b, 8). It is noteworthy that Gil speaks of completing the construction of the nation, consistent both with development-speak and with mod- ernist Brazilian identity discourse wherein, as mentioned above, the process of cultural mixture is understood as central and also incomplete.
Gilberto Gil’s remarkable career took off with his participation in the Tropicália movement of the late 1960s. When Lula appointed Gil minis- ter of culture late in 2002 the international press was abuzz. A world music star once imprisoned and exiled by the military and now directing the cultural policy of the first socialist government in this “developing” country thought to be the world’s eighth largest economy is newsworthy. In his role as minister Gil has traveled widely to publicize his “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizenship” program. This so- phisticated and ambitious cultural policy seeks as its partners “cultural agents, artists, teachers, and social activists who not only see culture as artistic languages [sic], but [who] also realize that it shapes rights, behav- iors, and economics” (Ferreira 2003, 11). It emphasizes working with al- ready existing social actors, organizations, and mechanisms, and it cites critical geographer Milton Santos, who has argued that utopia should be founded on “what already exists as an embryo, which thus holds the po- tential of being realized” (as paraphrased in Ferreira 2003, 11), recalling Josh Kun’s use of the concept of heterotopia. The program is consistent with an administration that has a social agenda but that is also respon- sive to the market and to the global economic and political landscape. In the words of the MinC’s executive secretary Juca Ferreira, it is intended to encourage and enable “a large scale convergence of low-income groups with that other portion of society that has kept its distance due to a lack of security...and that today enjoys greater access to the uni- versity, services, and cultural goods” (Ferreira 2003, 11). The minister seeks to plan a Brazil, he says, that will be integrated by the circulation of merchandise and values, by symbolic production, by the transit of popular culture through mass markets, and by stimulating a creative di- alogue between local and foreign cultures. Through spurring “real and human exchanges between Brazilian people,” the program will pave the way, Secretary Ferreira says, “to drawing together the various Brazils” (Ferreira 2003, 11).
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 207
Here I will only make brief mention of the Culture Points part of this program. These are spaces that should stimulate dialogue between civil society and the state following, in part, Jürgen Habermas’s conception of the public sphere (1989 [1962]), and “bring together key players to link up and drive community-based actions” (Gil 2003a, 42). Gil de- scribes the culture points as “anthropological do-ins” that massage “vital points that have been momentarily left aside or dormant in the coun- try’s cultural body” (2003a, 42). Financial support, computer and other digital equipment, free open-source software to aid in producing music, video, etc., are among the items provided through the program to help develop existing grassroots and other cultural agents and organizations. The culture points should also be connected with each other, especially via the Internet, suggesting an incorporation of the latest technologies of communication into a long-standing modernist (and perhaps origi- nally positivist) corporeal trope of the nation—that is, the country’s “cultural body.” Thus far, the monitoring of the initiative is incipient; the MinC’s own Web site, moreover, provides little information about spe- cific culture points.
One already existing community-based and music-centered organiza- tion that is participating in the program is the Organized Brazilian Hip Hop Movement (MHHOB) which, according to Lamartine Silva, one of the movement’s coordinators, has a presence in sixteen different states. Silva reports that the public programs of digital inclusion, part of the Ministry’s plan, “give peripheral youths access to other technologies be- sides weapons” (quoted in Pimentel 2005a). Silva is responsible for a cul- ture point in São Luís do Maranhão in the Northeast. He describes what he sees as a new kind of politics that echo the emerging participatory publics already pioneered by Worker’s Party municipal governments (see, e.g., Avritzer 2002): “Until today, in order to do anything at all with the federal government in the sphere of culture, you had to pass through the state government. These days, I was surprised to find a former sec- retary of culture from Maranhão state seeking me out to borrow my Cul- ture Point proposal. ...Previously the guy wouldn’t even talk to me” (Pimentel 2005a).
The Piaui Hip Hop Association (Associação Piauiense de Hip Hop), also part of the MHHOB, is another example of a culture point estab- lished where a grassroots organization had already shown initiative. The center began to take shape in an old building belonging to the Secretary of Education of the state government but abandoned for ten years. Youths from the hip-hop movement occupied the building until they could get official permission to stay there. Rap and other music groups use the re- hearsal space and recording studio at the center. The Bank of Brazil promised forty recycled computers. The Ministry of Education intends to provide satellite Internet connection. Also supporting the site are the
208 : Frederick Moehn
U.S.-based Kellogg Foundation, the NGO FASE (Federation of Social and Educational Assistance Organizations, which is itself supported by the Rio de Janeiro–based activist musical group O Rappa), and the students of a local school who are associated with the international group SIFE (Students in Free Enterprise). The Ministry of Labor, which is working jointly with the MinC on the culture points project, has reportedly pro- vided eighty-five work stipends for youths that the organization helps. The French NGO Acajuyê also provides materials and has sponsored exchange programs, bringing Brazilian youths to France (Pimentel 2005b).
This list of positive dialogues traversing various sectors of civil society is, I would note, reported on the Ministry of Culture’s own Web site. Thus far little public critique has emerged of the culture points program (the comments I have heard in casual conversations with Brazilian musicians are skeptical). One complaint I found pertains to delays of several months in the transfer of the promised stipends to certain MHHOB culture points. According to Secretary Célio Turino of the MinC, it is a bureau- cratic delay stemming from the fact that the stipends actually come from the Ministry of Labor, and the two ministries are working toward sort- ing it out.33 A blogger on the official Culture Points Weblog, “Conversê,” also noted that someone from the Pensarte cultural think tank in São Paulo described the culture points as “weak, without content, organized by people of low cultural level” (a derisive way of referring to Brazilians who have little formal education), and “just for show” (pra inglês ver).”34 The jury is still out, then, on how well the culture points massage the public sphere, and what kind of effect the program will have on citizen- ship in Brazil, especially now that Lula has won reelection.
Conclusions: The identity work of cosmopolitical citizenship
I have sought to present a set of examples from different perspectives in which discourses about music as well as musical practices are understood as traversing a “space” in between radically different Brazils, one that is characterized in part by a disjuncture between postdictatorship democ- ratization processes and the unequal realization of the civil and social components of citizenship in the face of durable forces of inequality and rising violence. I have tried also to explore on a limited scale how spe- cific sounds are taken to represent different Brazils, and how “rhythm” and drumming have a privileged place in certain re-imaginings of citi- zenship. Detailed ethnographic research and musical analysis can illu- minate more fully the relationships between discourses and musical practices in a given setting, but my aim here has been to highlight, on the one hand, how central music is to discussions of themes and problems
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 209
that bear on citizenship and social class in a sort of audiotopic space, and, on the other, to emphasize how ambiguous and unstable this space is.
Some of the recent literature on so-called cultural citizenship under- stands rights associated with cultural practices and identity as an impor- tant fourth component not envisioned by Thomas H. Marshall. This literature tends to focus on the recognition of alternative or oppressed social identities within a polity, and in many ways it parallels the rise of theories of multiculturalism.35 It emerged in a context in which scholars were arguing that the complexity of postindustrial society rendered class divisions less important than identity politics. The new social movements that organized around issues like the environment, gay rights, or democ- ratization were also interpreted as displacing class-based mobilization. In the cases explored here, however, questions of collective identity and cultural expression are very much about “citizenship and social class,” to evoke Marshall. The examples of CUFA and the MST suggest that it is not so much a question of whether class or identity (as we explored it through music) is more important in new social movements; rather, we see new ways in which class is tied to other aspects of the group experi- ence of citizenship, such as race, place, gender, violence, aesthetic pref- erences, and development. Max Gonzaga’s song “Middle Class” shows an alternative class perspective on some of the same problems that preoc- cupy Nega Gizza of CUFA, or Zé Pinto of the MST. However, that per- spective does not represent a social movement identity—at least not yet. It has the potential, perhaps, to become a “post-citizenship movement” in which participants who already enjoy most or all of the normal rights of citizens have established channels for mobilizing and putting pressure on political decision makers (Jasper 1997). Some, like economist Waldir Quadros, fear that extreme conservative forces could exploit such poten- tial. It seems vitally important, therefore, to play close attention to how relationships between culture, identity, and citizenship change inflections across class lines, rather than seeing these as distinct realms of experi- ence and practice. Moreover, as an analytical category “class” seems most often to be evoked in the Latin American context in association with the labor or subaltern sectors. Relatively few studies take the cultural expres- sions and preoccupations of the Latin American middle class—that “rather gelatinous and opaque sector,” as Altamiro Borges refers to it (2006)—as their object.
The MinC’s Culture Points initiative demonstrates, on the other hand, that state policies may traffic in some of the same discursive currency permeating the identity politics of social movements, pop music, or even of a disillusioned middle class. Francesca Polletta and James M. Jasper observe that new social movement scholars have inadvertently turned collective identity into “a kind of residual category” that describes what happens “outside structures, outside the state, outside rational action”
210 : Frederick Moehn
(2001, 285). Research on identity and social movements, they argue, should allow “for a number of different relationships between cultural and discursive practices on the one hand, and legal, political, economic, and social structures on the other” (285). The collection of examples I briefly explored here support Polletta and Jasper’s argument that the analytical challenge is to “identify the circumstances in which different relations between interest and identity, strategy and identity, and politics and identity operate, circumstances that include cultural processes as well as structural ones” (285).
Engin Isin and Patricia Wood offer a useful framework for theorizing the role that culture and identity play in contemporary conceptualiza- tions of citizenship by viewing the latter as both a bundle of rights and duties (civil, political, and social), as well as a set of practices (cultural, symbolic, and economic) that define an individual’s membership in a polity (1999, 4). Citizenship is thus not simply a legal or entirely a soci- ological concept, but a relationship between the two, a relationship be- tween status and practice (4). Music, in the cases described above, can be seen as a set of cultural, symbolic, and economic practices that engage, negotiate, and interrogate this relationship and the attendant questions of status. Viewed thus, the notion of cultural citizenship becomes more than simply about rights to produce and consume symbolic goods and services; it refers to the identity work required of “active producers of meaning and representation and knowledgeable consumers under ad- vanced capitalism” (Isin and Wood 1999, 152).
I began this essay with the two Brazils in Carnegie Hall, New York, and throughout I have employed Josh Kun’s concept of audiotopias, a neologism he coined in reference to music and the politics of difference in the United States. To close I want to bring my native country back into the discussion as a nation where social stratification is on the rise, and which has its own dynamics of violence. Economist Paul Krugman, for example, reports that the gap between the rich and the middle class in the United States is “as wide now as it was in the 1920s, when the po- litical coalition that would eventually become the New Deal was taking shape” (2007). In his January 2003 inaugural address Minister Gil asked what message Brazil can send to the world in a time when “fierce dis- courses and banners of war are being raised across the globe” (2003a, 43). This was eight months before the Brazilian diplomat Sergio Vieira de Mello, the UN Special Representative in Iraq, was killed in the Canal Hotel bombing in Baghdad on August 19, 2003.
Four years later, my government is preparing for a surge in troops in Baghdad, where today, January 16, seventy people were killed outside a university in so-called sectarian violence. In Los Angeles, on the same day, members of a Latino gang were, police alleged, “looking for a black
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 211
person, any black person, to shoot”; they found 14-year-old Cheryl Green chatting with friends and shot her dead (Archibold 2006). Can Brazil, a country also struggling with problems of violence and inequal- ity, set a global example of “opposites living side by side,” in Gil’s words, of the tolerance of differences? That is obviously not a question I can answer, but posing it is important to the urgent task of bringing this dis- cussion into a larger frame of reference where musical audiotopias in- tersect with global dynamics of difference, identity, class, violence, and civil society.
Acknowledgments
I presented earlier versions of the essay at the 2004 Society for Ethnomu- sicology annual conference; at Stony Brook Manhattan’s 2005 Inequali- ties Workshop; and at Princeton University’s Program in Latin American Studies in 2005. I thank my interlocutors on these occasions as well as the anonymous reviewers of the essay for their feedback. Thanks are also due to Cláudio Gonçalves Couto, Albert Fishlow, Charles Kirschbaum, Eric Herschberg, Jason Stanyek, and David Treece for their readings. I am also grateful to Nino Chapa Preta and Nega Gizza of CUFA, Max Gonzaga, and Lenine, among others in Brazil, for their help in this re- search. Any shortcomings herein are entirely my own responsibility.
Notes
1. From Lenine’s and Lula Queiroga’s song “Sob o mesmo céu,” dis- cussed below.
2. One corporate foundation called BRASIS (the Portuguese plural for Brazil), for example, states as its aim “to insert the greatest number of Brazilians into the map of citizenship, reducing the distances be- tween the different social realities which continue to constitute many Brazils within our country.” “Novos Brasis,” Insituto Telemar (http:// www.institutotelemar.org.br/novosbrasisresultado.asp), accessed Oc- tober 4, 2004.
3. The idea of the “space in between” is originally Silviano Santiago’s (2001 [1973]), although his meaning is somewhat different as it fo- cuses on the postcolonial problem of imitation versus originality and related dynamics as they play out in Latin American literature and culture. Both Santiago’s usage, however, and the space in between the two Brazils I am describing here are intertwined with modernist ideologies of the nation and development.
212 : Frederick Moehn
4.	Although	the	Old	Republic	(1889 – 1930)	granted	citizenship	only	to the very elite, under populist dictator Getúlio Vargas (1930–1945) the social component of citizenship was greatly expanded. Yet this was done in a highly controlled, statist, and corporatist top-down manner, and precisely during a period when political and civil rights were reduced. Political rights were expanded after 1945 and voting rights in fact saw their greatest expansion under the military dicta- torships of the 60s and 70s, when civil rights were heavily curtailed and elections and political parties highly controlled. Finally, today, with democracy seemingly firmly in place, many civil rights—which formed the foundation of Marshall’s sequence—remain inaccessi- ble to the majority of the population (Carvalho 2001, 219–20).
5. Sources:InstitutodePesquisaEconômicaAplicada(IPEA);Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE); World Bank; and U.S. Census Bureau (2005 gini for the United States is estimated). Class in Brazil is typically categorized in five gradients (sometimes labeled A through E). Economist Waldir Quadros, for example, delineates the following income levels: upper middle class (family income above R$ 5,000 [~US$2,300]), “middle middle class” (R$2,500 to R$5,000 [~$1,200–$2,300]) and lower middle class (R$1,000 to R$2,500 [~$450–$1,200]). Below these are the working class (family income from R$500 to R$1,000 [~$230–$450]), “the poor” (less than R$500 [~$230]) and “the indigent” (Sugimoto 2004).
6. See Lago 2002 in this journal for a detailed analysis of the Brazilian pieces that Milhaud draws upon in his Le Boeuf sur le Toit, composed in 1919.
7. TheRhythmicUprisingdocumentaryprojectiscoordinatedbyAmer- ican Benjamin Watkins. It highlights four performing arts groups, of which one is a female drum troupe, one is a capoeira group, another is a children’s circus, and the last is a youth theater group. The project Web site is http://www.rhythmicuprising.org. Rhythm of Hope was founded by American Phillip Wagner, a former IT pro- fessional who is also associated with Benjamin Watkins’ Rhythmic Uprising project. http://www.rhythmofhope.org.
8. The “listing” of seemingly incongruous aspects of national life is a fairly common practice in MPB (música popular brasileira) song lyrics. A classic example from the Tropicália era would be “Geleia Geral” (“General Jelly,” 1968) by Gilberto Gil.
9. By no means do I mean to draw a political parallel between the Vargas era and the Lula administration, or even between Barroso and Lenine/Quiroga. Lenine’s music, for example, is not particu- larly nationalist (although it does often celebrate mixture, miscegena- tion, and cultural heterogeneity).
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 213
10. Central Única das Favelas could also be translated as “United Favela Center.” I have chosen “Federation” because it more closely matches the nature of the organization, whose name was perhaps inspired by the United Labor Federation (Central Única dos Trabalhadores, or CUT).
11. CentralÚnicadasFavelas(CUFA)homepage(http://www.cufa.com .br/oquee.asp#), accessed October 15, 2005.
12. José Sarney from the state of Maranhão, was the first vice president of Brazil after redemocratization in 1985, immediately assuming the position of president when Tancredo Neves died before taking office. Sarney, who had been associated with the military-controlled political party ARENA, attempted but ultimately failed to control inflation with his Cruzado Plan. More recently he has been a senator. Antônio Carlos Magalhães, known as ACM, was also associated with the mili- tary dictatorship and was behind the 1964 coup d’état. He was a three- term governor of the state of Bahia, and a two-term federal senator; a very powerful politician widely considered to be entrenched in cli- entilist circles of money and power, but who also enjoyed popularity in his home state as a charismatic leader. Thousands attended ACM’s funeral in Bahia in July 2007.
13. Zumbi was an African-Brazilian born on the runaway slave colony (quilombo) Palmares in the middle of the seventeenth century and who led the colony in battle against the colonial forces. It took years for the Brazilian army to destroy Palmares in 1694. Zumbi was be- headed in 1695 and is today a national icon of the struggle of blacks in Brazil.
14. MST English Web site, main page (http://www.mstbrazil.org/index .html), accessed October 28, 2004.
15. In practice, the ambiguity of this constitutional article has often al- lowed landowners to interpret it to their own benefit (see Branford and Rocha 2002, 59).
16. “1984–2004: MST 20 Anos de Lutas, Conquistas e Dignidade!” MST Web Site, June 24, 2004 (http://www.mst.org.br/historico/historia .htm), accessed October 20, 2004.
17. Professor Else Vieira’s Landless Voices Web-based archive focused on the MST is a truly impressive research project and resource (http:// www.landless-voices.org). I am grateful to her and Malcolm McNee for sharing their work with me.
18. This sonic reference to the nueva canción genre may also evidence a renewed burgeoning of pan-Latin American social awareness spurred in part by post-neoliberal governments in the region such as that of Hugo Chavez in Venezuela. Chavez supported the Rio de Janeiro samba school Vila Isabel in 2006 with their theme, “Soy loco por ti
214 : Frederick Moehn
América,” which ended up taking the winning prize in Carnival, al- though not without controversy. (Thanks to Jason Stanyek for point- ing this out to me.)
19. A baixada is a lowland, hollow, or slope, but I translated it here as “way” to communicate the sense of a dangerous neighborhood, or passage.
20. Although 127 military police and nineteen higher-ranking officers went on trial in June 2002, none of the police involved in the mas- sacre has been imprisoned. (see Amnesty International Press Release: “Brazil: The Eldorado dos Carajás massacre 10 years on,” April 18, 2006).
21. Dr. Drauzio Varella’s book Estação Carandiru (1999) described his experience as a physician who made regular visits to the prison. The 2004 film Carandiru was a vivid dramatization of this book and the massacre.
22. See “Brazil: Corumbiara and Eldorado de Carajás: Rural violence, police brutality and impunity,” January 1, 1998, http://web.amnesty .org/library/index/ENGAMR190011998, accessed June 13, 2006.
23. Marote, from São Paulo, was also one of the producers of the first Brazilian hip-hop album, Hip Hop Cultura de Rua, (Hip Hop Street Culture, 1988).
24. From the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). 25. “Classe média no sufoco” (Revista Época–Edição 395–14/12/2005). 26. Ibid.Notethattheauthorscitedhereusethesingular“middleclass,”
while I have been using the plural “middle classes” in most instances. For a discussion of the two options as they pertain to analysis see O’Dougherty 2002, 9.
27. Festival announcement, “A Nova Música do Brasil–TV Cultura,” at http://www.brasilcultura.com.br/conteudo.php?menu=85&id=42 &sub=458, accessed June 16, 2006.
28. Revista e no. 101, “Música,” http://www.sescsp.org.br/sesc/revistas/ revistas_link.cfm?Edicao_Id=227&Artigo_ID=3540&IDCategoria =3864&reftype=2, accessed June 17, 2006.
29. Bloggers “StRaNgE,” Nov. 14, 2005, and “alltrillian,” Nov. 17, 2005, respectively, on http://www.radarpop.com.br.
30. Ricardo Antônio Lucas Camargo, January 16, 2006, on http:// tuliovianna.org.
31. Ludmila Ribeiro, “Nem verso, nem prosa: Críticas rasas e pouca poesia na 3a eliminatória do Festival Cultura,” http://www.jornalismo cultural.com.br/musica/cultura3.htm. As this reporter went on to note, rap was, in fact, represented at the festival, but only with the special guest Thaíde who stood out as representatitve of hip-hop “and a whole generation of young musicians also absent from the festival. ...He reinforced the nostalgia that hovers over this festival
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 215
of 2005, really searching for a bygone era that will never return, rap- ping the classic protest songs of the [19]60s and 70s, ‘Roda Viva’ and ‘Caminhando,’ [but] with the liberty for much more up-to-date extemporizing.”
32. Blogger “Abrão,” January 18, 2006, on http://www.radarpop.com.br. 33. “A cultura vive do que tece.” Revista A Rede, May 15, 2006. 34. Blogger ricardo.ruiz, “Esses pontos de cultura são fracos,” referring
to an interview with Maria Stella Leite of the Pensarte Institute that he read in the Viração Magazine. Blog posted on http://converse.org .br/, June 26, 2006.
35. In the cultural citizenship literature it remains unclear what duties would correspond to identity rights. (see, e.g., Miller 2001; Ong 1996; Pakulski 1997; Rosaldo 1999; Stevenson 2003; and Turner 2001) Theoretical efforts to work around this issue have been awkward because there is a fundamental tension between communalist and universalist conceptions of citizenship on the one hand, and the particularist nature of identity rights on the other.
Bibliographic References
Andrade, Mário de 1962 [1928]	Ensaio sobre a música brasileira. São Paulo: Martins
Editora. Archibold, Randal C.
2007	“Racial Hate Feeds a Gang War’s Senseless Killing.” New York Times, January 17.
Avritzer, Leonardo 2002	Democracy and the Public Space in Latin America. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. Barbosa, Marco Antônio
n.d.	Review of Nega Gizza’s CD Na humildade. Clique music Web site: http://cliquemusic.uol.com.br/artistas/artistas .asp?Status=DISCO&Nu_Disco=10414
Borges, Altamiro 2006	“As oscilações da classe média.” Adital: Notícias da América
Latina e Caribe, May 29. http://www.adital.com.br/site/
noticia.asp?lang=PT&cod=22744, accessed June 23, 2006. Branford, Sue and Jan Rocha
2002	Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Caldeira, Teresa P. R., and James Holston 1999	“Democracy and Violence in Brazil.” Comparative Study of
Society and History 41 (4): 691–729.
216 : Frederick Moehn
Carvalho, José Murilo de 2001	Cidadania no Brasil: O longo caminho. Río de Janeiro: Civi-
lizaão Brasileira. “Classe média no sufoco” Revista Época Edição 395, Decem- ber 14, 2005.
Cunha, Euclides da 1944 [1902]	Rebellion in The Backlands. Translated and with an
Introduction by Samuel Putnam. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. DaMatta, Roberto A.
1995 [1978]	For an Anthropology of the Brazilian Tradition; or “A Virtude está no Meio.” In The Brazilian Puzzle: Culture on the Borderlands of the Western World, edited by D. J. Hess and R. A. DaMatta, 270–91. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ferreira, Juca 2003	Opportunities to Voice, to Communicate, and to Live. In
“Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizen- ship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural policy press release, pp. 10–11.
Gil, Gilberto 2003a	Experimentation,	Memor y,	and	Invention	(Inaugural	Ad-
dress delivered by Minister Gilberto Gil, January 2, 2003). In “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citi- zenship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural policy press release, pp. 40–43.
2003b What Happens When You Set a Bird Free? In “Living Culture: National Culture, Education and Citizenship Pro- gram,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employ- ment cultural policy press release, pp. 8–9.
Habermas, Jürgen 1989 [1962]	The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An
Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society. Boston: MIT Press. Isin, Engin and Patricia Wood
1999	Citizenship and Identity. Thousand Oaks: Sage. Jasper, James M.
1997	The Art of Moral Protest: Culture, Biography, and Creativity in Social Movements. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
Kehl, Maria Rita 2002	Chico Buarque. In Música Popular Brasileira Hoje, edited by
Artur Nestrovski, 60–62. São Paulo: Publifolha.
Kun, Josh 2005	Audiotopia: Music, Race, and America. Los Angeles: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 217
Krugman, Paul 2007	“Distract and Disenfranchise.” New York Times, April 2.
Lago, Manoel Aranha Correa do 2002	“Brazilian Sources in Milhaud’s Le Boeuf sur le Toit: A Dis-
cussion and a Musical Analysis.” Latin American Music Re-
view 23 (1): 1–59. Marshall, Thomas H.
“Citizenship and Social Class.” In Class, Citizenship, and So- cial Development. By T. H. Marshall, with an Introduction by S. M. Lipset, 65–122. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
McNee, Malcolm 2003	The Arts in Movement: Cultural Politics and Production
in Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST). Ph.D. diss., University of Minnesota.
Miller, Toby 2001	“Introducing. . .Cultural Citizenship.” Social Text 19 (4): 1– 5.
Nestrovski, Artur, ed. 2002	Música Popular Brasileira Hoje. São Paulo: Publifolha.
O’Dougherty, Maureen 2002	Consumption Intensified: The Politics of Middle-Class Daily Life
in Brazil. Durham: Duke University Press.
Ong, Aihwa 1996	“Cultural Citizenship as Subject-Making: Immigrants Ne-
gotiate Racial and Cultural Boundaries and United States.” Current Anthropology 37 (5): 737–62.
Pakulski, Jan 1997	“Cultural Citizenship.” Citizenship Studies 1 (1): 73–86.
Pardue, Derek 2004	“Putting Mano to Music: The Mediation of Race in Brazil-
ian Rap.” Ethnomusicology Forum 13 (2): 253–86. Pimentel, Spensy
2005	“Cultura digital é aliada no combate à violência, avaliam jovens do Hip Hop.” Enviado especial da Radiobrás, July 28, 2005. “Associação Piauiense de Hip Hop é um dos mais de 200 Pontos de Cultura.” Agência Brasil, enviado especial, July 28, 2005.
Pochmann, Márcio, et al 2005	Classe media: Desenvolvimento e crise. São Paulo: Cortez.
Polletta, Francesca, and James M. Jasper 2001	“Collective Identity and Social Movements.” Annual Review
of Sociology 27: 283–305.
218 : Frederick Moehn
Reardon, Christopher 2005	“The New Favela Beat.” Ford Foundation Report Spring–
Summer 2005. Ribeiro, Ludmila
2005	“Nem verso, nem prosa: Críticas rasas e pouca poesia na 3a eliminatória do Festival Cultura.” Jornalismo Cultural, Aug. 17, http://www.jornalismocultural.com.br/
Rohter, Larry 2004	“The Two Brazils Combine for a Night at Carnegie Hall.”
New York Times, September 25. Rosaldo, Renato
1999	“Cultural Citizenship, Inequality, and Multiculturalism.” In Race, Identity, and Citizenship, edited by R. D. Torres et al., 253–61. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Santiago, Silviano 2001 [1973]	“Latin American Discourse: the Space In-Between.”
In The Space In-Between: Essays on Latin American Culture, by S. Santiago, edited by A. L. Gazzola, 25–38. Durham: Duke University Press.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy 1992	Death without Weeping: the Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil.
Los Angeles: University Of California Press. Silva, Fernando de Barros e.
2006	“Chico diz que vota em Lula de novo.” Folha Online, May 6. Stevenson, Nick
2003	Cultural Citizenship, Cosmopolitan Questions. Maidenhead, Berkshire: Open University Press.
Sugimoto, Luiz 2004	“A classe média está com raiva.” Jornal da Unicamp 251,
May 10–16. Tavares, Júlio César
n.d.	“Uma Proposta para os candidatos à prefeitura da cidade do Rio de Janeiro.” CUFA.com.br (website for the Cen- tral Única das Favelas), (http://www.cufa.com.br/colunas/ juliocesarprop.asp) (accessed October 28, 2004).
Turino, Célio 2003	Unearthing a Deep Brazil. In “Living Culture: National
Culture, Education and Citizenship Program,” Ministry of Culture/Ministry of Labor and Employment cultural pol- icy press release, pp. 14–18.
Turner, Bryan S. 2001	“Outline of the General Theory of Cultural Citizenship.”
In, Culture and Citizenship, edited by Nick Stevenson, 11–32. London: Sage.
Music, Citizenship, and Violence in Postdictatorship Brazil : 219
Veloso, Mariza, and Angélica Madeira 2000	Leituras Brasileiras: Itinerários no pensamento social e na liter-
atura. São Paulo: Paz e Terra. Ventura, Zuenir
1994	Cidade Partida. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras. Vieira, Else R. P.
Forthcoming	“About the Poetry and Music of the Sem-Terra,” in
The MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra do Brasil): Introductory Essays, edited by Else R. P. Vieira. Lon- don: Zoilus Press.
Waiselfisz, Júlio Jácobo et al. 2004	Mapa da violência IV: Os jovens do Brasil. UNESCO, Instituto
Ayrton Senna, Ministério da Justica/SEDH. Yúdice, George
1999	“The	Privatization	of	Culture.”	Social	Text	17	(2):	17 – 34. 2003	Parlaying Culture into Social Justice. In The Expediency of Culture, by G. Yúdice, 133–59. Durham: Duke University
Press.
