2003
Sociology
Journal of Agrarian Change
Producing Community: The MST and Land Reform Settlements in Brazil
WENDY WOLFORD

This paper analyses the attempt to create an ‘imagined community’ among members of the MST (Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, Movement of Rural Landless Workers) as a way of maintaining high levels of participation. As one of the most active rural movements in Brazilian history, MST owes much of its success to high levels of involvement among members who have already achieved their initial goal of access to land. Move- ment leaders and activists encourage participation by creating a community through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. The lived experiences of community differ from the imaginings, however, and in this paper I show how MST members negotiate the movement’s expression of community in ways that reflect historical experiences of economy and society. Ultimately, MST’s imagined community is effective because the movement has established itself as a successful mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
Keywords: land occupations, land reform, social movements, Brazil INTRODUCTION
Established in 1984, the MST is now ‘the most active organization in the Brazilian countryside’ (Navarro 2000: 37). At the movement’s first National Congress in 1985, members decided on two main goals. MST would fight for an agrarian reform that distributed land to those who would work it, and for the develop- ment of a just, fraternal society (Rocha and Branford 2002; Fernandes 1999). In the years since then, the movement has organized over 230,000 land occupations and overseen the creation of approximately 1200 agrarian reform settlements.1 Movement efforts have been critical in pushing through legislation geared towards land redistribution and the promotion of small family farming. Partly as a result
Wendy Wolford, Department of Geography, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 203 Saunders Hall, Campus Box 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu The research for this paper was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. The author would like to thank
Henry Bernstein for his helpful comments and advice. 1	For updated numbers and information about MST’s activities, see the movement’s own web page at: www.mst.org.br. Also see a web site on MST maintained in the United States by a group called Friends of MST at: www.mstbrazil.org/index.html.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Henry Bernstein and Terence J. Byres 2003.
of these successes, MST’s membership has increased from several hundred in 1984 to over one million today.
The vast majority of these members are not, in fact, ‘sem terra’ (landless) any more – they are people who have won access to land through the movement and now could be more accurately described as ‘com terra’ (landed). These com terra are very important to the maintenance of movement activities because they typic- ally have better access to resources than sem terra and can support ongoing land occupations and political battles. Maintaining a high level of participation and commitment among members who have already won access to land is therefore crucial to MST’s continued growth and impact. But most social movements find it difficult to generate such ongoing momentum. They often become victims of their own success, particularly when they are invested in the acquisition of an easily identifiable, tangible good such as land (cf. Zamosc 1986). MST members who have satisfied their initial demand for land need to be convinced of a reason to remain active in the movement, or many will cease to participate.
Many of MST’s accomplishments over the past seventeen years can be attrib- uted to its success in convincing members that there is a reason to stay in the movement after they win land. MST leaders and activists have worked hard to create, in Benedict Anderson’s (1983) words, an ‘imagined community’, consti- tuted through ideas and practices and distilled into symbols, slogans and ritual. Embedded in this sense of community are ideological guidelines for interpreting different experiences, events and relationships. In this paper, I describe MST’s efforts to create an ‘imagined community’ of settlers conceived as a class for itself in a system dominated by landed elites. I then briefly examine the experiences of community on two MST settlements, one in southern Brazil and one in northeastern Brazil. These two settlements provide an interesting comparison because of the different occupational histories shared by a majority of MST members in the two places. The settlers in southern Brazil were primarily small family farmers before joining the movement, while the settlers in northeastern Brazil were primarily salaried rural workers. The settlers in both places struggle over their understanding of what community means to them – they struggle inwardly and they struggle with each other. Sometimes the everyday experience of ‘community’ is not very communal at all. Ultimately, I argue that while many elements of MST’s framing are successful, people participate in the movement for reasons that have less to do with the appeal to community and more to do with the movement’s effective positioning as mediator between the settlers and the Brazilian State.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND THE RISE OF MST
MST’s call for agrarian reform is not a new idea in Brazil. Land distribution has been both inequitable and contested since the Portuguese began to settle the new colony in the early 1500s. Because the Portuguese crown was unwilling and unable to colonize Brazil directly, the area’s known territory was divided into 15 captaincies in 1534, and considerable rights over these areas were bequeathed to
Producing Community	501
502	Wendy Wolford
hereditary captains ( Johnson 1987). The captains oversaw land distribution within their territories, and colonists who had connections to the captains were able to obtain large plots of land. Smaller plots of land were also set aside for poor settlers who were convinced to emigrate to Brazil, but the successful captaincies relied on wealthy men who produced export crops on large rural properties. Access to land could also be obtained through the act of squatting (posseiro), which was practised by wealthy and poor colonists alike. In general, however, these two mechanisms of land distribution (patronage and squatting) favoured the wealthy, and this bias is reflected in Brazilian land tenure patterns today (Stein 1985).
Until the 1930s, Brazil’s economy was dependent on the production of a few primary commodities. In the early colonial years, sugarcane dominated, but by the 1670s when competition from Dutch producers in the Antilles lowered demand for Brazilian sugar (Schwartz 1985), new commodities such as gold, rubber, cocoa, dairy and coffee became increasingly important. Sugarcane and coffee were the principal crops in the densely settled areas of the country, the Northeast and the South/Southeast. Produced for export, both crops were grown on large- scale plantations owned by wealthy elites and worked by slaves until the mid- 1800s (Dean 1976; Eisenberg 1974).2 The plantations, which were often richer than the towns, were set up as individual communities, with the owner – the senhor do engenho – at their head, followed by a group of skilled or semi-skilled employees, and surrounded by a mass of unskilled workers. The hierarchical paternalism of sugar and coffee plantations shaped social and economic develop- ment in Brazil and similar communities are still evident in its rural areas today.
In spite of the restrictive conditions keeping indigenous and African slaves at work in the sugar mills, a surprising number of runaway slave communities, called quilombos, were set up in remote areas as refuge communities. The most famous quilombo, called Palmares, was actually a network of settlements that ran throughout 200 square kilometres in the Northeast, an area now known as the State of Alagoas. Palmares existed for almost 100 years until the Brazilian gov- ernment succeeded in destroying the quilombo in 1695, decapitating its leader Zumbi and imprisoning the women and children who were not killed during the military operations (Schwartz 1992). The existence of Palmares, a community based on very different rules than Brazilian society, threatened the colonial rulers and provoked a violent reaction.
When Brazil was granted independence from Portugal in 1822, members of the newly established government debated the issue of land distribution (Viotti da Costa 2000). Access to land was an important subject because Brazil still had considerable territory open for settlement, and distributing property was seen as a way of encouraging immigration. Immigration was increasingly viewed as necessary to supplement the domestic labour force in the event that slavery was
2	Between 1500 and 1850, when the slave trade was finally abolished, over 3.65 million slaves were shipped into Brazil, more than to any other region in the Americas (Skidmore 1999: 17). Historians’ estimates of numbers vary, as it is difficult to produce reliable figures after 1830 when the slave trade (though not slavery) was abolished and Africans were smuggled into the country illegally.
abolished or became prohibitively expensive (Dean 1976). The two most popular proposals for regulating land distribution were market-based (making land avail- able for sale) and government-based (making land available for public distribu- tion) (Viotti da Costa 2000). In 1850, the land issue was resolved with a new land law that theoretically moved land onto the market, although in practice wealthy elites were able to continue the practice of claiming land through possession (Wright 2001). The government and plantation owners agreed to promote immigration by making frontier areas available for colonization, particularly in the southern end of the country.
In 1886, planters from the State of São Paulo organized the Sociedade Pro- motora de Imigração (Society for Promoting Immigration) and the number of immigrants to Brazil increased from 33,000 in 1886 to 132,000 in 1888 (Skidmore 1999: 72–3). Migrants received some private and public subsidization of travel costs, but the conditions they found in Brazil were far from the paradise they were promised. The planters found it difficult to reconceptualize their relation- ship with labour as a voluntary wage contract (Stein 1985; Viotti da Costa 2000), and they worked to frustrate settlers’ desire for land because the plantations were only viable with a steady source of labour. If immigrants were free to settle elsewhere, it was unlikely they would choose to stay on the plantations, and so planters restricted their mobility through debt peonage and intimidation (Dean 1976; Stolcke 1988). In 1902, the Italian government officially prohibited its citizens from accepting subsidies for travel to Brazil, and the Swiss Consul in Brazil was actively investigating several accounts of persecution (Lesser 1999). Descendants of these immigrants, some of whom found their own land, would be among the first members of MST.
By the early 1900s, Brazil’s economy was beginning to diversify as the profits of coffee production were invested in industrialization, particularly in the south- eastern State of São Paulo (Dean 1969). As industrialization increased, govern- ment officials discussed the ‘agrarian problem’. The large-scale properties and plantations in rural Brazil were seen as traditional and backward (Stein 1985), and it was doubted that they could satisfy the growing demand for cheap food from urban workers and employers. The large estates were seen as a barrier to the modernization of both the rural and urban areas. By the 1950s, the call for land redistribution was growing stronger, although the method was debated. Two classic opinions were presented by Ignácio Rangel (1956) and Caio Prado Júnior (1945, 1966). Rangel believed that industrialization would naturally lead to land tenure change and agricultural modernization, while Prado Júnior believed that a State-led socialist reform was necessary for boosting both agricultural production and development. During the 1950s and early 1960s, grassroots organizers with the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), rural trade unions and the Catholic Church, increased their presence in the rural areas and advocated a distributive agrarian reform (Medeiros 1989). In 1954, the PCB included agrarian reform as part of its strategy for carrying out a democratic-bourgeois revolution, and in 1957 formed a national union of peasants and rural workers in São Paulo (the Union of Farmers and Agricultural Workers of Brazil, ULTAB). Throughout
Producing Community	503
504	Wendy Wolford
the 1950s and 1960s, the Communist Party organized rural trade associations in several States, particularly Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Bahia (Maybury-Lewis 1994).3
In 1955, rural sugarcane workers in the northeastern State of Pernambuco founded a society that came to be known as the Peasant Leagues (Ligas Cam- ponesas). The rural workers, led by a plantation-born lawyer, formed their society in protest over their plantation owner’s decision to violate traditional practice and withhold money for a coffin intended for the burial of a worker (Pereira 1997). The Peasant Leagues grew rapidly and their development, combined with the activities of the Communist Party, stirred suspicions that a left-wing revolu- tion was imminent.4 The fear over revolution in the countryside was heightened by then President Goulart’s decision to announce a radical agrarian reform, expro- priating rural properties over 600 hectares without compensation.
In March 1964, the armed forces of Brazil seized power, forcing Goulart into exile and establishing military rule. Once in power, the military adopted an approach to the rural areas that would solve the agrarian problem by redistri- buting land through colonization and modernizing agricultural production. The military believed that it could satisfy the demand for land that was generating unrest in the Northeast and South of the country by moving ‘men without land’ to a ‘land without men’. The plan involved settling 200,000 families in the sparsely populated savannahs of the Centre-West and the Amazon Basin. In this way, the military could also secure the Northwest border of the country through effective possession.5
As the second part of its agrarian reform project, the military government targeted large-scale producers for subsidized modernization.6 The government poured millions of dollars of subsidized credit into the hands of private pro- ducers (Delgado 1985). Rural credit increased five times in real terms between 1968 and 1978 (Goodman et al. 1984: 198). During years of high inflation, such credit carried a negative rate of interest and financed the soybean and wheat boom in the southern and central-west States. Agricultural technology moved
3	When the National Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG) was formed in 1964, replacing ULTAB as an umbrella movement representing rural workers, the Brazilian Communist Party provided some of its most active leaders. Although the military government banned the Communist Party later that year, CONTAG continued to organize rural workers, focusing prim- arily on securing workers’ rights.
4	See Forman (1975) who has an interesting discussion of the Peasant Leagues. 5	The planned colonization projects were largely failures because they did not provide the necessary infrastructure, and basic services such as health and sanitation were never offered. The military managed to create only 43 settlements for 8000 of the 100,000 people expected. The military’s experiment with colonization brought international condemnation because of the difficult conditions experienced by the settlers and because of the environmental damage caused to the Amazon region (Schmink and Wood 1984). 6	According to José de Souza Martins, ‘five months after the coup and some time before the Land Statute was sent to Congress, the North American representative for the Alliance for Progress, Walt Rostow, was in São Paulo speaking animatedly with industrialists about the issue of the internal market. [He emphasized] that the industrialists should take an interest in transforming and modernizing their agriculture’ (Martins 1981: 94).
increasingly towards mechanized planting and threshing and chemical inputs. The use of irrigation equipment, pesticides and fertilizers all expanded produc- tion at an unprecedented rate.
The modernization of agriculture restructured land and labour relationships. Mechanized production reduced the need for workers and, without the money to pay for land of their own, millions of rural workers left for the urban areas (Graziano da Silva 1982). Large farmers out-competed small, traditional ones, making it more difficult for the latter to make a living. Land ownership became more concentrated, with the GINI index of land distribution increasing from 0.731 in 1960 to 0.867 in 1985 (Cardoso 1997). Through selective modernization and the urban migration of rural workers, the military government effectively ‘solved’ the agrarian problem. Agricultural production increased rapidly and Brazilian producers became internationally competitive in several lucrative com- modities, including soy, wheat, orange juice, poultry and cattle/beef (Müller 1989).
During military rule (1964–82), the Catholic Church grew into a force for radical organization and change in the Brazilian countryside. In 1961, the Roman Catholic Church officially decided to focus on land tenure issues in Latin America, publishing a series of educational documents to inform rural workers in Brazil of the biblical statement that ‘the land is a gift of God’. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, the Brazilian episcopate was one of the most progressive religious clergies in the world (Mainwaring 1986). In 1963, the first Ecclesiastical Base Communities (Comunidades Eclesiais de Base – CEBs) were created as a means of enabling communities to hold Sunday service without a priest, and in 1972 the Church formed the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra – CPT) to protect landless workers in the Amazon. By 1975, the CPT had extended its activities to peasants all over Brazil. By 1985, it was estimated that there were over 100,000 CEBs in local communities. Because of their integration into local communities and connection with a wider network of reform-minded activists, the CEBs were an ideal channel for grassroots organization (Houtzager 1997).
In 1982, the military formally withdrew from government. They had stepped into office ‘temporarily’ in 1964 to restore order to the country and had ended up ruling for eighteen years. The gradual end of authoritarian rule was characterized by economic crisis. The Brazilian State was deeply in debt and hyper-inflation threatened even as society clamoured noisily for a piece of the country’s eco- nomic wealth. When José Sarney was inaugurated as president in 1985, he remarked, ‘I have inherited the greatest political crisis in Brazilian history, the largest foreign debt in the world and the greatest internal debt and inflation we have ever had’ (Selcher 1986: 7).
In 1985 MST held its first National Congress. Tracing its roots back to the quilombos and Peasant Leagues, the movement grew out of several different land disputes in southern Brazil during the late 1970s and early 1980s (Fernandes 1999). MST members argued that the military had not only failed to solve the agrarian problem, it had created new ones. MST employed an aggressive method of land occupations, while justifying its actions with an appeal to the Federal
Producing Community	505
506	Wendy Wolford
Constitution, which states that ‘land has a social responsibility to be productive’. Land occupations were organized by activists, many of whom came out of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches. Activists travelled through poor rural and urban areas, informing people about their rights to land and organizing occupations. Once an encampment was set up on occupied land, activists and new members waited for representatives of the government or the landlord (sometimes the same) to visit. Negotiations over expropriated/occupied land were often violent and protracted, but MST won key successes early on that fuelled the movement’s growing momentum.
THE IMAGINED COMMUNITY OF MST
From the very beginning, MST activists have envisioned a struggle that goes well beyond the simple demand for land. This has created some difficulties for the movement because most of those who join it do so as a means to a very definite end. Although members ascribe different meanings to land (Wolford forthcoming a), most join the movement in the hope of incorporation into the government’s agrarian reform programme. Successful members usually express gratitude towards the movement and remember their experiences with pride and even pleasure, but without a compelling reason to continue as sem terra (landless) after receiving land, many would cease to participate regularly in movement events or drop out altogether. MST cannot afford to let this happen, as landed members constitute a valuable source of ideological and material support. Landed members are often asked to provide food for people living in occupation camps, and they even participate in new occupations as a way of adding numerical and emotional strength (Fernandes 1999). Landed members also attend regular public demonstrations that are considered crucial for raising government and public awareness about the plight of landless workers and small family farmers.
MST leaders address this dilemma of participation among successful members by creating an imagined community complete with group norms and expecta- tions that will tie members into the movement. As Benedict Anderson wrote of nationalism, this community of sem terra is imagined because most of its members will never actually meet each other, no matter how many national meetings they attend. In addition, the community is imagined because adherence to MST’s ideological and practical guidelines requires each individual to go well beyond past experiences to imagine a new social, political and economic ideal. Borrowing the language of ‘frames’ from Erving Goffman (1974), Robert Benford and David Snow (2000; see also Snow et al. 1986) have referred to this sort of ideological guidance within movements as the creation of ‘schemata of interpre- tation’ that ascribe meaning to past, present and future events and relationships in order to explain and legitimate movement activity. MST leaders develop frames of community that will close the gap between what they see as the ‘objective conditions of exploitation’ and the subjective interpretation of those conditions as exploitation. Because the frames that MST presents conflict with hegemonic interpretations of reality, the imagined community needs to change
not just the settlers’ economic situation but their cultural and social situations as well.
The main element of MST’s imagined community is its oppositional class character. The movement argues that as small farmers in rural Brazil, the settlers are exploited by a capitalist system whose chief engineers are large landowners, politicians and corporations. The sem terra are landless because others (capitalists, bankers, politicians, etc.) stole, misused and abused property that should belong to society as a whole. Within the dominant system, rural workers have few options: ‘The rural worker justifies an anti-capitalist stance because his only alternative under capitalism is “inevitable proletarianization”’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 92: 6). As an internal MST document argues, quoting Karl Marx: ‘All progress in capitalist agriculture is progress in the art of exploitation, whether of the worker or of the soil’. Participation in MST is presented as an expression of a class for itself: ‘we aren’t fighting against one land-grabber, we are fighting against a class, the land owning elite’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 35). Although the movement has moved away from a dogmatic reliance on Marxist-Leninist theory, a recent anthology of ‘Marxism in Latin America’ cited MST as one of the most important ‘new tendencies’ in the region (Löwy 1999: 63). According to MST’s outline of class conflict in Brazil, the landowning elite is supported ideologically and practically by the Brazilian State. At the movement’s First National Con- gress in 1985, the 1600 delegates present decided to take a stand against the New Republic (1985–9), and MST has rejected every government since on the grounds that the administrations represented ‘a bourgeois state . . . invested with class interest’ (Stedile and Fernandes 1999: 36, 51).
The other side of MST’s class positioning is that within the movement all members are theoretically equal, part of a class in itself. This is deliberately based on the socialist ideal of egalitarianism and embodied in the concept of ‘union’, or unity. In the words of one MST member: ‘è a união que faz a força’ (it is unity that makes us strong)’.7 Leadership in the movement is carefully structured to be as horizontal as possible and all offices are, in principle, occupied temporarily.8 All participants in national-level decision making are selected on a rotating basis or are elected by the members of their communities. Through this ideal of equality, members across the country are encouraged to feel kinship with, and pride in, their unknown but imagined companheiros (comrades).9
Through documents and rituals, MST leaders carefully embed the class nature of the movement’s imagined community in historical structures and experiences. The historical tradition that MST draws upon goes back 500 years to injustices that are depicted as a direct consequence of the way in which Brazil was colonized.10
7	Interview #10, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 8	Movement members at the first meeting in 1984 decided that they did not want a president because it would invest one office and one person with too much power. Six of the most visible MST leaders, however, have been in positions of power since the movement was first formed. 9	As a figure in one of MST’s educational booklets explains: ‘Companheiros! We have to stay to- gether – IN ALL OF BRAZIL, you know how it is! Unity brings Strength’. 10	A popular MST slogan reads: ‘500 Years of Injustice’.
Producing Community	507
508	Wendy Wolford
MST consciously unites time and space by invoking events that took place in different time periods and regions to explain the present reality of Brazil as a whole. In a document prepared for discussion, an MST leader argues: ‘If agrarian reform was originally justified because it was necessary for overcoming feudal relations in the countryside . . . in ‘modern Brazil’ it is justified for even more important reasons. Not only do feudal social relations remain, but [so do] pro- duction relations that are effectively slavery’ (Teixeira 1999: 17). MST activists emphasize their belief that the movement is only the most recent expression of discontent in the rural areas. They invoke Zumbi, the leader of the quilombo Palmares, and the Peasant Leagues to establish a noble line of predecessors. During an MST meeting in the State of Santa Catarina, a theatre piece featured settlers dressed up as participants in past resistance movements, all holding up MST’s flag in symbolic support of their contemporary counterparts. Establish- ing the belief that peasants throughout time have fought and died for causes similar to that of MST plays an important part in the movement’s imagined community. When the government or national media ridicules MST members, calling them vagabonds and bandits, they are reminded that others suffered the same ill treatment. To paraphrase Benedict Anderson, it is through such emo- tional linkages to heroic ancestors that ‘pasts are restored, fellowships are imag- ined and futures dreamed’ (Anderson 1983: 154).
The historical tradition extends globally to include heroes of Marxist-inspired resistance around the world. Posters of Vladimir Lenin and Che Guevera are regularly present at MST meetings, as in the case of this photograph taken during a 1999 meeting in Pernambuco (Plate 1). The large red flag stretched across the stage pictures Che Guevera, Fidel Castro, Rosa Luxembourg and Nelson Mandela, among others. The words framing the flag read: Proletarians of the World Unite.
MST’s imagined community, like most communities, has important rules about who can be included and who cannot. As one older woman on an MST settlement said: ‘We are all together here – you can already see how different someone is who isn’t in the movement’.11 Membership in the movement is ‘elite’ in the sense that theoretically only those who fulfil the appropriate criteria are accepted. The ideal settler is a combination of the traditional peasant and the so- called ‘new man and woman’. The early editions of MST’s monthly newspaper, O Jornal Sem Terra (The Landless Newspaper, or JST), were filled with discussions of the new ‘social citizen’ that MST wished to create, as well as imaginative ways of encouraging settlers to willingly conform to this image. The vices that MST members are warned against are ‘reflexes of a sub-ideology generated by the private ownership of the means of production’. The vices range from ‘individu- alism’ (where one person ‘puts himself above the organization’) to ‘spon- taneity’ and ‘immobility’ (which causes a person to not ‘involve himself with anything’) ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).12 MST activists are encouraged to
11	Interview #19, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 12	The full list of vices includes: personalism, anarchy, complacency, sectarianism or ‘radicalism’, impatience, adventurism and self-sufficiency.
Producing Community	509 Plate 1. Flag displayed at MST meeting, Pernambuco 1999
promote discussion so that people will ‘know the vices [in order] to overcome them’ ( Jornal Sem Terra January 1991: 3).
Most movement leaders are not conscious of promoting an ‘ideal’ settler, but the outlines of what is considered acceptable behaviour are evident in the imagined community’s guidelines for participation. These guidelines are distributed by movement activists who travel regularly throughout the settlements, both to hear from the settlers and to disseminate information from the movement’s headquarters in São Paulo. MST activists provide information, material goods and ideas that have both practical and ideological value. Acceptance of one legitim- ates, and encourages, acceptance of the other. Being a member of MST’s imag- ined community requires some degree of involvement in movement activities, whether through participation or support. Adherence to the behaviour appropri- ate to membership in MST is continually assessed from within. Any individual can be kicked out of the group for violating the rules of personal conduct (although violations would have to be extreme). The practice of peer evaluation is supported by government legislation on the land reform settlements. Section 5, part e, of the Settlement Contract signed by all agrarian reform beneficiaries states that settlers can be kicked off their land if they ‘become disruptive ele- ments [that negatively affect] the development of the workers in the project area due either to poor conduct or inability to adapt to community life’. Sufficient agreement among MST members can result in a settler losing rights to his or her land as well as membership in the movement. During a 1997 demonstration,
510	Wendy Wolford
two supposed MST members were expelled from the movement because they were believed to be spies. This sort of discriminatory membership is an import- ant component of any community, particularly a social movement community. There would be little appeal to sacrificing everything for a movement that any- one could join.
MST’s imagined community is symbolically represented in the movement’s dramatic flag: a deep red, the flag is stamped by an outline of the Brazilian nation. A generic representation of a man and woman are poised at the edge of the outline, his hand holding high a machete to symbolize resistance and struggle. At the movement’s first meeting, members chose this symbol over a straw hat because they wanted to express the movement’s commitment to a better, more progressive Brazilian nation (Rocha and Branford 2002). The flag’s emblem is repeated on T-shirts, baseball caps and posters that can be seen at any MST demonstration and on any settlement.
One of the main methods for actively presenting the frames underlying MST’s community is through what the movement calls ‘mysticism’ (see Schwade 1992). Mysticism is a legacy of Liberation Theology, which relied on charismatic leaders who were able to re-engage people in the practices of the Church. MST activists build on this combination of worldliness and idealism by creatively using songs, theatre and chants to help form new ideas and mould behaviour. Symbols of the struggle for land that characterize mysticism include dramatic representations of a joyful harvest where people work together to bring in the crops, and visits from past resistance leaders. In 1998, one State-wide meeting in Santa Catarina opened with several children walking single file through the audience carrying the tools and fruits of working the land – a machete, a handful of beans, a large squash. These were all laid at the front on a large outline of Brazil, signifying the construction of a better nation through the practices and values of MST’s new community. The dominant messages of mysticism are humility, honesty, convic- tion, perseverance, sacrifice, gratitude, responsibility and discipline. According to an MST publication, mysticism ‘reduces the distance between the present and the future, helping us to anticipate the good things that are coming’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 102: 3). Movement leaders encourage activists to use mysticism to tie settlers more firmly into the movement: ‘the more that the masses attach them- selves to their symbols, leaders and the organization, the more they fight, the more they mobilize and the more they organize themselves’ ( Jornal Sem Terra 97: 3). Mysticism is always present at MST meetings, assemblies and public demonstrations.
NEGOTIATING MST, COMMUNITY AND THE STATE
Most academic discussions of MST refer to the imagined community as repre- sentative of the movement (Hammond 1999; Petras 1997, 1998; Robles 2000). MST leaders themselves attribute the movement’s success to the formation of an imagined community that resonates with the settlers’ historical experiences and new expectations. But MST members have come to the movement from many
Producing Community	511
Figure 1. Location of two MST communities
different backgrounds, and they bring with them varied experiences of com- munity. During field research conducted in 1998–9 and 2001, I found very dif- ferent ideas shaping community relationships on settlements in the sugarcane plantation region of northeastern Brazil and the small family-farming region of southern Brazil (Figure 1; Wolford forthcoming a). Members of the two groups negotiated MST’s imagined community in ways that reflected their particular understanding of community.
The historical community described by the rural workers on a settlement in Pernambuco named Flora was segmented hierarchically along occupational lines, from the plantation owner at the top to the day labourer contracted illegally at the bottom (Sigaud 1979). Members of the plantation community lived in close physical proximity, but relations between occupational groups were marked by social distance. The rural workers rarely met socially as a community, because as one older man who had worked on different plantations in the region since 1961 said, ‘in that time there were no workers’ meetings. A meeting was to do forced labour’.13
In contrast, the historical community described by the small family farmers on a settlement in Santa Catarina named Vento was organized horizontally, as there was little occupational differentiation between families. Unlike the families on Flora, contact among the families was relatively rare because houses were dispersed, and interaction was usually reserved for the weekend soccer game or church service. Families would co-operate occasionally, however, on tasks that
13	Interview #25, Flora, Agua Preta, PE.
512	Wendy Wolford
benefited the community, such as repairing the roof of the school house, or on tasks that benefited individual families, such as bringing in the harvest when it was ready or helping a neighbour build a fence. These mutirões, as they were called, usually took place among relatives, although many of the settlers on Vento remembered group projects that had involved the whole community. As one settler said: ‘we’d been working in a group since we were little. Everyone got along’.14 When the first occupation in Santa Catarina took place in 1980, the landless squatters (not yet a part of MST) sent a portion of their first harvest down to their counterparts on an occupation site in the neighbouring State of Rio Grande do Sul.15
These different historical experiences with community shaped the way that settlers on Flora and Vento interacted with MST’s presentation of community. For the settlers on Flora, MST was an organization that they participated in almost reluctantly (Wolford forthcoming b). As plantation workers, they had little experience deriving their livelihood from their own farming, and most expressed a preference for wage labour over working the land. As one older man on Flora said, ‘What I thought [about getting land] was the same thing that everyone thought. We were used to our boss, every week we worked, and the money came for us to do our little shopping in town. Afterwards, with agrarian reform, we didn’t have the right to that any more . . . And so this was why we thought [that becoming settlers] was difficult’.16 Thirteen of the forty-six families living on Flora had joined MST because they felt there was little alternative when they were unable to find work in the crumbling sugarcane economy. The re- maining thirty-three had effectively joined the movement when the government expropriated the plantation property they were living on and offered them a piece of land. MST’s propositions for community were not ones that resonated with the settlers, and many perceived the movement as a trade organization that provided services for the settlers rather than a political community. When asked whether he had joined MST, one settler on Flora said, ‘Listen, it’s like this, I live here inside the settlement, what they say that I have to do, what I have to pay and what I have to do about the association, these things, I do’.17
The settlers on Vento participated in MST’s imagined community very dif- ferently than the settlers on Flora. Only twenty-three of the ninety-six families on the settlement had received land on the settlement without participating in an MST occupation. The families who had come to Vento through MST said that they joined in order to get land for themselves or for their children. A young man preparing to get married said, ‘To have land is a beautiful thing’.18 A woman on Vento said she and her husband had joined MST because ‘our kids were growing up and they had no land – through the struggle, our kids have gotten
14	Interview #38, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 15	For more information on this, see Fernandes (1999). 16	Interview #27, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 17	Interview #14, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 18	Interview #3, Vento, Campos Novos, PE.
married and gone after their own land’.19 For the former small family farmers, many of the MST’s messages resonated with their own experiences of com- munity. They believed in MST’s struggle to ‘transform society’20 and to ‘fight for equality and a better life for everyone’.21 The settlers on Vento were willing to work within the general guidelines of MST’s imagined community, although collective production projects established on the settlement suffered severe prob- lems. MST settlers who had tried to work in the collective project and found they could not, remained committed to the movement. As one woman who was preparing to leave the collective for an individual plot on the settlement said, ‘We still participate – we are still in favour of the movement. The movement still helps us, they won’t throw us out. We are not leaving [the collective] because of them’.22
Even as MST members work with very different understandings of the move- ment’s imagined community, few cite the ideological frame components as the reasons for their continued participation. Members continue to attend meetings and demonstrations in large part because MST has successfully linked material resources to ideological resources by situating itself as the mediator between the settlers and the State. Although MST has theoretically and practically organized itself in opposition to the Brazilian State, one marked consequence of winning land through the movement is increased interaction with representatives and resources from the State. The settlers’ relationship with the State begins during the occupation period, when they rely on local government to send food and health supplies. Even though the act of occupying property is portrayed by the media and government as illegal, people living in MST encampments usually receive basic support from local government. Activists organizing occupations tell participants to bring enough food to last a few days, until the government and other settlers begin to contribute.
Once MST members receive land, the government becomes their landlord, creditor, educator and overseer. Technically, the agrarian reform process estab- lishes the State as a landlord because the settlers are given use rights, not title, to the land, although they are expected to begin paying for the land in ten years. Both MST and the settlers militate against being ‘liberated’ from government in this way. MST argues that the State has a moral obligation to give the settlers their land because wealthy landlords were able to acquire land without payment. The movement also recognizes that being liberated from the government would cut the settlers off from an important source of support. The State acts as the principal creditor for agrarian reform settlers because it provides significant funds for start up and investment. Start up funds include money to build a house and buy an initial set of supplies for production. Subsidized funds for short- and long-term investment are also provided on an annual basis, although these
19 20 21 22
Interview #21, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is a young man on the settlement. Interview #12, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. The speaker is an older woman on the settlement. Interview #4, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	513
514	Wendy Wolford
are continually being reduced.23 The State is also involved in maintaining basic infrastructure on the settlements, including roads, primary education, health serv- ices, etc. In providing these goods and services, the State establishes itself as the ultimate overseer of settlement life and activities. If settlers want to move to a new settlement, experiment with alternative production practices or request ad- ditional assistance, they need to go through agents of the State.
Most settlers believe they need access to government resources to survive on the land. The government agrees, estimating that a majority of the settlers in the country would be forced to give up their land if they did not have access to the assistance it provides. A study conducted in 1998 estimated that only settlers in Santa Catarina had the means to pay back their State subsidized loans (Buainain and De Souza Filho 1998). Settlers are always nervous that the government will reduce their access to resources. As one settler in Santa Catarina said: ‘[The State is] going to abandon me, and I will only get resources from PRONAF. And this is how one loses the land’.24
MST’s ability to maintain participation turns on its presentation of the move- ment as the primary mediator between a cruel State and its members. The State is depicted as cruel because it is biased towards large landowners and, movement leaders argue, has no desire to see agrarian reform succeed. The State’s own visibility in the settlements makes it a good target. Poor roads, insufficient elec- tricity and a lack of resources all vividly maintain the impression that the govern- ment needs to do more in the settlements. As a settler on Vento said, ‘Even though we have a lot of things now, we cannot stop yet because the situation is not easy’.25 Having promised a regular supply of resources, the Federal govern- ment has had a very difficult time fulfilling what have come to be seen as its obligations. Short-term investment credit, for example, habitually arrives late or in the wrong season altogether.26 When this happens, settlers either have to simply give the money back or plant in the off-season and suffer significant production losses. MST activists and leaders continually warn settlers that the State will only fulfil its promises if constant and forceful pressure is applied. When resources are secured from the State, the movement argues that this is the result of successful organization within the sem terra community.
23	Until 2001, each settler had the right to almost R$20,000 when they received land through INCRA (National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform). This money included an initial amount of R$340, to be spent on emergency food supplies which many of the families need when they arrive in the settlement. The emergency money is followed by a grant of R$740 for start-up supplies such as a hoe, wheelbarrow and seeds, and as soon as boundaries between plots are legally documented, each settler received R$2000 to build a house. The remainder of the R$20,000 consists of long-term investment funds from the Program for Agrarian Reform Credit (PROCERA), which was created in 1985. Since 2001, settlers have been incorporated into PRONAF (Program for Small Farmers), where they are treated as small family farmers (instead of settlers) and eligible for less generous funding.
24 25 26
Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Interview #42, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. Beginning with an economic downturn in 1999, the Federal government began to hold back the
funds for agrarian reform more and more regularly. There was a noticeable deceleration in the number of settlements created and the amount of support disbursed overall in 1999.
And the movement’s positioning between settlers and the State has been very successful. During interviews with settlers on six settlements in the southern State of Santa Catarina and the northeastern State of Pernambuco, the main reason given for supporting MST and continued participation in movement activit- ies was the MST’s position of influence vis-à-vis local and Federal governments. As one older settler on Vento said: ‘Nothing would function without the move- ment. If it weren’t for protests, the struggle, everyone participating together, then we wouldn’t get anything’.27 Resources such as credit are seen as coming from MST rather than coming from the State. One former rural worker on Flora who was a spokesperson for the settlement in its struggle for State resources said: ‘The Federal Government is obligated to settle us, to provide infrastructure for the settlement and to give us credit. Unfortunately, it takes too long to do this – you only get [these things] through pressure, we only receive something after the government has been pressured, and this is done by the movement’.28 Most settlers feel that they won their land because of MST’s strength as an organization and they continue to see organization as an effective means to pursue resources. Movement demonstrations are considered largely responsible for ensuring a government-funded supply of credit in the first place: ‘Today the movement is respected because we have won some of the things that we wanted. Our credit is subsidized, for example, and not even the rural trade union got that!’29 Movement activists continually remind the settlers of the debt they owe the MST. And most people agree because they believe that ‘the people who get land through agrarian reform will be guaranteed a better life’.30
Over the past ten years, the State has increased the flow of resources to MST members. In some ways, the government has organized its own agrarian reform programme around social movements. As one government official said, ‘we are always just one step behind the movement’.31 Between 1993 and 1997, thirty- seven properties in Santa Catarina were distributed for the purposes of agrarian reform. Of these, only seven were not the result of organized pressure.32 In 1996, the country’s largest rural union, the Confederation of Agricultural Workers (CONTAG), identified 226 estates that were eligible for expropriation under the Federal Constitution. The Federal government inspected 198 of the properties and expropriated or bought 100. MST also identified 196 estates eligible for expropriation and the government followed up on 181, expropriating or pur- chasing 126 (Cardoso 1997, quoted in Deere and León De Leal 1999: 33). MST’s success in winning expropriations is such that new recruits and squatters con- sider it extremely unlikely that they will not win access to land (Deere and León
27	Interview #10, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 28	Interview #3, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. 29	Interview #2, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 30	Interview #36, Vento, Campos Novos, SC. 31	Interview with Dr Alacir Pereira Batista, INCRA Superintendent, Florianopolis, SC. 24 March 1999.
32	Figures from the Regional INCRA office of Santa Catarina. Supported by an interview with the settlement division of the regional INCRA office in Santa Catarina, 26 March 1999. INCRA estim- ates that in Santa Catarina roughly 60 per cent of all expropriations are the result of social pressure.
Producing Community	515
516
Wendy Wolford
Table 1. Settlement projects created 1970–94 and 1995–7
Period	Years
Settlements
1970 –1994	25	795 1995 –1997	3	1454
Source: Seligmann (1998). Table 2. INCRA’s annual budget 1994–8
Year
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Source: Seligmann (1998).
Amount (in R$ million)
390 1279 1425 2020 2243
De Leal 1999; Hammond 1999). The Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) admin- istration (1995–2003) authorized the creation of more new settlements than all the previous administrations from 1970 to 1994 combined (see Table 1). And Cardoso’s administration more than quintupled the resources allocated for reform under the INCRA, the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform, since 1994 (see Table 2).
Even as resources from the State have increased, however, the movement has stepped up its offensive against the government, arguing that the FHC adminis- tration is a more dangerous enemy than any past administration. MST activists and leaders have travelled throughout the settlements, discussing the state of the national political economy with settlers. They argue that under Cardoso, the Federal government is providing resources with one hand and taking them back with the other through discriminatory trade and production policies. Discussion of these policies links Cardoso’s administration to neo-liberalism, US imperialism and the so-called Washington Consensus. MST documents argue that even if Cardoso authorizes settlements and provides credit for settlers, he is committed to an economic and political system incompatible with Brazilian sovereignty and small family farming. Included in the MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People, written during the 2000 National Congress, is an indictment of the Cardoso administration:
It is true that our society has always been unjust. Like any capitalist society, the poor have always been exploited and humiliated. And the rich class, earning more and more all the time, has always repressed the people and submitted it to the interests of international capital. But since 1994, with the neoliberal policies of Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s government, the
problems have become even more acute. This economic policy represents only the interests of the banks and of multinational companies. For these, the government guarantees high interest rates and financial help. Suffice to say: last year the government spent 64 percent of the national budget servicing the interest on internal and external debt. Despite all the social problems, the government of the Brazilian elites has the nerve to send 50 billion dollars to the rich countries every year. That is why there is a lack of money for education, health, public transport, popular housing and employment generation. In agriculture the situation is more grave still. The Cardoso government wants to ‘modernize’ the rural areas stimulating large export-orientated estates; handing control of the agricultural market over to the multinational corporations; and allowing agro-industries to con- trol the storage of food products. (MST 2000)
Settlers are reminded that even if access to land is authorized by the government, it is won through the struggle. As one settler on Flora said: ‘The one who gave me land was INCRA, that is to say, in the first place, it was MST, because if we were to wait for INCRA, it would never have come through. It had already been twenty years that we were waiting for INCRA. But then MST came and camped out here and they fought [for the land]’.33 Another settler on Flora agreed, although less robustly, saying ‘we have this here and they say it is because of the movement’.34
When Cardoso was re-elected President of Brazil in 1998, settlers were warned by the MST that they would have to increase their organizational efforts to protect their gains. As an older settler on Vento said, ‘Our government is against us. For all these four years [of Cardoso’s presidency], we are the ones who are going to lose. The big guys aren’t going to suffer. We need money – and they always hold it back. We always argued that we had to fight for a dignified life . . . Because if we don’t, [the government] will get us’.35
In presenting the State as the settlers’ primary enemy, MST is able to take advantage of necessary State resources without allowing individual members or the movement as a whole to be co-opted through incorporation. MST settlers rely heavily on the State for access to resources, including the basic recognition of their right to property, and so the movement has to justify the seeming paradox of reliance on a State it opposes. The movement has done this by presenting itself as the effective mediator between the settlers and the State and by insisting that continued access to State resources requires participation in the movement’s imagined community of sem terra. Framing the State as corrupt, cruel and incompetent is an effective means of convincing settlers that this com- munity is necessary long after they receive land. Even as settlers negotiate the movement’s imagined community, rejecting and adapting many elements, they are convinced that continued participation is necessary for their economic survival.
33 34 35
Interview #8, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #13, Flora, Agua Preta, PE. Interview #1, Vento, Campos Novos, SC.
Producing Community	517
518	Wendy Wolford CONCLUSION
Although MST’s numbers are relatively insignificant compared to the total population of Brazil and its total land area, the movement is widely considered an important voice for effective national democracy (Gohn 1997; Rossiaud and Scherer-Warren 2000). The demand for land redistribution is a familiar one in the country, and MST’s agenda has won many supporters in the urban areas and universities.
MST’s consistent and coherent presentation of the movement’s community has led supporters and detractors alike to judge the movement according to statements made by representative leaders. But MST’s presentation of commun- ity differs greatly from the negotiations and experiences of community on the ground. MST leaders and activists have built the movement’s community around a series of frames – interpretive, diagnostic and prognostic frames, in Benford and Snow’s (2000) words. These frames explain rural workers’ subordinate posi- tion within Brazilian capitalism and provide workers with the means for address- ing their situation. The presentation of poverty as a result of class exploitation generates both opposition and solidarity, making it possible to identify whom to fight against and whom to fight with. Explicit ties to past resistance contextualizes participation in the movement, investing the present with a rich legacy. Move- ment members share experiences, and there is an expectation of shared values across community members such that a red cap or T-shirt symbolizes the fulfil- ment of movement criteria for participation. These criteria are disseminated regu- larly to members during organized movement activities.
And people throughout Brazil have joined MST in search of something better, or at least something different, than what they have. The elements of MST’s imagined community facilitate involvement in a movement that other sources, such as the national media, usually present as dangerous, radical and subversive. And the frames themselves work to present a coherent criticism of ‘politics as usual’. On the settlements, however, the test of MST’s community is not whether it makes sense, whether it introduces an acceptable or appropriate philosophy, but whether or not it works. Regardless of how committed settlers are to the ideas of MST’s imagined community, few would remain members if this meant total isolation from the State. In fact, most argue that they are grateful to the movement for improving their access to the State. MST leaders have had to work creatively to enable their alternative philosophy to be effective within the dominant economic, political and social system. This has involved persistent mediation between the State and their settler members.
REFERENCES
Anderson, B., 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Benford, D. and D. Snow, 2000. ‘Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment’. Annual Review of Sociology, 26: 611–39.
Buainain, A.M. and H.M. De Souza Filho, 1998. PROCERA: Productive Impacts and Payment Capabilities. Brasilia, DF: INCRA/FAO.
Cardoso, F.H., 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brasília, DF: Presidência Da República Secretaria De Comunicação Social.
Dean, W., 1969. The Industrialization of São Paulo, 1880–1945. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Dean, W., 1976. Rio Claro: A Brazilian Plantation System, 1820–1920. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Deere, C.D. and M. León De Leal, 1999. Towards a Gendered Analysis of the Brazilian Agrarian Reform. Storrs, CT: Center for Latin American & Caribbean Studies, Univer- sity of Connecticut.
Delgado, G.C., 1985. Capital Financeiro e Agricultura no Brasil: 1965–1985. Campinas, SP: Editora UNICAMP.
Eisenberg, P.L., 1974. The Sugar Industry in Pernambuco: Modernization Without Change, 1840–1910. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Fernandes, B.M., 1999. MST, Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem-Terra: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Forman, S., 1975, The Brazilian Peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press. Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. New York:
Harper Colophon. Gohn, M.d.G., 1997. Os Sem Terra, ONGs e Cidadania. São Paulo: Cortez. Goodman, D., B. Sorj and J. Wilkinson, 1984. ‘Agro-industry, State Policy and Rural Social
Structures: Recent Analyses of Proletarianization in Brazilian Agriculture’. In Proletar-
ianisation in the Third World, eds B. Munslow and H. Finch. London: Croom and Helm. Graziano da Silva, J.F., 1982. A Modernização Dolorosa: Estrutura Agrária, Fronteira Agrícola
e Trabalhadores Rurais no Brasil. Rio De Janeiro: Zahar Editores. Hammond, J., 1999. ‘Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’ Move-
ment’. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18 (4): 469–89. Houtzager, P.P., 1997. Caught Between State and Church: Popular Movements in the Brazilian
Countryside, 1964–1989. Berkeley, CA: University of Berkeley, Department of Political
Science. Johnson, H.B., 1987. ‘Portuguese Settlement, 1500–1580.’ In Colonial Brazil, ed. L. Bethell,
1–39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jornal Sem Terra. Newspaper published by MST, Sao Paulo. Lesser, J., 1999. Negotiating National Identity: Immigrants, Minorities and the Struggle for
Ethnicity in Brazil. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Löwy, M., ed., 1999. O Marxismo na Amèrica Latina: Uma Antologia de 1909 aos Dias
Atuais. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Mainwaring, S., 1986. The Catholic Church and Politics in Brazil, 1916–1985. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press. Martins, J.D.S., 1981. Os Camponeses e a Política No Brasil: As Lutas Sociais no Campo e Seu
Lugar no Processo Político. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes. Maybury-Lewis, B., 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade
Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. Medeiros, L.S.d., 1989. Historia dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE. MST, 2000. The MST’s Manifesto to the Brazilian People. Brasilia. http://
www.mstbrazil.org/manifesto.html/ Müller, G., 1989. Complexos Agroindustrial e Modernização Agrária. São Paulo: Hucitec. Navarro, Z., 2000. ‘Breaking New Ground: Brazil’s MST’. NACLA Report on the Amer-
icas, 33 (5): 36–9. Pereira, A.W., 1997. The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast
Brazil, 1961–1988. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Producing Community	519
520	Wendy Wolford
Petras, J., 1997. ‘Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left’. New Left Review, 223: 17–47. Petras, J., 1998. ‘The Political and Social Basis of Regional Variation in Land Occupations
in Brazil’. Journal of Peasant Studies, 254: 124–33. Prado Júnior, C., 1945. Formação do Brasil Contemporâneo. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Prado Júnior, C., 1966. A Revolucão Brasileira. São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense. Rangel, I., 1956. ‘Iniciativa Pública e Privada’. Econômica Brasileira, 2 (3): 33–140. Robles, W., 2000. ‘Beyond the Politics of Protest: The Landless Rural Workers Move-
ment of Brazil’. Canadian Journal of Development Studies, XXI (3): 656–91. Rocha, J. and S. Branford, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in
Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau. Rossiaud, J. and I. Scherer-Warren, 2000. A Democratização Inacabavel: As Memòrias do
Futuro. Petropolis, RJ: Vozes. Schwade, E., 1992. A Luta Não Faz Parte Da Vida . . . E A Vida: O Projeto Politico-
Religioso De Um Assentamento No Oeste Catarinense. Florianopolis, SC: Universidade
Federal de SC. Schwartz, S.B., 1985. Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society: Bahia, 1550–
1835. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schwartz, S.B., 1992. Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels: Reconsidering Brazilian Slavery. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Illinois Press. Selcher, W., 1986. Political Liberalization in Brazil: Dynamics, Dilemmas and Future Pros-
pects. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Seligmann, R., 1998. PROCERA: Programa Especial de Credito Para Reforma Agrária.
Brasilia, DF: Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária. Sigaud, L., 1979. Os Clandestinos e os Direitos: Estudo Sobre Trabalhadores da Cana-De-
Açúcar de Pernambuco. São Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades. Skidmore, T.E., 1999. Brazil: Five Centuries of Change. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Snow, D., E. Burke Rochford Jr, S. Worden and R. Benford, 1986. ‘Frame Alignment
Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation’. American Sociological Re-
view, 51: 464–81. Stedile, J.P. and B.M. Fernandes, 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta Pela
Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo. Stein, S.J., 1985. Vassouras, a Brazilian Coffee County, 1850–1900: The Roles of Planter and
Slave in a Plantation Society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Stolcke, V., 1988. Coffee Planters, Workers and Wives: Class Conflict and Gender Relations on
São Paulo Coffee Plantations, 1850–1980. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Teixeira, G., 1999. Fatos e Mitos da Politica Agricola do Governo FHC. Brasilia, DF:
Movimento Sem Terra, MST. Viotti da Costa, E., 2000. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories, Revised Edition.
Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. Wolford, W., forthcoming a. ‘Families, Fields, and Fighting for Land: The Spatial Dy-
namics of Contention in Rural Brazil’. Mobilization: An International Journal. Wolford, W., forthcoming b. ‘Of Land and Labour: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane
Plantations of Northeast Brazil’. Latin American Perspectives. Wright, A., 2001. ‘The Origins of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers’.
Paper prepared for presentation at the meeting of the Latin American Studies Association,
6–8 September 2001, Washington, DC. Zamosc, L., 1986. The Agrarian Question and the Peasant Movement in Colombia: Struggles
of the National Peasant Association, 1967–1981. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
