2010
Geography
World Development
Doing it for Themselves: Direct Action Land Reform in the Brazilian Amazon
CYNTHIA SIMMONS, ROBERT WALKER
Michigan State University, USA
STEPHEN PERZ
University of Florida, USA
STEPHEN ALDRICH
Indiana State University, USA
MARCELLUS CALDAS
Kansas State University, USA
RITAUMARIA PEREIRA
Michigan State University, USA
FLAVIA LEITE
University of Florida, USA
LUIZ CLAUDIO FERNANDES
SEDAM, Porto Velho, Rondoˆnia, Brazil
and
EUGENIO ARIMA *
Hobart and William Smith Colleges, NY, USA
Summary. — The present paper considers a sometimes contentious process of land reform presently occurring in Brazil. This process, referred to in the paper as Direct Action Land Reform (DALR), involves organizations such as the Landless Rural Workers Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, or MST) and more spontaneous actions of individuals desiring a piece of land for their own. Results of a survey covering 751 households engaged in such land reform actions in the Brazilian Amazon are presented, in order to describe participants and land reform processes. Evidently, social movement organizations provide for a modest degree of wealth accumulation, a welfare improvement that must be set against potential environmental costs. The paper concludes by calling attention to the challenge DALR may ultimately pose to the Brazilian state.
Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Key words — Latin America, Brazil, direct action land reform, environment, Amazon
1. INTRODUCTION
Land reform has long been advanced as a way to correct so- cial inequities in countries with large rural populations. Fol- lowing WW II and the collapse of longstanding colonial relations between the global north and south, a number of newly independent governments promoted programs of land redistribution in order to support democratic forms of gover- nance and to eradicate vestiges of imperial domination. The United States and its allies assisted in such efforts as part of a strategic investment in less-developed countries to thwart communist insurgencies rising with the tides of populist dis- content (Esteva, 1992). Governments across the Americas, Africa, and Asia hoped that the land reform agenda would re-
*The research presented in this article was supported by the National Science Foundation (Geography and Regional Science) under the project (0522062) ‘‘Brazil’s Direct Action Land Reform Movement: Environmen- tal Impacts and Socio-Spatial Dynamics.’’ Certain data were provided by NASA project (NNGO6GD96A) ‘‘Spatially Explicit Land Cover Econo- metrics and Integration with Climate Prediction: Scenarios of Future Landscapes and Land-Climate Interactions.” Generous support was also provided through the Brazil Initiative in the Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies, International Studies Program at Michigan State University. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations ex- pressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and editor for their many useful comments made on an earlier version of this article. Final revision accepted: June 17, 2009.
429
World Development Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 429–444, 2010 Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 0305-750X/$ - see front matter
430	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
solve persistent problems of rural poverty that were explained as symptomatic of land scarcity given the concentration of holdings in the hands of the few.
Reactions by the landed elite to these initiatives were often sharp, and in many cases led to violent rebukes of government policy (De Janvry, 1981; De Janvry & Sadoulet, 1989; Rei- dinger, 1995). Perhaps as a consequence, the fortunes of land reform as part and parcel of development strategy have waxed and waned in many places in the postwar years. During what has been referred to as the era of agricultural modernization, the paradigm of productive efficiency largely replaced the con- cept of rural justice, and efforts to resolve the issue of rural poverty were tied to technologies that would raise incomes through improved production techniques rather than access to land. Agricultural modernization was heartily embraced by rural elites, given its twofold promise of higher profits and reduced pressure for land appropriations. So long as out- side interests and institutions such as the World Bank paid the bill, the proffering of new technologies was a win-win situation for those who sat on the upper end of the distribution of land holdings. With the waning of the cold war in the 1980s, and the dominance of neoliberal policies, agrarian reform was marginalized as a policy concept, and policies advocating such change were disregarded.
Today, the call for agrarian reform has once again become an integral component of development discourse, from both the neoliberal camp advocating market-based land reform (i.e., the World Bank) and the growing populist movements demanding land redistribution as a fundamental human right, and essential to food sovereignty (i.e., La Via Campesina). Land reform has likewise returned with force to the social agenda of many countries. Brazil, the focus of the paper, is one of the four important industrializing nations referred to as the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China). As such, it possesses one of the largest economies in the world, with per capita incomes that place it squarely in the upper quartile of developing countries when measured by conven- tional indices.
Nevertheless, Brazil also ranks amongst the worst with re- gard to both income and land distribution, providing fuel for a particularly vociferous land reform movement. The con- temporary struggle for land has frequently turned violent, resulting in a reported 1,547 agrarian activists killed nation- wide during 1988–2008, nearly half of those deaths occurring in Amazonia (Almedia, 1994; CPT, 1991–2008) (CPT, 1988– 2008). Although the vast majority of victims were men, wo- men, and children who comprise the rank and file landless and their advocates, there has been a rise in fatalities since the mid-1980s of large-landowners, their gunmen, and often their families, earning Amazonia its reputation as Brazil’s notorious badland (Simmons, 2004; Simmons, Walker, Arima, Aldrich, & Caldas, 2007a).
Efforts to bring peace to Brazil’s landless and alter the distri- bution of land holdings represent a tide of populist sentiment now gripping the South American continent, with similar cries for rural justice sounding in Bolivia, Venezuela, and Ecuador (Moyo & Yeros, 2005; Petras, 1998; Rosset, Patel, & Courville, 2006). Movement activists frequently communicate and inter- act across national boundaries, and share both information and resources in what is emerging as a transnational resistance project complementing the progressive regimes of the countries in which they are occurring. It is within this continental context that the paper focuses on Brazil, where land reform and violent land conflict have ‘‘broken out” in spite of industrial growth, urbanization, demographic transition, and what has all the appearances of a boom economy.
This land reform process manifests itself in the formation of settlements, or Projetos de Assentamento (PAs), through aggressive and sometimes contentious ‘‘occupations” of private and public lands by individuals and social movement organi- zations (SMOs). Since we focus the paper on the actions of the landless, we use the term occupation, a political distinction preferred by movement activists who maintain they ‘‘occupy” land, not invade, because they have the ‘‘moral” authority and constitutional right (Stedile, 1997; Wolford, 2004). Such settle- ment processes constitute what has been referred to as Direct Action Land Reform (DALR), in populist counterpoint to the top-down ventures of state-led programs of several decades ago (Sigaud, Rosa, & Macedo, 2008; Simmons et al., 2007a).
Present-day DALR in Brazil is often thought of in conjunc- tion with its most famous SMO, the Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST), which has spawned a movement represent- ing more than 1.5 million members (Fernandes, 2000; Stedile, 1997; Welch, 2006; Wolford, 2004). But other organizations crossing a rather broad political spectrum are also involved, including the Pastoral land Commission (CPT), the Movement for the Struggle for Land (MLT), the Syndicate of Small and Medium Rural Producers (SINPRA), the Organization of Workers in the Country (OTC), and the local rural workers un- ions (STRs) that are corporatist vestiges of the military gov- ernment but remain active proponents of the rural poor (He ́bette, 2004, p. 197; Martins, 1989, p. 67; Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons, Perz, Pedlowski, & Silva, 2002b; Simmons, Walker, & Wood, 2002; Toni, 1999). DALR represents a form of what has been referred to as grass-roots political mobilization. We resist this botanical metaphor, and opt for a labeling convention that links to a long history of left politics, particularly the anarchist resistance to com- munist discipline, and the philosophy that revolution can only be made through the concrete insurrectionary actions of the masses. The contentious nature of land occupation pursuant to DALR reflects a politics of direct action outside the organizational politics of leftist parties, not to mention the normal grievance channels of elected governments.
The prime motivation of the present paper is to provide an empirical account of Brazilian DALR, a relatively recent phe- nomenon in the region of study, Amazonia. Thus, land reform in Brazil currently possesses a critical environmental conse- quence, because the lion’s share of current DALR activity in the country is in fact occurring here. Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, the two Amazonian States that form the empirical basis of the research to be presented, accounted for almost a third of all families participating in land reform actions in Brazil dur- ing 1979–2007 (Table 1). These actions translated into the set- tlement of 5,072 km2 annually, a sizeable fraction of the land being deforested yearly throughout the entire Brazilian por- tion of the basin over the period (10,000–20,000 square kilo- meters deforested per year). A growing number of researchers have expressed concern about this new threat to the forest posed by social justice movements dedicated to re- solve the land issue, despite the avowed ‘‘greenness” of their often progressive ideologies (e.g., Fearnside, 2001; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a; Simmons; Caldas, Aldrich, Walker, & Perl, 2007b). Indeed, individual DALR actions involve coordinated efforts of 100s to 1000s of small farmers, who have already been implicated as agents of deforestation, and little consider- ation has been given to their cumulative impact on the land- scape (see Simmons et al., 2007a,b). Nevertheless, the paper emphasizes that large ranchers and agro-industry must be re- garded as the greatest perpetrators of land cover change. Although these enterprises represent less than 4% of establish- ments clearing land in Amazonia, they accounted for more
Region
North Para ́ Rondoˆ nia Brazil
# Settlements	%
1,617	21 824	11 133	2 7841	100
# Families	%
355,896	40 207,202	23 33,414	4
902,078	100
Area km2
471,742 128,349 18,743 660,863
%
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON Table 1. Rural land settlements in Brazil: 1979–2007
431
Source: DATALUTA—Banco de Dados de Luta pela Terra, 2008. www.fct.unesp.br/nera.
than 50% of deforestation during 2001–05, and their future contribution is likely to become more pronounced as soy pro- duction for biofuel pushes further into the region (Alves, 2002; Walker et al., 2000; Walker, 2003; Walker et al., 2009).
Although the paper considers aspects of the environmental impact of DALR, its main goals are to (1) provide an intro- duction to Brazilian DALR through field-based description, and (2) examine the impact DALR has on the livelihoods of its participants. To accomplish this, the paper first considers how	the	Brazilian	government	has	addressed	A	Questa ̃ o Fundiaria, the issue of land, and social concerns that its mal- distribution presents an enduring injustice and potential economic inefficiency. This section is essential to understanding contemporary DALR because state action has laid the legal foundation that justifies DALR, and state inaction provides the motivation (Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons et al., 2007a). After this comes a review of what is currently known about Brazilian DALR, which covers a gamut from intensely political processes prosecuted under the banner of various left-leaning movements, to less organized expressions of individuals uniting to achieve the personalized quest of land acquisition for family production. A presentation of results from field surveys of representative DALR settlements in the Amazon basin follows. Here, the paper’s main contribution is made, a description of participants and settlements that provides insight into conditions enabling DALR, as well as DALR demography, farming system sustainability, and formation processes. Specifically, the analysis examines the efficacy of DALR actions to improve the livelihoods of its par- ticipants and the potential for land conflict and environmental degradation in the process. This description leads to a discus- sion of Brazilian DALR, and the introduction of ethnographic information that allows for a nuanced interpretation of survey results. The paper concludes by embedding DALR within the broader societal context of neoliberal Brazil, and the developmental prospects of this powerful movement.
2. BRAZILIAN APPROACHES TO A QUESTA ̃ O FUNDIARIA, THE LAND ISSUE
Brazil, motivated by wide concern for rural poverty and jus- tice, has a long historical record of legislation and policies with implications for land distribution dating from the first Land Statute of 1850. These actions, typically prosecuted by the fed- eral government in a centralized manner, we refer to broadly as state-led agrarian reform, or SLAR, which can be grouped within agrarian reform legislation, colonization, and current policies that outline Projetos de Assentamentos (PAs). An extensive literature addresses the history of agrarian reform and colonization efforts (Medeiros, 2002; Santos, 1984; Sim- mons et al., 2007); here we limit discussion to an emphasis on the manner in which these actions influence contemporary DALR. In particular, agrarian reform legislation provides the institutional incentive for DALR action, while colonization supplies the demographic impetus. The remainder of this sec-
tion considers contemporary policy that promotes the creation of PAs.
In terms of legislation, Direito de posse, first outlined in the Land Statute of 1850, recognized right of land possession if it was put to productive use, and sanctioned expropriation and redistribution of unutilized holdings by the state (Fernandes, 2000; Foweraker, 1981; Medeiros, 2002; Santos, 1984, 2001).1 Since then, a series of constitutional amend- ments and laws have created ambiguity regarding these rights (Simmons et al., 2007a). Of considerable significance to the emergence of DALR is the constitutional stipulation that all private holdings fulfill their ‘‘social function,” a principle that has diluted the inviolability of private property and allowed for state expropriation of properties for non-compliance. It should come as no surprise that adversaries of present-day DALR narrowly define social function as economic productiv- ity measured by an index limited to crop yields and stocking density, in sharp contrast to proponents of DALR who advance a multidimensional assessment that also includes items such as job creation and local staple food production. For DALR SMOs and the rural poor generally, social func- tion has become convoluted with environmental quality and a just work environment, given newly drafted environmental and labor laws as stipulated in the Land Statute of 1964 and article 186 of the 1988 Brazilian Constitution (Fernandes, 2000; Medeiros, 2002; Simmons, et al., 2002b; Simmons, Walker, & Wood 2002a; Treccani, 2001). The ambiguity in the law and the manner in which it is interpreted by the judiciary has pitted the landless and landowners in a fight that plays out in the courts, as well as on the landscape.
Although Brazil has elaborate legislation enabling the State to expropriate and redistribute land in the name of agrarian reform, it has never chosen to do so through sustained govern- ment intervention. Instead, it has substituted policies of colo- nization to address rural poverty by making unclaimed lands available for settlement and possession. This was especially significant in Amazonia during the early years of the military regime (1964–85), justifying the creation of the Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (or INCRA) charged with organizing and prosecuting these policies, an agency that stands today. INCRA, which possesses the term agrarian re- form in its very name, has gone through a series of metamor- phoses, although most of its institutional history has been devoted to colonization. Colonization efforts were concen- trated in the States of Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, and involved plans that provided a variety of fiscal incentives to attract agro- industry, the construction of a vast highway network to inte- grate the region with the economic core of the country, the provision of land for small holder colonization, and the crea- tion of a system of central places providing services to the new settlers (Browder, 1988; Browder & Godfrey, 1997; Hall, 1989; Ianni, 1979; Mahar, 1979; Velho, 1972). By the end of the 1970s, however, federal interest in the colonization of Amazo- nia declined, and efforts shifted to resource extraction, especially mining and timber. That said, the construction of highways and the development of mineral resource extraction,
71 19 3 100
432	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
especially the discoveries of gold deposits, unleashed waves of spontaneous in-migration providing the demographic impetus for DALR to this day.
Democratic change in Brazil restored interest in land re- form, which quickly became a top priority for the new govern- ment. Economic malaise stymied concerted efforts, however, despite mounting populist pressures on federal government to fulfill longstanding promises about providing land for the poor. In parts of Amazoˆnia, particularly southern Para ́ State, a low-intensity civil conflict simmered (Schmink & Wood, 1992; Simmons, 2004; Simmons et al., 2007a,b). Perhaps in re- sponse to such incidents, which brought Brazil much un- wanted international publicity, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso called for the creation of the Novo Mundo Rural, a new rural world, through the development of Projetos de Assentamentos (PAs), or settlement projects, to be populated by competitive small holders. To bring this about, the landless poor are to first organize themselves in associations and invest their labor power, with government subsequently supporting their efforts through the provision of resources and infrastruc- ture (INCRA, 2000). In effect, this new PA program repre- sented an important shift in agrarian reform efforts from state directed efforts during colonization, to state sanctioned PAs that necessitate and legitimate pre-emptive occupation of land by the landless and their movements (Sigaud, 2005, p. 256).
Cardoso also attempted to introduce a World Bank pro- gram for market-led agrarian reform, or MLAR, as an alter- native to the inefficient efforts of the State, and as a means to moderate civil conflict (Deininger, 1999; Deininger & Binswanger, 1999; Riedinger, Wang, & Brook, 2001). MLAR is founded on the creation of a Land Bank capable of distrib- uting loans to farmers and necessary mechanisms to support land markets between buyers and sellers with minimal govern- ment intervention. Many neoliberal theoreticians, however, criticize the efficacy of such efforts, with some labeling these policies neoliberal populism constituting nothing more than the re-packaging of ineffective programs of the past (Bernstein, 2002). From the left, critics maintain that MLAR amounts to a land giveaway to wealthy land owners, which also increases debt loads on the landless poor who were meant to be the pri- mary beneficiary (Borras, 2003; Wolford, 2003). Despite lim- ited claims of success in pilot projects in the South and Northeast of Brazil, MLAR has been eclipsed by DALR in the Amazon. Indeed, agrarian reform following the initial col- onization phase is exclusively a direct action phenomenon leading to the creation of PAs.
3. DALR IN BRAZIL AND THE AMAZON
PA formation represents a considerable administrative com- mitment on part of the Brazilian state. Nevertheless, proactive, state-led programs have been few and far between, and the Brazilian government has largely passed the baton to civil society, thereby creating a momentous opening that SMOs and motivated individuals have exploited to create their own PAs (De Janvry, Sadoulet, & Wolford, 2001; Sigaud, 2005; Sigaud et al., 2008; Simmons et al., 2002b; Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2007a,b). In essence, the rural poor have taken agrarian reform into their own hands by exploiting the land law and the institutional resources made available by legisla- tion. These actions constitute what we refer to as DALR, which to date has created over 7,000 PAs, and homes for about 800,000 families throughout Brazil (MDA/INCRA, 2007). As disclosed at the outset of the paper, Amazoˆnia is
increasingly a target for PA formation, presumably given the perceived abundance of land, and the ever-increasing accessi- bility of its most remote places. Nevertheless, DALR emerged as a notable movement in the southern part of the country in the mid-1980s, as part and parcel of the MST, its largest, most vocal, and most successful advocate to date (Stedile, 1997; Welch, 2006; Wolford, 2003a, 2003b, 2004).
Although MST is surely a notable exemplar of a DALR SMO, it is important to recognize that many other SMOs par- ticipate in DALR actions, and that many land reform actions occur with little or no SMO involvement whatsoever. As dis- cussed at the outset, this observation provides an important empirical motivation for the paper, which seeks to describe the forms of DALR presently occurring in Brazil, and partic- ularly in Amazonia. This task first involves an overview of PA creation processes, distinguished by type of DALR as best can be determined from the literature. We then move on to a pre- sentation of survey results, and a description of DALR house- holds, differentiated by the PA creation process. Finally, the results from our analyses, combined with insight gathered from key informant interviews, allow us to elaborate on some important complexities of DALR in Amazonia.
There is much precedence for creating a typology to describe and compare settlement efforts in Amazonia. For our study, we build on the notion outlined by He ́bette (2004) that distin- guishes processes and characteristics of farmers that settled as part of directed colonization schemes from those that moved into the region later as part of ‘‘spontaneous” colonization. However, we limit our focus to strictly those engaged in spon- taneous colonization as opposed to state-led efforts. Based on the literature, we further delineate two fundamental forms of DALR in Brazil today, one involving SMO leadership, and the other emerging spontaneously, with little attention to pol- itics or ideology. Thus, the discussion now moves to address each of these, with particular attention to the PA formation process.
(a) SMO-led DALR
DALR as a journalistic phenomenon appears mainly to implicate SMOs and their ideological quests. Perhaps for this reason much has been written about SMO-led DALR (e.g., Branford & Rocha, 2002; Fernandes, 2000; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a,b; Stedile, 1997; Wright & Wolford, 2003). A commonly portrayed case is the MST-style SMO, with a polit- ical agenda that goes beyond obtaining land. DALR under SMO leadership involves a coordinated set of actions designed to advance the political agenda as well as to obtain land for the creation of a PA. Mobilization, perhaps ironically, typi- cally occurs in towns and cities, although a significant propor- tion of participants have migrated from rural locations where they were displaced prior to moving to the numerous frontier towns (Fanelli, 2001; Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2002, 2007a,b; Stedile, 1997; Veiga, 1990). To organize them, militants establish a contact center in the municipal seat, and initiate advertising campaigns via posted fliers, radio announcements, and even by loud speakers atop cars, cruising targeted neighborhoods. This organizational phase can last for several months to over a year, during which community lead- ership emerges and committees essential to PA implementa- tion and governance are formed.
Following this, DALR selects its target property. For MST actions, the frente de massa is a key committee including local day labor and farm hands aware of the lay of the land. Often, sympathizers from government agencies such as INCRA provide intelligence about local properties vulnerable to
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	433
constitutionally stipulated expropriation. A prime objective of SMO-led DALR is to attack latifundios. Thus, the SMOs plan- ning an occupation typically select large private holdings, and accuse owners of failure to comply with the constitutionally mandated social function, and, more recently, violations of environmental and/or labor laws as a legal strategy that opens the door to state intervention and expropriation (Simmons, 2005; Simmons et al., 2007a,b; Treccani, 2001). With the target selected, the ‘‘occupation” takes place, often in the early morning to avoid detection until such time as a large enough group has assembled on the target. 2 For security reasons, only a few individuals know the location and time of the planned occupation until the last minute when they are called to orga- nize at a pre-determined rendezvous site, and the press is con- tacted in advance to ensure coverage as a way to avoid violent reprisals by landowners. INCRA, as the agency responsible for adjudicating land claims and conflicts, is also notified.
The final and most frustrating phase involves formal recog- nition of the PA. Although an SMO can organize and achieve an occupation relatively quickly, formal recognition is another matter given the checks and balances of the legal framework for adjudicating contentious land claims. Recent legislation has complicated the process, and delayed property expropria- tion and PA approval by years. Specifically, decree MP 2.183- 56 enacted by President Cardoso and upheld by President Lula puts a moratorium of two years on INCRA investigations of DALR land claims, when such claims involve the mobilization and mass action as described. Since it is not unusual for DALR actions to involve multiple occupations before an IN- CRA investigation is even started, PA formalization can easily take over five years, during which the rank and file build a make-shift community, or acampamento. These have become familiar architectural features of many Brazilian landscapes, with their iconic black tarp roofs, and their colorful movement flags, whatever the SMO may be. Ideally, the acampamento is located on the actual land targeted for DALR appropriation. If physical occupation of the property proves daunting, the SMO may choose a strategic site, such as a roadside visible to passers-by and the media, or even the INCRA compound itself, which gives government workers strong incentives to re- solve the claim. All the while, INCRA provides acampamento residents with subsistence foodstuffs in a monthly allotment referred to as the cesta basica.
INCRA’s investigation is based on a vistoria, basically an appraisal of property investment and productivity. Herein lies an additional complication in the formalization process—spe- cifically, the way in which productivity is defined. Landowners prefer the estate productivity index that was last updated in 1975, which uses explicit measures of crop yield and animal to pasture ratios to indicate a productive property. The DALR advocates, on the other hand, argue that such an accounting method must consider how the property and its productivity benefit the local population in terms of job creation and staple food provisions, which is mandated in the ‘‘social function” clause of the constitution. Regardless of INCRA’s results, either side can bring the case before the courts to determine the fate of the land, which draws out the formalization process for many more years. Once this phase of the process con- cludes, and in the event the outcome favors DALR partisans, the property, if private, is expropriated in the state of interest, with compensation for the owner. Now, the actual develop- ment of the settlement begins in earnest. Administrative law of INCRA requires that DALR participants form an associa- tion and draft a Plan for the Development of the Settlement, or a PDA. This plan outlines a strategy for economic growth, typically based on agriculture but also possibly involving
small-scale industrial activities, particularly in the food-pro- cessing sector. Once the PDA has been approved, INCRA must provide infrastructure, including roads, housing, schools, and health facilities, in addition to food subsistence with the cesta basica. The vistoria, development of a PDA, and final ap- proval of the PA draws out the overall DALR process to over ten years in some cases.
SMO-led DALR possesses a significant ideological compo- nent. The MST, in particular, pursues a socialist platform, and views the PA as embryonic to the creation of a new, more humane, society. This society, to emerge from the rural areas, is to be based on family farms and cooperatives, meant to pave the way to an equitable industrialization that never loses sight of rural socialist enterprise. The MST organizes revolutionary instruction as part and parcel of its PA formation strategy, and maintains a free ‘‘school of political formation” in the state of Sa ̃o Paulo for training militants in movement ideology and rural strategy, in addition to linkages with Brazilian uni- versities that provide participant education in agronomy. A key element of the MST agenda—and that of many other SMOs—involves the promotion of environmental sustainabil- ity (MST, 2007). This is to be based on appropriate farming systems, informed by ecology, and concerted efforts to hus- band environmental resources for future generations of DALR activists who will continue pursuing the various left- leaning SMO agendas. As a mirror to World Bank discourse, DALR SMOs promote the idea that long-run development must depend on sustainable relations with the environment. Whether rhetoric from either camp turns into action with the promotion of more sustainable practices is a topic open to great debate, both within Brazil and the International com- munity.
(b) Spontaneous DALR
Although SMOs are very active in Brazilian land reform ef- forts, other modes of DALR take place without the significant influence of politics, ideology, and organizational forethought. Evidence has accumulated about efforts to spontaneously form PAs as a way to obtain land, a phenomenon of particular import in Amazonia given its land abundance, and the waves of directed and spontaneous migrants who have flocked to the region over the past several decades (He ́bette, 2004). Of course, land ‘‘squatting” has a long history in Brazil, and in many other parts of the world where the rural poor have lim- ited options (He ́bette, 2004). The DALR actions we consider in this section focus on the acquisition of land and creation of a PA as a community venture that conforms to the admin- istrative requirements of INCRA. As such, it becomes eligible for state investments in social overhead capital described in the previous section (Sigaud, 2005).
Research on small holder livelihoods (Caldas et al., 2007; He ́bette, 2004; Walker, 2003; Wood, 1983) and private interest road-building (Arima, Barreto, & Brito, 2005; Perz et al., 2008) calls attention to spontaneous colonization with the for- mation of PAs as a practical afterthought. Spontaneous DALR—to be distinguished from the spontaneous processes considered by He ́bette (2004) in its quest to form a state-sanc- tioned settlement—emerges from the gradual occupation of empty public lands—so-called terras devolutas—by on-site res- idents, without much political forethought or organization. 3 Factors enabling the onset of spontaneous DALR include (1) a prior history of government colonization in the area and (2) the condition of parentesco, or the availability of dense familial networks providing organizational and human re- sources for political struggle (Caldas, 2008; He ́bette, 2004).
434	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Thus, spontaneous DALR does not represent the outcome of the quest for a political objective, as shaped by an SMO, but a process of agricultural expansion initiated by prior, state-sanc- tioned colonization stemming from the 1970s. In contrast to the original colonists, however, spontaneous DALR partici- pants receive little or no government assistance until a PA has been formed, at which time they become eligible for sup- port from INCRA, just as in the case of SMO-led actions. Spontaneous DALR does benefit from local family networks, a source of encouragement, labor power, and human capital for confronting difficulties encountered along the way (He ́b- ette, 2004; Caldas, 2008). 4
In one stylized description of spontaneous DALR, partici- pants reproduce the original settlement pattern of the govern- ment’s initial colonization site, by extending the original roads (Perz et al., 2008). This facilitates forest penetration, the demar- cation of properties, and recognition of property holdings by INCRA, given the extra-legal occupation has the appearance of an extension of the original, INCRA-sanctioned develop- ment. The process begins with a search for land by individuals unknown to each other but with relatives living in the old colo- nization areas. Once he, or she, has identified a plot, an informal demarcation (marcaßca ̃o) of the land is made, reproducing the dimensions of the old colonization areas. Deforestation follows in order to demonstrate ‘‘productive” use, a legal precondition for gaining title by the principle of usocapia ̃o.
With the passage of time, the settlers acting individually form a small community. Once a critical mass has assembled, and developed collective awareness about the institutional oppor- tunities afforded by the land statute, they petition INCRA in order to formalize their settlement, and to take advantage of the legally prescribed investments that follow the declaration of a PA (Caldas, 2008). In many cases the local rural syndicates intervene at this point, acting as intermediaries between the State and the landless (He ́bette, 2002; Sigaud, 2005). From this point forward, spontaneous DALR must follow the same procedures as its SMO-led variant, with the development of a PDA, and a legal process alienating the land from public holdings into private ownership. The households also become eligible for the cesta basica once INCRA has taken up their case.
As described, spontaneous DALR is non-ideological, and treats the PA formation process in a somewhat opportunistic sense, as a way for individuals to gain access to land. Of course, this is largely the intention of the administrative rulings of Presidents Cardoso and Lula, and the agenda of INCRA, so the participants of spontaneous DALR can hardly be criticized. The lack of ideology stands in sharp contrast to SMO-led DALR, whose organizations may be more interested in the creation of an egalitarian society. Although the forma- tion of spontaneous PAs typically does not involve an explicit ideological component, individual participants of course possess their own political notions and agendas, which can in- clude concern for environmental sustainability. PDAs, in turn, are likely to reflect developmentalist rhetoric, which has grown increasingly green since the Rio Summit of 1992. That said, politics, environmental or otherwise, are not so pronounced and evolved as with SMO-led DALR.
In sum, both SMO and spontaneous DALR involve individ- uals acting to force the government to follow through on its promise of agrarian reform, both have among their primary objectives the acquisition of land and title for participants, and both require some degree of organization in order to meet these objectives. The key distinguishing feature between the two is the manner in which the initial occupation takes place and the point at which the participants organize. Specifically,
SMO-led DALR settlements are initiated with a premeditated ‘‘occupation”—the almost overnight settlement of land, or invasion as the landowner might see it—necessitating an orga- nized front. In contrast, spontaneous DALR is initiated only after a gradual and sporadic occupation has achieved a critical mass of settlers, capable of asserting social force.
4. THE EMPIRICS OF DALR
The discussion to this point has provided an overview of DALR processes, and suggests two basic modes, SMO-led and spontaneous. The paper now moves to field-based descrip- tion, and presents results from survey research undertaken in the summer and fall of 2006. This research, motivated in part by the snapshot of DALR just presented, elaborates a set of hypotheses about distinctions between the SMO-led and spon- taneous DALR. Hypotheses are now stated, and tested using survey-based field data and inferential statistics. The results are followed by a brief presentation of key informant ethnog- raphy. As will become apparent, DALR must be elaborated beyond the two types presented to this point in order to ulti- mately provide a comprehensive description.
(a) Survey of DALR participants
The literature suggests several key distinctions between SMO-led and spontaneous DALR that are now subjected to statistical investigation. Specifically, these modes of land re- form differ in terms of (1) origins of participants, (2) proce- dures implemented for the selection of target properties, with implications for land conflict and deforestation, (3) access to capital and economic resources more generally, and (4) engagement with environmental sustainability concerns. With these differences in mind, we specify the following hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1 (Hyp-1) is that SMO-DALR involves mobili- zation of urban residents, unlike spontaneous DALR parti- sans, who are primarily rural.
Hypothesis 2 (Hyp-2a) states that SMO-DALR targets pri- vate holdings, and spontaneous DALR, unoccupied public lands, so-called terras devolutas. Property selection has serious implications for both land conflict and deforestation. Thus, hypothesis 2b (Hyp-2b) asserts that SMO-DALR is more likely to result in violence than spontaneous DALR for the simple fact that proprietors have strong incentives to defend their properties, and a constitutional right to do so. Hypothe- sis 2c (Hyp-2c) anticipates more deforestation in the aftermath of spontaneous DALR given the land targeted for occupation is likely to be forested.
Hypothesis 3 states that PAs formed by SMO-DALR will have developmental advantages due to deeper veins of social capital, and leaders savvy about pressuring INCRA to fulfill administrative obligations prescribed by law. Thus, we anticipate that participants in SMO-DALR, relative to their counterparts in spontaneously formed PAs, will experience livelihood improvements (Hyp-3a), quicker land titling (Hyp-3b), and superior access to credit (Hyp-3c) and agricultural extension assistance (Hyp-3d), all of which have been identified as essential ingredients for ‘‘development” success.
Hypothesis 4 claims that settlers in SMO-DALR settlements implement more highly productive agricultural practices given increased access to technology and inputs either directly from the SMO, or as a result of their ability to pressure the govern- ment for assistance. This will hypothetically manifest in pro- nounced usage of agricultural inputs including fertilizers,
Settlement
Para ́
Transamazon: Rio do Peixe Surubim Rio Traira ̃o Tutu ́ı Norte Uirapuru ́
Southern Para ́
17 de Abril 1 de Marßco Alegria Castanhal Araras Canudos Cabanos Palmares II Santa Maria do Pontal
Rondonia
Asa de Avia ̃o Cautarinho Chico Mendes I Guarajus
Joana D’Arc I Joana D’Arc III Jose Carlos Marechal Rondon Oriente
Pedra Redonda Primavera Rosana Lecy Serra Grande
Municipality
Uruara ́ Me ́ dicilaˆ ndia Uruara ́ Uruara ́ Uruara ́
Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Sa ̃o Joa ̃o do Araguaia Maraba ́ Sa ̃o Joa ̃o do Araguaia Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Eldorado dos Caraja ́s Parauapebas Eldorado dos Caraja ́s
Machadinho D’Oeste Sa ̃o Francisco do Guapore Presidente Medici Corumbiara Porto Velho Porto Velho Vale do Anari Nova Mamore Buritis Machadinho D’Oeste Theobroma Nova Mamore Costa Marques
Type of DALR Tactic
Spontaneous Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led Spontaneous
SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led
SMO-led Spontaneous SMO-led SMO-led Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led Spontaneous Spontaneous Spontaneous SMO-led SMO-led SMO-led
Year INCRA recognized
10/25/1995 5/18/1988 10/7/1997 10/29/1999 6/10/1997
6/19/1997 6/15/1998 12/9/1999 8/4/1987 8/16/2004 3/7/2003 12/13/2001 7/14/1997
7/28/1999 8/30/2002 5/30/1997 12/29/1995 6/9/2000 6/9/2000 5/5/1998 12/5/2002 11/20/2000 12/29/1995 9/18/1997 11/28/2001 8/14/2001
Families settled
241 1344 160 341 252
688 349 95 83 56 81 286 67
69 213 67 124 289 495 47 64 93 145 262 81 120
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	435
pesticides, and herbicides (Hyp-4a); although not environmen- tally advantageous, such agronomic inputs would allow for higher yields. We also anticipate greater exposure to sustain- able farm management techniques given greater environmental emphasis of many SMOs and increased access to extension, such as fallow management (Hyp-4b), contour farming, (Hyp-4c), green manuring, (Hyp-4d), terracing, (Hyp-4e), crop rotation (Hyp-4f), and mulching (Hyp-4g). These practices, shaped by the ideological drivers of movement rhetoric and programs, should reduce rates of fertility decline on SMO-led PAs (Hyp-4h) and reduce the incidence of wildfire contagion relative to the spontaneous case (Hyp-4i).
(b) The survey and study areas
The data used to consider the above-mentioned hypotheses were collected by field surveys conducted in the summer and fall of 2006. The survey, which assembled information for 751 DALR families, was administered in 26 settlements in Para ́ and Rondoˆnia, two states with extensive development histo- ries, and extremely active contemporary land reform move- ments (Table 2). The Para ́ sites focused on the so-called South of Para ́, an area long notorious for contention over land, and the Transamazon Highway (BR-230) in the central part of the state, the region of the first PIC implemented in the early 1970s. The PAs visited in Rondoˆnia came from all over the state, given its relatively small size and the quality of its high- way system as compared to Para ́. Of the 26 settlements visited in both states, 14 were SMO-DALR PAs, and 12 of them were spontaneous PAs (Figure 1 and Table 2). Classification by type of PA was made on the basis of key informants from INCRA,
other government workers, and settlement residents. The main distinguishing characteristic, as stated above, was the way land was settled, either through planned SMO occupation in the case of SMO-DALR, or gradual and spontaneous small farmer set- tlement as we see in spontaneous DALR. Survey participants were identified by the opportunistic methods described in Cal- das et al. (2007), which seeks geographic coverage and repre- sentativeness.5 Representativeness of the survey sample is probably also guaranteed by sample size, given over 700 of the target population of about 4000 DALR households (Table 2) provided responses.
(c) Methodology
The survey instrument gathered household-level information on demographic history, farming system and agricultural prac- tices, durable goods possession, and DALR experience. With respect to demographic and personal data, the instrument que- ried respondents about household structure, migration history, social and political networks, and personal background in DALR and land conflicts. Although settlement histories for each site enabled classification into the two categories identifi- able in the literature, contemporary DALR in the Amazon, and Brazil more generally, is a process whose complexity is concealed by a simple, binary typology. Despite complexity within DALR types, this classification still holds for the pur- pose of analysis. A closer examination of DALR processes is aided by our subsequent key informant interviews that detailed settlement histories, to be discussed in the section that follows.
For Hyp-1, we use data derived from a question in the migration history component of the survey that explicitly
Table 2. Study sites, settlements name, and DALR type
436	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Figure 1. (a) Assentamento study sites in Para ́. (b) Assentamento study sites in Rondoˆnia.
asked whether the respondent lived in an urban or a rural site	and 2b, we use data derived from questions that asked the prior to moving to their current residence. To address Hyp 2a	respondent to identify if the land they occupy was previously
Wealth category at arrival
1 2 3 4 Total
Spontaneous DALR
187 (48) 73 (47) 57 (41) 21 (57) 338 (47)
SMO-DALR
203 (52) 84 (54) 82 (59) 16 (43) 385 (53)
Total
390 157 139 37 723
terms of age (􏳵45 years) and education level of household head (􏳵3 years), number of co-resident family members (4.5), extent of market engagement, and consumption depen- dence on the production of annuals. Length of occupation of rural property is statistically different between the DALR types, although not substantial, and close to 8 years in both cases. The size of holding does differ meaningfully, with aver- age properties on spontaneous PAs at 77 ha, almost twice as large as those found on the SMO-led settlements (41 ha). In terms of farming systems, the data show comparability, with diversification across annual crops (corn, rice, manioc, and beans) and perennials (coffee, cocoa, pepper, and banana). Nevertheless, households in spontaneous DALR settlements are more heavily engaged in perennials, particularly cocoa. They also have more cattle, 35 compared to 21 head in SMO-led settlements, although the difference is not significant and pastures are about the same in both cases.
Testing the hypotheses on key distinctions between SMO- led and spontaneous DALR involved inferential statistics (i.e., chi square and t-tests), with results given in Table 5. As for Hyp-1, findings confirm that participants in SMO-DALR are more likely to come from urban areas given the prevalent strategy of SMO mobilization, with 41% of SMO-led DALR participants coming most immediately from urban areas, as compared to 25% for the spontaneously acting individuals. Results also support our expectation in Hyp-2a that settlers in SMO-led DALR settlements more often target private property (73%), while settlers in spontaneous DALR seek public lands (59%). However, we did not find support for our subsequent hypothesis, Hyp-2b, that because they target private land, settlers in SMO-led DALR experience more con- flict than spontaneous DALR settlers. This is likely explained by the high residential turnover in SMO initiated PAs; data showed that 54% of the respondents in SMO-led PAs were not the original settlers on the land, compared to 46% in spon- taneous DALR PAs. 7 Nevertheless, key informant interviews with long time residents, SMO leadership, and public officials, tell a tale of contentious land struggle in SMO-DALR sites specifically, which is supported with secondary sources such as local newspapers and CPT accounts that give detailed re- ports on violent conflict. Finally, testing on Hyp-2c supports the hypothesis that spontaneous DALR settlers have a greater potential for deforestation, given they occupy heavily forested lands, with an average of 91% under forest cover at time of occupation. Regardless, impact on forests by settlers in SMO-led DALR cannot be dismissed, given that average for- est area at time of occupation is still high, at 80%.
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	437
private or public, and whether they experienced conflict when they settled their land. For (Hyp-2c), we use data derived from the questionnaire that explicitly asks the percentage of land cover in forest at time of occupation, which gives us percent- ages for comparison.
In order to assess (Hyp-3a), that settlers in SMO-DALR set- tlements experienced greater improvements in wealth than spontaneous settlements, we followed precedent set by Walk- er, Perz, Caldas, and Silva (2002) and Caldas et al. (2007), using data derived from the surveys that reveal the ownership of an array of durable goods that correlate well to wealth (Morris, Carlleto, & Hoddinott, 2000). 6 Because we did not have prices of the goods, we did not create a single monetary value (Junming, 1997; Morris et al., 2000), and rather than imposing a weighting scheme, we chose categories that could be used to define dummy variables (Menon, Ruel, & Morris, 2000; Weil, 1989). Four wealth categories were created ranging from 1, the poorest cohort, to 4, the richest. This was done for two time periods: (1) at time of arrival on the settlement, and (2), at the time of the interview (see Tables 3a and 3b). We next create an improvement variable that indicates whether the households moved up in wealth category, reflecting improve- ments in rural livelihood (see Table 3c), and use it in the anal- ysis to examine whether a statistically significant difference between DALR type exists. Walker et al. (2002) and Caldas et al. (2007) used such categorical data successfully in statisti- cal analyses similar to the one presented here.
To test Hyp-3b through 3d, we used binary (y/n) response information derived from questions on the surveys that query whether respondents received title, credit, and agricultural extension. Finally, to test whether settlers in SMO-DALR set- tlements have greater access to agricultural technology (Hyp- 4a–g), we use responses from a variety of questions on the sur- vey that illicit, yes or no, whether respondents used the agri- cultural practice. We also measured sustainability in terms of (yes or no) whether the respondent experienced (Hyp-5a) decline in land fertility and/or (Hyp-5b) exposure to wildfire.
(d) Results and discussion As for general characteristics of the survey households and
their farming systems, Table 4 shows them to be similar in Table 3a. Wealth categories at arrival
Table 3c. Wealth change, from time of arrival until time of interview by DALR type
Notes: Wealth was defined on specific durable goods possession as queried in the survey.
Wealth category at interview
1 2 3 4 Total
Spontaneous DALR
77 (59) 107 (55) 119 (37) 39 (51) 338 (47)
SMO-DALR
Total
Table 3b. Wealth categories at time of interview
Notes: Wealth was defined on specific durable goods possession as queried in the survey.
54 (41)	131
86 (45)	193 207 (63)	326 37 (49)	76 385 (53)	723
Development status over time of moves
Stayed the same Total % same Improved
Total % improved Declined
Total % declined Total = n
Spontaneous	SMO
171	156 52%	42%
1 74 91 2 55 99 3 11 9
42%	53%
􏳶1 15 15 􏳶2 3 2 􏳶3 1 0
6%	5% 330	372
438
A. Households characteristics
Age of household head (yrs) Length of land occupation (yrs)* Day labor bought* Day labor sold Number of people on property Number of families on property Education Household head (yrs)* Consumption characteristics (%)
Corn Rice Manioc
Market engagement (%)
B. Farm system characteristics
Mean property size (ha)* Annuals
Corn (ha)* Rice (ha) Manioc (ha)
Perrenials Coffee (ha)
Cocoa (ha)* Banana (ha) Cattle (heads) Pasture area (ha)
WORLD DEVELOPMENT Table 4. Descriptive characteristics of settlements and households
Full sample mean (Std. Deviation)
44.55 (13.00) 7.81 (5.45) 15.49 (45.93) 17.08 (52.58) 4.52 (2.81) 1.10 (0.42) 3.01 (2.62)
53.59 (0.50) 52.39 (0.50) 51.06 (0.50) 56.76 (0.50)
57.82 (57.10)
1.10 (3.96) 0.96 (1.54) 0.56 (1.26)
0.68 (12.30) 1.81 (7.45) 0.43 (2.37) 28.92 (58.79) 22.60 (51.35)
SMO-DALR mean (Std.
45.20 (12.66) 7.27 (3.91) 17.54 (39.75) 13.89 (47.97) 4.50 (2.71) 1.09 (0.37) 2.76 (2.36)
56.10 (0.50) 54.86 (0.50) 50.62 (0.50) 57.18 (0.50)
41.43 (25.31)
0.95 (1.43) 0.95 (1.45) 0.56 (1.21)
0.61 (1.74) 0.55 (3.43) 0.52 (3.07) 23.41 (35.83) 21.35 (50.59)
Deviation)
Non-SMO-DALR mean (Std. Deviation)
43.80 (13.37) 8.44 (6.77) 13.09 (52.16) 20.47 (56.96) 4.55 (2.94) 1.11 (0.47) 3.31 (2.88)
50.71 (0.50) 49.57 (0.50) 51.57 (0.50) 56.29 (0.50)
76.97 (75.15)
1.26 (5.59) 0.97 (1.63) 0.55(1.31)
0.76 (2.80) 3.26 (10.09) 0.32 (1.10) 35.18 (76.58) 24.01 (52.25)
Notes: Inferential statistics were performed on the indicators (chi-square and difference of the means as appropriate). Variables in bold with an * indicate significance at the .05 level.
Table 5. Development and Sustainability Indicators, by DALR type
Full sample	SMO
Spontaneous
A. Settlement characteristics
Hyp-1 Last residence—urban (%)* Hyp-2a Land targeted for occupation*
Private (%) Public (%)
Hyp-2b Land conflict (%) Hyp-2c Forest at time of occupation (average% in forest)*
B. Development indicators
Hyp-3a Improvement livelihood (%)* Hyp-3b Title security (%)* Hyp-3c Credit (%)* Hyp-3d Agricultural extension (%)
Top 3 sources
C. Agricultural technology
Hyp-4a Inputs (%)** Hyp-4b Years fallow (yrs) Hyp-4c Contour farming (%) Hyp-4d Green manure/plant cover (%) Hyp-4e Terracing (%) Hyp-4f Crop rotation (%)* Hyp-4g Mulch cover (%)
D. Sustainability indicators
Hyp-4h Decline in land fertility (%) Hyp-4i Exposure to wildfire (%)*
* Statistically significant at .05. ** Statistically significant at .10.
34	41	25
43	73	9 36	15	59
5	6	4 86	80	91
45	53	42 62	48	77 64	71	56 18	17	20
Cooperative	EMATER EMATER	INCRA
INCRA	Cooperative
Cooperative CEPLAC EMATER
5.5	3.6	1.9 1.3	1.4	1.2 3.8	4	3.5
12	13.7	10.6 3.8	4.6	2.9
14.8	19.4	9 10.4	9.2	12
37	39	34 45	50	38
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	439
The data analyses show a statistically significant effect on livelihoods as posed in Hyp-3a, with 53% of settlers in SMO-led sites improving their circumstances compared to 42% for spontaneous settlers. These results are further elabo- rated in Tables 3a, 3b, and 3c, which provide additional infor- mation on the dynamics of durable goods possession, showing that more households in spontaneous DALR sites experienced no change or a decline in wealth status compared to SMO- DALR participants. As for differences in access to title, credit, and agricultural extension, the results are mixed. Our findings reveal a statistically significant difference with respect to tenure security, Hyp-3b, but they contradict expectations, with a lar- ger proportion of settlers in spontaneous settlements (77%) having title, as compared to those living in SMO-led DALR sites (42%). The reason for this may be SMO strategy. Accord- ing to a number of key informants in SMO settlements, they prefer not to get title because that signifies the final stage of INCRA support, at which time the households are no longer eligible for cesta basica and other subsidies. 8 With regard to credit, Hyp-3c, results are statistically significant and agree with expectations that SMOs facilitate access.
Findings from the analysis of differences for Hyp-3d regard- ing access to agricultural extension were not significant, with nearly 20% of all households across DALR types receiving some form of agricultural extension. However, there is a sub- stantive difference in terms of which organizations supplied this service for which DALR type. For SMO-DALR settlements, agricultural extension was primarily provided by government services, most importantly the State agency Empresa de Assisteˆncia Te ́cnica e Extensa ̃o Rural (EMATER) and INCRA, followed by local cooperatives contracted by the local rural syndicates. In contrast, spontaneous DALR resi- dents more often received extension from local cooperatives, followed	by	government	agencies	such	as	the	Comissa ̃ o Executiva do Plano da Lavoura Cacaueira (CEPLAC) and EMATER. The spontaneous DALR residents rarely men- tioned receiving assistance from INCRA. In general, this gives some support to our hypothesis that SMOs are better able to pressure the government for services that benefit residents in their settlements.
Finally, with respect to measures of agricultural technology and sustainable practices (Hyp-4a–4i), results show statisti- cally significant differences for inputs, crop rotation, and wild- fire exposure. Findings for both inputs and crop rotation are consistent with hypothetical statements, with SMOs evidently managing to (1) acquire capital inputs to increase farm pro- ductivity, which may or may not be sustainable, and (2) em- ploy green farm practices, in particular crop rotation that is used by nearly 20% of the SMO-DALR households surveyed. The application of green manure and mulch cover are also important techniques used by DALR households, with no sig- nificant difference between the DALR types. The sustainability result for fire, however, does not conform to expectations, a problem that appears more prevalent in the SMO-led settle- ments. In terms of land fertility declines, over one-third of households sampled said this was a problem, although no sig- nificant differences emerged.
In summary, analyses support a number of hypothesis state- ments. SMO-led DALR tends to promote relative wealth accumulation, and their farming systems are somewhat ‘‘greener” than spontaneous actions, with less settlement in areas of primary forest and greater reliance on agricultural inputs. That said, SMO-led PAs experience more wildfire, a critical concern in present-day Amazonia. As for wealth accumulation, it is important to point out that members of spontaneous settlements also experience wealth accumulation.
That DALR participants in general appear to improve their life circumstances probably explains the widespread and aggressive nature of the movement. Perhaps ironically, but also in concert with expectations, large numbers of settlers in SMO-led PAs show urban residency prior to PA formation. Of course, such individuals are likely to have started out in rural areas, and where they lived immediately prior to DALR involvement often indicates a chain of circular migrations with return flows to the rural environment. In other words, DALR, and specifically its SMO variant, has the potential to instigate migration flows in reverse of the pervasive tendency of rural to urban movement that generally occurs with economic develop- ment. 9 In fact, a preliminary assessment of the data does indi- cate a significant difference with greater circular migration (rural–urban–rural) in SMO-DALR, supporting hypothetical assertions made earlier by Simmons et al. (2002b) and Sim- mons et al. (2007b). Such a migratory phenomenon possesses implications for the Amazonian forest, since much of the land occupied is forested (Fearnside, 2001; Simmons et al., 2002b; Simmons, 2005).
(e) Complexities in the PA formation process
Evidently, the DALR categories as elaborated are instruc- tive with respect to attributes of household and farming sys- tems, and useful for distinguishing SMO from spontaneous DALR in an effort to examine rural livelihood improvements, as we demonstrate in the previous section. However, the typol- ogy does not reflect the nuanced differences that emerge in the formative processes within settlements in each DALR cate- gory. From a broader policy perspective, understanding how PAs come into existence is a key part of the story, and a prin- cipal goal of the paper. To this point, we have advanced from the literature a sharp contrast between SMO-led PAs on the one hand, and the spontaneous version on the other hand. This provides an intelligible distinction, with exotic SMOs importing a confrontational politics of occupation at one ex- treme, and local residents seeking their own opportunity via manipulation of the state, on the other extreme.
Nevertheless, the empirical processes of PA implementation present more complexity than described, and here we identify a select number of distinguishing features that contribute to a more nuanced understanding of DALR in Amazonia. Since the rank-and-file participants have little information on imple- mentation, we draw on insight gained from key informant interviews in a re-creation of settlement histories. Two specific issues are paramount in this regard. One involves what we shall refer to as locational contingency, and the other, hybridity in the political forces—and agency—that set in motion and sustain the PA formation process. As for the locational issue, property targeting and DALR action, particularly with SMO- led actions, may bear a highly contingent relation to where the PAs are ultimately established. Specifically, there is not a nec- essary correlation between site of occupation and site of a new PA; in fact, the occupation may not be the precipitate factor to PA creation. A rather dramatic example is provided, perhaps ironically, by PA 17 de Abril in southern Para ́ formed in re- sponse to the massacre in Eldorado dos Caraja ́s in 1996.
This PA, organized by the MST, involved almost every tac- tic endorsed by the larger landless movement from occupa- tions of the desired land and public buildings, encampments on roadsides, to well-publicized protests, marches and road blockades. Success, however, was unintentional, at least with regard to the precipitating event that led to the expropriation of Fazenda Macaxeira. In fact, it was the un-intended conse- quence of the road blockade and the subsequent massacre of
440	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
19 landless workers by the military police that led to the crea- tion of this and many other settlements across the Amazon and the Brazilian countryside. In particular, the international and national press coverage of the events that transpired that tragic day were far-reaching, with an expose ́ in the New York Times, for example. The outcry in response to the bloody images of bodies on the roadside forced the government to re- spond to the needs of the landless, and consequently, several PAs in the immediate vicinity of Eldorado dos Caraja ́s were established within the year, PA 17 de Abril among them. 10
Thus, DALR actions, particularly those precipitating vio- lent response by the state or land owners, can have significant spillover effects, and the PA formation process may not unfold as planned by an SMO or individuals pursuing DALR. Specif- ically, targeted properties do not always fall to direct action tactics, particularly in the case of private lands judged produc- tive by the relevant authority. In such circumstances, which are relatively common, INCRA seeks to provide alternative sites for settlement. Although the case of Eldorado dos Cara- ja ́s is by far the most famous example of the intersection be- tween violence and DALR pursuant to the desire to create a PA, an almost identical incident transpired the previous year in Curumbiara, Rondoˆnia, with a military assault on an encampment on Fazenda Santa Elina that left 12 people dead, nine missing, and hundreds wounded. In its aftermath, the government promised to provide the surviving families land in a number of newly created settlements in the vicinity, sev- eral of which are included in our sample. 11
Another empirical situation that does not meet our initial presentation involves the admittedly simplistic two-way cate- gorization into SMO-led and spontaneous DALR, and the assumptions that SMO-DALR is initiated by an extra-local SMO, in contrast to endogenous agricultural expansion pro- cesses that unfold in spontaneous DALR. Specifically, DALR may reveal hybridized processes involving a diverse mix of ac- tors, radical leadership that emerges endogenously, not via exotic import, and state agency, as when government officials, sympathetic to the landless, provide their knowledge, exper- tise, and support to SMOs and/or individuals seeking land. The PA Tutu ́ı Norte, an SMO-DALR PA in the study area along the Transamazon Highway in the State of Para ́, pro- vides a good example here. 12
The creation of this PA was instigated by an occupation of a ranch that was targeted not for expropriation, but simply as a means to force INCRA to provide the participants land, some- where. The 30 families that participated in the occupation pre- viously lived on another PA in the vicinity, PA Rio do Peixe— a spontaneous DALR PA—, from which they were evicted by INCRA and forced to move to town because the land lacked water. As it turns out, their leader, Senhor Gustavo, was a for- mer employee of INCRA and therefore knowledgeable about the land statutes and administrative obligations of the agency he had worked for. To initiate DALR, Mr. Gustavo enlisted the local rural syndicate in the nearby town of Uruara ́ (Figure 1a) for political support and assistance in mobilizing the urban landless for the occupation. Once the families occupied the property, its owner appealed to INCRA, at which point Mr. Gustavo indicated the occupied property was not large enough for their purposes. That is, their DALR actions were actually meant as a tactic in a longer-term negotiation with INCRA for a sizeable parcel. After more than a year, they succeeded with the establishment of PA Tutuı ́ Norte on 34,000 ha of govern- ment land along the Tutu ́ı River, taking on a shoe string shape so that all residents have access to water.
Finally, spontaneous DALR also reveals hybridity, with processes that do not always conform to the unplanned, unor-
ganized, and endogenous settlement evolution elaborated in our typology. To the contrary, the vast majority of settlers in spontaneous DALR PAs across the study region were immigrants from the Northeast, and many received help in the initial stages of settlement from a diverse set of actors lo- cated outside their social network of family and friends. In several PAs, the rural syndicate working in conjunction with INCRA advised the participants on the best location for set- tlement in order to increase their likelihood of receiving title. Settlement histories also revealed a precarious relationship be- tween settlers and loggers, with initial occupation triggering conflict over resources, but later turning into mutual ex- change, whereby loggers built roads and supplied housing materials for settlers and, in return, the settlers gave them ac- cess to the wood from their land claim, lending legality to their illegal operations.
In sum, the initial categorization of DALR outlined at the outset is subject to internal complexity and variation. For in- stance, PAs are not necessarily created on the land that was originally targeted for expropriation, DALR evidently in- volves a broad cross-section of society, and actors in unex- pected, difficult-to-theoretically-delineate, roles, and familial networks provide support but do not alone determine success of DALR. Nevertheless, the final distinction between SMO and spontaneous-led DALR is both empirically useful and va- lid. The ultimate distinction revealed by the ethnographic study is that the SMO-led actions shape the entire DALR pro- cess from land occupation to PA formalization; whereas the spontaneous variant involves the occupation of land by like- minded individuals in an unplanned and independent fashion, and only later in the process do participants come together to create the INCRA-mandated association.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The main objective of this research was twofold. The first was to develop a comprehensive understanding of DALR in the Brazilian Amazon, which is a new and growing post-devel- opment strategy to bring economic and social justice to the rural hinterlands, beginning with equitable land access. The second was to examine the impact of DALR on the livelihoods of participants, and the potential implications for the environ- ment and land conflict. In order to address these issues we per- formed a cross-basin study involving both in-depth key informant interviews at national, regional, and local scale and 751 comprehensive household surveys in 26 settlements across the study region. In doing so, this study represents one of the first examinations of Brazilian DALR, as well as one of the few large-scale household surveys done at the cross-basin scale. As such, the findings from this research could have far-reaching policy implications for other regions and countries facing populist discontent with land inequality and their own form of DALR movement.
In general, we have found that DALR involves a complex and heterogeneous set of processes, although each settlement can be classified as either SMO-led DALR or spontaneous DALR depending on whether it was initiated by an occupa- tion. Nevertheless, within each category exists a great deal of diversity, which is important to consider in the overall exami- nation. When it comes to SMO-led DALR, our case revealed the collaboration of a multitude of actors including informal and formal social movements active at a variety of scales, from endogenous populist action spearheaded by a charismatic farmer to coordinated events initiated by national and interna- tional organizations. Indeed, the landless struggle in the Ama-
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	441
zon today involves a myriad of social movements, such as theMovimentodosCamponeˆsdeCorumbiara(MCC),an endogenous SMO that split with the MST, and others such as the Ligas Camponesas, Movimento Luta de Terra, Movi- mento dos Pequenos Produtores, each with their respective ideologies.
The examination of spontaneous DALR settlements re- vealed that our initial description did not always hold. In par- ticular, settlers were often immigrants from the Northeast of Brazil who moved to the region in search of land to farm, and not from the local area as suggested in the demographic lifecycle. In many respects, this form of settlement resembles the initial wave of colonization, although these settlers do not have the same degree of subsidies and support by the gov- ernment in the initial phase of occupation as the colonist farm- ers did in the early years. Instead, they rely on support from a vast network of family and friends. Key informants gave evi- dence that would suggest a process of chain migration and channelization is at work, connecting places in the Northeast through kin relations to specific sites in the basin, and, there- by, creating and recreating socio-economic and environmental conditions. Given the importance of social networks and chain migration to the success of spontaneous DALR settlements, these phenomena merit greater attention and future research.
While our research shows great diversity in DALR settle- ments, the households living in these PAs across the study re- gion are quite similar. The typical head of household was born in the Northeast of Brazil, is middle aged, and supports a fam- ily of four. The main economic activity is farming, with an emphasis on rice, corn, manioc, and beans for consumption, and cattle and perennials for market. In general, farmers across the sample, regardless of whether they live in SMO- led or spontaneous DALR PAs, use the same agricultural technology and land management practices. Nevertheless, there were important differences. As we hypothesized, many settlers in SMO-led DALR sites came from urban areas and targeted private land for occupation, compared to settlers in spontaneous DALR PAs who more often came from rural areas and targeted forested land, each having potential im- pacts on land conflict and the environment.
When it comes to development, measured in terms of improvement in wealth, and access to title, credit, and agricul- tural extension, we expected residents in SMO-led DALR set- tlements to have better outcomes given greater access to political and social capital, and the subsequent power wielded by SMOs necessary to pressure the government for support. For the most part, this hypothesis was upheld by our research, particularly in terms of wealth improvements and access to credit. We found no statistically significant difference between participants in the two types of DALR PAs in terms of access to agricultural extension, although an assessment of the source of extension revealed that SMO-led DALR participants re- ceived the vast majority of assistance from the government, specifically INCRA. To the contrary, spontaneous DALR participants received negligible assistance from INCRA or any other government agencies for that matter, and this was the biggest complaint expressed by spontaneous settlers.
In a similar vein, we expected that SMO-led participants would have greater access to technological inputs and educa- tion on ecologically sound agricultural practices. As a result, we expected that their farming systems would be more produc- tive and perhaps more sustainable than farmers in spontane- ous settlement sites, leading to less fertility decline and accidental fire damage. However, the results from the analyses were not so clear. We did find that participants in SMO-led DALR sites did have greater access to inputs (i.e., fertilizer,
pesticide, and herbicide), although across the sample the num- ber of farmers using such inputs was less than 5%. Likewise, only a small fraction of farmers practiced the agricultural tech- nologies identified. Of greatest importance was crop rotation, which was used by twice as many farmers in SMO-led DALR PAs than those living in spontaneous sites, nearly 20% of the sample. Two other practices, green manure (12%) and mulch cover (10%), were used by farmers equally across the sample. When it comes to sustainability, there was no statistical differ- ence in the number of respondents reporting fertility decline, which revealed that across the sample more than a third expe- rienced such degradation. Furthermore, contrary to expected outcomes, we found that settlers in SMO-led DALR PAs experienced greater accidental fire than those living in sponta- neous DALR sites.
These apparent contradictory outcomes may reflect the inability of individuals living in SMO-led DALR PAs to main- tain the political and social capital in the long term. Specifi- cally, SMOs are successful at short-term organization and mobilization of people and resources prior to settlement for- malization, when the precipitate factor to the struggle is still unsatisfied, and consequently, the settlers receive the immedi- ate benefits for development. At the same time, it may also re- flect their inability to maintain cohesion within settlements for the long term necessary for sustainability. This may explain widespread accounts of accidental fire in SMO-led sites, which led to damage of crops, equipment, and housing (Simmons, Walker, Wood, Arima, & Cochrane, 2004). Concern regarding the lack of social capital and organizational capacity was like- wise expressed by respondents and key informants in the spon- taneous sites, who explicitly stated that the associations created in accordance with INCRA regulations at the begin- ning of the formalization stage were basically non-existent to- day despite continued and pressing need.
Also important for consideration is the impact of DALR on land conflict. Specifically, SMO-led DALR targets private land for occupation, and the expectation is that this is likely to lead to contentious encounters between the landless and landowners. Despite the fact that our research showed no sta- tistical significance in the prevalence of land conflict at time of occupation between SMO and spontaneous DALR, news ac- counts on an almost daily basis lend evidence to the fact that it is occurring. As noted earlier, more than 1,500 landless workers have been killed in the struggle, and in the recent years there has been an increase in violence (CPT, 2008). The prime objective of the larger landless movement is the eradication of latifundios, and the occupation of private hold- ings is the tactic of choice, which generates contention and vio- lence whether as an externality of action or as part and parcel of the overall strategy. 13
In terms of potential environmental impacts, our research shows that settlers in SMO-led and spontaneous DALR settle- ments target forest due to the protection it provides by the cloak of the canopy and the initial capital garnered from sale of valuable hardwoods. While spontaneous DALR is likely to have a greater impact on primary forest at the edge of the agricultural frontier, SMO-led DALR may result in a second wave of deforestation on the once hollow frontier (Simmons et al., 2007b). Given the high rate of turnover in these settle- ments, it is likely that some residents abandon their land and return to nearby frontier towns in search of employment. There, these newly landless migrants may once again be re- cruited by the landless movement and return to the rural areas, initiating a new cycle of deforestation. Indeed, Brazil now rec- ognizes DALR settlement formation as a significant deforesta- tion driver. That said, we wish to re-emphasize the greater
442	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
impact that other actors, particularly large-scale ranchers, have on the Amazonian environment. Although we recognize the potential impacts of DALR on forest cover, our main focus is on development outcomes, and we leave a full treatment of DALR and the environment to future research.
DALR exists in contemporary Brazil because individuals are willing to build their own futures. Further, the organiza- tional capacity of SMOs pursuing DALR represents hard won social capital that appears to be improving the lives of its participants. The policy implication is that the Brazilian Government has freely at its disposal substantial human and institutional resources, which it should use in shaping an ap- proach to agrarian reform that increases farm viability as it mitigates environmental impact and social conflict. Coopera- tive engagement with the social movements is likely to im- prove livelihoods in the agricultural sector, thereby helping to resolve persistent problems of rural poverty that have pla- gued Brazil, even in this period of unprecedented growth and development. The Brazilian government, by providing minimal assistance in the selection of areas for settlement for-
mation, and certain basic agricultural inputs, could create a viable family farming sector at low environmental cost.
DALR in Brazil today is a social movement that has taken Brazil by surprise, given that country’s robust recovery from mismanagement by the military government, and the adjust- ments all have had to make to an increasingly globalized world economy. To be sure, President Lula da Silva’s social welfare programs have wider sweep than those of his predecessor, President Cardoso, but many SMOs view Lula da Silva with suspicion, and they clearly represent a shadow government at local level in the PAs they have fought to establish. Millions of Brazilians interpret the world and their place in it through the optic of the DALR struggles they have endured, and the leaders who have inspired their efforts. Thus, SMO-led DALR, and DALR in general, must be recognized as a pre- eminent post-development phenomenon, a social welfare quest with its own philosophy, culture, and agenda, and with mini- mal governmental input. Because the Brazilian state never managed to create a life of dignity for the rural poor, it must now follow the lead of those who are doing it for themselves.
1.	Land Statute 601 of September 18, 1850, can be found on the INCRA website http://www.incra.gov.br/_htm/serveinf/_htm/legislacao/lei/ 601.htm.
2. Of course, from the landowner’s perspective this same action constitutes an invasion of private property, which is also constitutionally protected. Herein lies the essence of the legal battle.
3.	Terra Devoluta is unclaimed public land, not yet dedicated to specific uses.
4. He ́bette2002,analyzedwhatisreferredtoas‘‘parentesco”offthe Transamazon highway in Para ́.
5. The difficulties of field data collection complicated formal efforts at geospatial sample design (Griffith, 2005). Moreover, random sampling by distance (every nth kilometer) and household count (every nth farmstead) proved impractical given proprietor absence and difficulty in house identification from the road. In addition, the remoteness of household locations made time a serious constraint on data acquisition. For reasons such as these, the analysis sample was collected opportunistically; in essence we conducted interviews with people we could find, building geographic representation by daily updates of the survey geography using regional maps. Evidently, the sample possesses both systematic and random spatial components, given the desire for representation on the many settlement roads, and the randomness of opportunity once sampling occurred on them. Such a sample possesses desirable statistical properties (Griffith, 2005).
6. The poorest households (category 1) possess none of the durable goods considered. Category 2 households possess either a stove or a chainsaw, and nothing else, and category 3 households possess a stove or a chainsaw, plus either (i) some good depending on electricity generation or (ii) a motorcycle. The wealthiest households (category 4) have what
category 3 households own, but also possess either a car or a tractor. In essence, our categorization here elaborates the two categories used in Walker et al. (2002).
7. Analyses show a statistically significant difference with greater lot turnover in SMO DALR. So, it follows that many of the current residents were not involved in the initial land occupation and were not exposed to related conflict, as is reflected in the data.
Almeida,B.A.W.(1994).Carajas:Aguerradosmapas[Carajas:Awarof the	maps].	Bele ́ m:	Falangola.
Alves, D. (2002). Space–time dynamics of the deforestation in Brazilian Amazoˆ nia. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 23(14), 2903–2908.
Arima, E., Barreto, P., & Brito, M., 2005. Pecua ́ria na Amazoˆnia: Tendeˆ ncias	e	implicaßco ̃ es	para	a	conservaßca ̃ o	[Ranching	in	the Amazonia: Tendencies and implications for conservation]. Bele ́m: Imazon.
NOTES
REFERENCES
KI Interview, Eldorado de Caraja ́s, July 2006.
8.
9. urban-rural migration trends in SMO-DALR, this does not demonstrate a change in the predominant rural to urban trend at the regional scale (Perz et al., unpublished manuscript). The substantive impact of this migration cycle is the subject for future research.
10. The number of PAs created throughout Brazil after 1996 almost doubled, from 992 at end of 1995 to 2,506 after. In Para ́ State the number of PAs tripled.
11. The decision to accept the government’s proposition without the expropriation of the fazenda was a serious point of contention within the landless movement in Rondoˆnia that eventually led to a split with the MST and the creation of Movimento dos Camponeˆs de Corumbiara (MCC), a radical endogenous SMO.
12. ThedetailsonPATutu ́ıNortederivefromkeyinformantinterviews in 2007. Names changed to protect identity of respondents.
13.	Some have suggested that DALR SMOs plan their action to generate the greatest attention, and target land for political reasons.
Although the data reveal a statistically significant difference in rural-
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Comissa ̃ o CPT.
Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral Pastoral
da da da da da da da da da da
Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra Terra
(CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT). (CPT).
(1992). (1995). (1996). (2002). (2003). (2004). (2005). (2006). (2007). (2008).
Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos Conflitos
no no no no no no no no no no
campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo. campo.
Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m: Bele ́ m:
DOING IT FOR THEMSELVES: DIRECT ACTION LAND REFORM IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON	443
Bernstein, H. (2002). Land reform: Taking a long(er) view. Journal of Agrarian Change, 2(4), 433–463.
Borras, S. M. (2003). Questioning market-led agrarian reform: Experi- ences from Brazil, Colombia, and South Africa. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3(3), 367–394.
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Browder, J. O., & Godfrey, B. J. (1997). Rainforest cities: Urbanization, development and globalization of the Brazilian Amazon. New York: Columbia University Press.
Browder, J. O. (1988). Public policy and deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. In R. Repetto (Ed.), Public policies and the misuse of forest resources (pp. 247–297). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, for World Resources Institute.
Caldas, M., Walker, R., Perz, S., Arima, E., Aldrich, S., & Simmons, C. (2007). Theorizing land cover and land use change: The peasant economy of colonization in the Amazon Basin. Annals of the Association of American Geographer, 97(1), 86–110.
Caldas, M. M., 2008. Settlement formation and land cover and land use change: A case study in the Brazilian Amazon. PhD dissertation, Michigan State University.
He ́ bette,	J.	(2004).	Movimentos	Sociais	Contemporaˆ neos	no	campo Paraense. Cruzando a Fronteira: 30 anos de estudo do campesinato na Amazoˆnia (Vol. 2, pp. 197–211). Bele ́m: Editora Universitaria UFPA.
Ianni,	O.	(1979).	Colonizaca ̃ o	e	Contra-reforma	na	Amazoˆ nia.	Petro ́ polis: Vozes.
INCRA. (2000). Principais aßco ̃es do Instituto Nacional de Colonizaßcao e reforma agraria.
Junming, Z. (1997). Multilevel analysis of rural outmigration in Guan- dong, China. Working paper series no. 97.03. Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies, Harvard University, Cam- bridge, MA.
Mahar, D. J. (1979). Frontier development policy in Brazil: A study of Amazoˆnia. New York: Praeger.
Martins, J. S. (1989). Caminhando no Cha ̃o da noite. Sa ̃o Paulo: Hucitec. MDA/INCRA.	(2007).	Diretoria	de	obtenßca ̃ o	de	terras	e	implantaßca ̃ o	de projetos de assentamento. Projetos de reforma a ́gra ́ria conforme fases
de implementaßca ̃o. Medeiros, L. S. (2002). Movimentos sociais, disputas polı ́ticas e reforma
agra ́ria de mercado no Brasil [Social movements, political disputes and
market agrarian reform in Brazil]. Serope ́dica, RJ: EDUR. Menon, P., Ruel, M. T., & Morris, S. S. (2000). Socioeconomic differentials in child stunting are consistently larger in urban than in rural areas. Food Consumption and Nutrition Division, FCND Discussion Paper No. 97. Washington, DC: International Food Policy
Research Institute. Morris, S. S., Carlleto, C., & Hoddinott, L. J. M. (2000). Validity of rapid
estimates of household wealth and income for health surveys in rural
Africa. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 54, 381–387. Moyo, S., & Yeros, P. (Eds.) (2005). Reclaiming the land: The resurgence of rural movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. New York: Ced
Books. MST National Secretariat. (2007). Linhas pol ́ıticas reafirmadas no V
Congresso Nacional do MST-2007, CARTA DO 5 CONGRESSO NACIONAL	DO	MST.	<http://www.mst.org.br/mst/pag- ina.php?cd=4178> Accessed 12/18/2008.
Perz, S. G., Brilhante, S., Brown, F., Caldas, M., Ikeda, S., & Mendoza, E. (2008). Road building, land use and climate change: prospects for environmental governance in the Amazon. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363, 1889–1895.
Petras, J. (1998). The new revolutionary peasantry: The growth of peasant-led opposition to neoliberalism. Z Magazine, October. <http://www.mstbrazil.org/petras1098.html>.
Riedinger, J. M. (1995). Agrarian reform in the Philippines: Democratic transitions and redistributive reform. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Riedinger, J. M., Yang, W.-Y., & Brook, K. (2001). Market-based land reform: An imperfect solution. In H. Morales, & J. Putzel (Eds.), Power in the Village (pp. 363–378). Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press.
Rosset, P., Patel, R., & Courville, M. (Eds.) (2006). Promised land: Competing visions of agrarian reform. Oakland, CA: Food First Books. Santos, R. (1984). Law and social change: The problem of land in the Brazilian Amazon. In M. Schmink, & C. Wood (Eds.), Frontier expansion in Amazonia (pp. 180–203). Gainesville: University of
Florida Press. Santos,	W.	M.	(2001).	Desapropriaßca ̃ o,	reforma	agra ́ ria,	e	meio	ambiente:
Aspectos substanciais e procedimentos reflexos no direito penal [Dis- appropriation, land reform, and the environment: Substantial aspects and the penal code]. Belo Horizonte: Mandamentos.
Schmink, M., & Wood, C. (1992). Contested frontiers in Amazonia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sigaud,	L.	(2005).	As	condißco ̃ es	de	possibilidade	das	ocupaßco ̃ es	de	terra. Tempo Social, revista de sociologia da USP (Vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 255– 280).
Sigaud, L., Rosa, M., & Macedo, M. (2008). Ocupaßco ̃es de Terra, Acampamentos e Demandasao Estado: Uma Ana ́lise em Perspectiva Comparada. DADOS—Revista de Cieˆncias Sociais, Rio de Janeiro, 51(1), 107–142.
Simmons, C. S. (2004). The political economy of land conflict in Eastern Amazonia. Annals of the Association of American Geographers.
Simmons, C. S. (2005). Territorializing land conflict: Space, place, and contentious politics in the Brazilian Amazon. Geojournal, 64, 307–317. Simmons, C. S., Walker, R. T., & Wood, C. (2002a). Small producers and reforestation in Brazil and Panama: Implications for forest recovery.
Agroforestry Systems, 56, 89–105.
Deininger, K. (1999). Making negotiated land reform work: Initial experience from Colombia, Brazil and South Africa. World Develop- ment, 27(4), 651–672.
Deininger, K., & Binswanger, H. (1999). The evolution of the world bank’s land policy: Principles, experience, and future challenges. World Bank Research Observer, 14(2), 247–276.
De Janvry, A. (1981). The agrarian question and reformism in Latin America. Baltimore: John Hopkins University.
De Janvry, A., & Sadoulet, E. (1989). A study in resistance to institutional change: The lost game of Latin American Land reform. World Development, 13(4), 513–534.
De Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., & Wolford, W. (2001). The changing role of the state in Latin American Land reforms. In A. De Janvry, G. Gustavo de Anda, E. Sadoulet, & P. Jean-Philippe (Eds.), Access to land rural poverty and public action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Esteva, G. (1992). Development. In W. Sachs (Ed.), The development dictionary: A guide to knowledge as power. London: Zed Books.
Fanelli, L. (2001). Movimento Sem Terra and Migrations. Paper presented at the meeting of the Latin American, Studies Association, Washing- ton, DC, September 6–8, 2001.
Fearnside, P. M. (2001). Land-tenure issues as factors in environmental destruction in Brazilian Amazonia: The case of Southern Para ́. World Development, 29(8), 1361–1372.
Fernandes, B. M. (2000). A formaßca ̃o do MST no Brasil [The MST formation in Brazil]. Petro ́polis: Vozes.
Foweraker, J. (1981). The struggle for land: A political economy of the pioneer frontier in Brazil, 1930 to present. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Griffith, D. A. (2005). Effective geographic sample size in the presence of spatial autocorrelation. Annals of the Association of American Geog- raphers, 95, 740–760.
Hall, A. L. (1989). Developing Amazoˆnia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in Brazil’s Caraja ́s Programme. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
444	WORLD DEVELOPMENT
Simmons, C. S., Perz, S., Pedlowski, M. A., & Silva, L. G. T. (2002b). The changing dynamics of land conflict in the Brazilian Amazon: The rural–urban complex and its environmental implications. Urban Ecosystems, 6(1/2), 99–122.
Simmons, C., Walker, R. T., Wood, C., Arima, E., & Cochrane, M. (2004). Wildfires in Amazonia: A pilot study examining the role of farming systems, social capital, and fire contagion. Journal of Latin American Geographers, 3(1), 81–96.
Simmons, C. S., Walker, R. T., Arima, E. Y., Aldrich, S. P., & Caldas, M. M. (2007a). The Amazon Land War in the South of Para ́. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 97(3), 567–592.
Simmons, C., Caldas, M., Aldrich, S., Walker, R., & Perz, S. (2007b). Spatial process in scalar context: Development and security in the Brazilian Amazon. Journal of Latin American Geographers, 6(1), 125–148.
Stedile, J. P. (1997). A reforma agra ́ria e a luta do MST. Petropolis, RJ. Vozes.
Toni, F. (1999). State-society relations on the agricultural frontier: The struggle for credit in the Transamazoˆnia region. PhD disser- tation, Department of Political Science, University of Florida, Gainesville.
Treccani,	G.	D.	(2001).	Violeˆ ncia	e	grilagem:	Instrumentos	de	aquisißca ̃ o	da propriedade da terra no Para ́. Bele ́m: Universidade Federal do Para ́.
Veiga, J. E. (1990). A reforma que virou suco: uma introdußca ̃o o ao dilema agrario no Brasil. Petopolis: Vozes.
Velho, O. (1972). Frentes de expansa ̃o e estructura agra ́ria. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar.
Walker, R. (2003). Mapping process to pattern in the landscape change of the Amazonian frontier. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 93(2), 376–398.
Walker, R. T., Perz, S., Caldas, M., & Silva, L. G. T. (2002). Land use and land cover change in forest frontier: The role of household life cycles. International Regional Science Review, 25(2), 169–199.
Walker, R. T., Moore, N., Arima, E., Perz, S., Simmons, C. S., Caldas, M., et al. (2009). Protecting the Amazon with protected areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(26), Available from www.pnas.org_cgi_doi_10.1073_pnas.0806059106.
Weil, C. (1989). Differential economic success among spontaneous agricultural colonists in the Chapare, Bolivia: The conversion of rain forest to pastures in Panama. In D. A. Schumann, & W. L. Partridge (Eds.), The human ecology of tropical land settlement in Latin America (pp. 264–297). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Welch, C. (2006). Movement histories: A preliminary historiography of the Brazil’s Landless Laborers’ Movement (MST). Latin American Research Review, 41(1), 198–211.
Wolford, W. (2003a). Families, fields, and fighting for land: The spatial dynamics of contention in rural Brazil. Mobilization: An International Journal, 8(2), 201–215.
Wolford, W. (2003b). Producing community: The MST and land reform settlements in Brazil. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3(4), 500–525.
Wolford, W. (2004). This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 94(2), 409–424.
Wood, C. (1983). Peasant and capitalist production in the Brazilian Amazon: A conceptual framework for the study of frontier expansion. In E. Moran (Ed.), The dilemma of Amazonian development (pp. 259–277). Boulder: Westview Press.
Wright, A., & Wolford, W. (2003). To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First! Publications.
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
