1997
NA
New Left Review
Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left
James Petras

The Left in Latin America is staging a major comeback. While most publicists, journalists, academics, government and World Bank officials either celebrate or bemoan the triumph of ‘neoliberalism’, opposition is growing which in time could challenge the dominance of the whole free-market power structure. As yet only loosely associated—in forums, seminars, and international gather- ings—this new oppositional force has solid roots in a number of countries and is extending its support from specific regions and classes to the construction of a number of national counter-hegemonic blocs.
To talk about ‘the Left’ in Latin America is misleading because there is more than one, and the older sort remains, like a withering vine, blocking from view the emergence of the new socio-political movements. What many casual observers and not a few journalists and academics refer to as ‘the Left’ includes ‘referents’ who have long abandoned the class struggle and in large part have been assimilated into the liberal political establishment or its ngo periphery.
17
What may explain the confusion is the manner of this conversion: the ex-leftists frequently resort to intellectual posturing in which they label earlier positions ‘conservative’, ‘out-moded’ or ‘orthodox’, and present themselves as the up-to-date, renovated, modernized, post-something- or-other, democratic Left.
To come to terms with the emergence of a new revolutionary Left in Latin America, it is important firstly to identify the different waves of the Left and to differentiate them; secondly, to discuss their spatial and economic focus, social base, style of political action and political per- spective; thirdly, to present data documenting the growth, contradictions and political challenges that confront these burgeoning socio-political movements. Finally, relations between this new Left with past move- ments will be examined, along with the present confrontations with the us-led ‘neoliberal’ power bloc, and the potential for a socialist trans- formation.
Signs and Substance of Leftist Resurgence
The stronghold for the resurgence of the Left is found in the countryside: in a number of countries, the 1990s have been characterized by massive land occupation movements by landless peasantry. The most important of these is the Landless Rural Workers’ Movement in Brazil (mst). With hundreds of peasant organizers and hundreds of thousands of active sup- porters in the countryside, it has forced a national debate among all the political parties on the issue of agrarian reform.1 Most observers of Brazilian politics agree that the mst is the most dynamic, best organized and effective social movement in Brazil today. In Bolivia, the closing of most of the tin mines, and the heavy influx of cheap imports and govern- ment-condoned contraband has weakened the mining and industrial unions. In their place the peasant confederations, particularly the coca farmers, have led major confrontations with the State and their us patrons, cutting highways and spearheading general strikes that have paralyzed the country.2 In Paraguay, the National Peasant Federation is at the core of the political mobilization blocking the return of the mili- tary and forcing agrarian issues into the centre of debate. Together with other peasant organizations, they led 50,000 peasants through the streets of Asunción to the Presidential Palace and National Congress.3 In Mexico, the major popular struggles have taken place in the countryside: Guerrero, Chiapas and Oaxaca have seen large-scale confrontations between peasants and the State.4 In Ecuador, Columbia, and El Salvador, similar processes of peasant mobilizations have emerged to redefine the national political agenda.
Not all the instances of left resurgence are located in the countryside, how- ever; there is also a renewal of civic unions in Columbia, the growing
1 A basic history of the mst is found in João Pedro Stedile and Frei Sergio, A Luta pela Terra No Brazil, São Paulo 1993; and Documento Basico do MST, São Paulo 1994. See the Jornal de Brasil, 23 June 1996, p. 17. 2 Alex Contreras Baspineiro, La Marcha Historica, Cochabamba 1994; Interview with Evo Morales, in Carlos D. Mesa Gisbert, De Cerca, La Paz 1994.
3 Informativo Campesino (Asunción), no. 91, April 1996. 4 La Jornada, 10 August 1996, p. 3; Chiapas, no. 2, 1996.
18
influence of the Chilean Communist Party in the trade unions, urban movements in Venezuela and Argentina, the emergence of an independent, ‘class oriented’ trade unionism in Mexico City and in the north among auto workers; dissident and combative sectors of the National Labour Confederation (cut) in Brazil; militant teachers’ unions increasingly led by Marxists in Bolivia, Paraguay, Chile, Mexico and Brazil. Nevertheless, while organized, urban, working-class movements are not absent from the struggle, and in some instances take centre-stage, the truly revolutionary action and movements in this resurgence of the Left are rural.
Many commentators and analysts, even those as distinguished as Eric Hobsbawm, have written of the political eclipse of the peasantry.5 The obituaries have proved premature. There are a number of reasons why demographic arguments about the shrinking size of the rural labour force do not necessarily translate into political analysis—at least in the bulk of Latin American countries. First, because shrinking percentages do not nullify the fact that tens of millions of families continue to live in the countryside. Second, given the crises affecting urban and industrial areas, particularly growing unemployment and poverty, the cities are no longer an encouraging outlet for young peasants. Third, when land occu- pations are on the agenda, there can be a movement from provincial towns and cities back to the countryside—the ‘re-peasantization’ effect. Fourth, the liberal economy has battered small producers, driving down prices of staples and increasing indebtedness, creating family and social bonds between the mostly young landless sons and daughters involved in the land invasions. Fifth, ‘structural’ considerations apart, a new genera- tion of ‘educated’ (primary or secondary school) peasant leaders has emerged over the last decade with strong organizational capabilities, a sophisticated understanding of national and international politics, and a profound commitment to creating a politically educated set of cadres. Local leaders of both sexes have intervened in regions of conflict, trans- forming previously spontaneous and easily defeated occupations into well planned and executed mass political actions. The combination of structural conditions and the growth of a new political leadership, built around the principle ‘every member an organizer’, has been instrumental in the swift rise of the ‘peasant movements’.
It should be noted, though, that these are not peasant movements in the traditional sense, nor are the rural cultivators who comprise them divorced from urban life or activities. In some instances, the new peas- ants are former workers, particularly miners, displaced because of plant or mine closures, or they were peasants one generation earlier.6 In other cases, they are the ‘excess’ sons and daughters of peasants who entered religious institutions, became involved in the rural struggles, and aban- doned the Church to lead the struggle for land reform.7 In many cases, they are daughters of small peasants with primary or secondary educa- tion, who join and sometimes lead land occupations rather than migrate
5 Eric Hobsbawm The Age of Extremes. The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–1991, New York 1994, pp. 8, 289. 6 Interview with Evo Morales. Many of the names of the peasant unions are taken from mining centres of Oruro.
7 Interview with regional leaders of the mst of Brazil at I Curso Latinoamericano de Formacion, 19–29 March 1995, Instituto Cajamar São Paulo.
19
to the cities to work as domestic servants.8 The ‘new peasantry’, espe- cially those who are leading the struggle, travel to the cities, participate in seminars and leadership training schools, and engage in political debates. In a word, even as they are rooted in the rural struggle, live in land settlements and engage in agricultural cultivation, they have a cosmopolitan vision. The quantity and quality of these new ‘peasant intellectuals’ varies from country to country depending on the resources and maturity of the movement. In Brazil, the mst is well known for its heavy investment in leadership training, with hundreds of its members passing each year through different levels of socio-political and technical education.9 Other movements such as those in Paraguay and Bolivia still rely on a small number of well-informed leaders.
Another point about the ‘new peasantry’ is that it is politically autonomous of any electoral and/or sectarian left parties, even the most radical. It is largely engaged in direct action rather than the electoral process. The mst in Brazil has ‘fraternal’ relations with the Workers’ Party (pt), generally supporting their candidates and occasionally pre- senting its own within the Party.10 But the main strength of the mst is its extra-parliamentary struggle, including land invasions, the block- ing of highways, and sit-ins at the Agrarian Reform Institutes. mst tactics, strategy and ideological debates are decided within the move- ment and are not subordinated to the pt or its parliamentary represen- tatives. On the contrary, the mst’s actions have shaped the commitment of the pt leadership to the agrarian struggle. The recent massacre in Pará is a case in point. When the State Governor sent in the Army to dislodge peaceful protesters marching to the state capital on 19 April 1996, leading to a massacre in which nineteen peasants were killed (and four ‘disappeared’), the mst mounted a national campaign which drew on the support of pt congressmen who formed an investi- gatory committee, and the cut which launched a series of national demonstrations.11 The mst was the catalyst in the protest and followed it up with a new wave of land occupations, while President Cardoso’s popularity plummeted to its lowest level, below 30 per cent—the repressive Governor belonged to Cardoso’s party. Similarly in Bolivia, the militant peasant organizations have largely broken past ties with the nationalist parties and socialist sects, and have been engaging in internal debates about forming their own political movement. In Paraguay, many leaders of the National Federation of Peasants, attempting to provide a national focus for the peasantry, recently launched a new revolutionary socialist movement.
8 Interviews with Brazilian rural women of the mst at a Conference on Peasant Women in Rural Struggles, 22 June 1996, Cajamar, São Paulo. 9 Como Organizar a la Masa, Direccion Nacional mst, São Paulo, September 1991; Documento Basico do MST.
10 Interviews with MST leaders, João Pedro Stedile and Ademar Bobo Egidio Brunetto. 19–29 March 1995. See also Documento Basico do MST, pp. 24–30. 11 In discussion with cut leaders, it was clear that the mst was at the cutting-edge of the struggle. Most trade union leaders readily admitted that the mst was far more cohesive and organized for confrontation than the urban industrial unions. It was clear from the posters plastered on the walls of downtown Rio condemning the massacre in Pará that the rural struggle had became a ‘cause’ for the militant sectors of the cut. Interview with Ina Meireles, President of cut, Rio de Janeiro, 17 May 1996, and Vito Giannotti, Educational Director, Aeronautical Workers, Rio de Janeiro, 16 May 1996.
20
Furthermore, the new peasant movements are strongly influenced by a blend of classical Marxism and, in differing contexts, by ethnic, gender, and ecological considerations. In Paraguay and particularly in Bolivia the questions of social liberation and the rural struggle are strongly infused with a revindication of ethnic, linguistic, cultural and even national claims.12 In Brazil and Bolivia, organized groups of peasant women pres- sure these movements for greater influence and representation.13
The new peasant movements are linked together in a Latin American regional organization, the Congreso Latinoamericano de Organizaciones del Campo (cloc), and are increasingly involved in the international formation called Via Campesino which discusses ideas and experiences pertaining to the rural struggles. Through these links and others, an emerging ‘internationalist’ consciousness and practice is emerging. For example, the militants of the Brazilian mst work across the borders with their counterparts in Paraguay and to a lesser degree, Argentina and Uruguay.
In summary, the resurgence of the peasant movements of the 1990s is not a simple replay of the movements of the 1960s. In many cases the successes and failures of the earlier movements have been studied and discussed. While there is a certain continuity because of the presence of a handful of older militants in the new movements, and some of the leaders are the children of the past generation of activists, a series of important differences both at the tactical, strategical, political and organ- izational level indicate that the new movements are a promising and creative political force.
The Political Context for Peasant Resurgence
The re-emergence of peasant movements takes place in a complex and changing political context. In the first instance, the policies of the neoliberal regimes have hurt a vast array of social groups, including seg- ments of the bourgeoisie.14 Since the late 1980s, the urban movements and trade unions have been in decline in most countries. In this situa- tion, the rise of the peasant movements has been looked upon favourably by the adversely affected groups as a mechanism to delegitimize or weaken the application of neoliberal policies—hence the favourable press and media accounts that have on occasion appeared, particularly in Brazil. Support for the mst by sectors of the bourgeoisie was graphically illustrated while I was in Brazil in May 1996 when a group of entre- preneurs organized a luncheon for the mst to express their support for
12 In Bolivia during a seminar I presented in June 1996 at the training school for mostly coca-growing peasants in La Paz, the relation of class and nation was the central topic of debate. In Paraguay the issue is less clearly defined, though in everyday conversations with peasant leaders it was clear that the Guarani cultural-linguistic universe was central. 13 At a seminar in Cajamar on 21 May 1996 there were over eighty peasant women leaders from all regions of Brazil discussing such issues as gender equality in cooperatives, greater leadership roles, greater acceptance of married women attending cadre schools. In a semi- nar that I presented, the class-gender framework was generally accepted and the debate flowed within the parameters of a rejection of bourgeois (classless) feminism and class reductionist economism.
14 See James Petras, Henry Veltmeyer and Steve Vieux, Neoliberalism and Class Conflict in Latin America, London 1997 forthcoming, especially ch. 2.
21
agrarian reform.15 The peasant movements opposing neoliberalism have filled the political space abandoned by the centre-left electoral coali- tions. The Centre-Left either failed to win elections or turned toward assimilating liberal politics, in some cases joining neoliberal regimes. The ebbing of electoral centre-left opposition was accompanied in many cases by the weakening of the trade unions, partly as a result of anti- labour legislation, mass firings and high unemployment, and partly because of the accommodating attitudes of the trade union leadership. Thus the eruption of class warfare in the countryside became the ‘spark’ to ignite public debate and call into question the overall political project of the regime.
The Left: Three Waves
Over the last twenty-five years, the Left emerged in three district waves. To understand the significance and the nature of the current socio- political movements, it is important to place them in the context of their predecessors.
The first wave of the contemporary Left began in the 1960s and contin- ued into the mid-1970s. It included mass social movements, guerrilla armies and electoral parties. Sometimes class and military activities merged.16 Sometimes electoral and trade union politics combined.17 This was the period of the ‘New Left’—movements and parties that chal- lenged the dominance of the pro-Moscow communist parties. There were Maoists, Fidelistas, those influenced by Trotskyist ideas, and others who grew out of the Christian and Populist movements. The Latin American dictatorships decimated this wave; hundreds of thousands of activists were killed, jailed or forced into exile. As a result of the repres- sion and overseas relations with social-democratic foundations, the great majority who returned to politics did so as social democrats, and some- times as neoliberals.
The second wave of leftists emerged in the dictatorial period and the years following—first in opposition to the authoritarian regimes and later to the ‘neoliberal agenda’. This wave found expression in the Foro of São Paulo and included the fmln of El Salvador, the Sandinistas, the Workers’ Party of Brazil, the Broad Front of Uruguay, Causa R of Venezuela, the Revolutionary Democratic Party of Mexico and the Frente Grande of Argentina.18 These parties, coalitions and ex-guerrilla movements, how- ever, have become sucked into an increasingly electoralist politics and began to accommodate to neoliberal policies on privatization, ‘globaliza- tion’ and other issues. In time, they have begun to lose a good part of their identity as parties of the Left and become more and more divorced from
15 Interview with João Pedro Stedile of the mst, 13 May 1996. 16 This was partly the case at least in some industries and factories in Argentina. The Montoneros and Peoples Revolutionary Army did have influence in certain unions, partic- ularly in Cordoba and Rosario. This was generally not the case in the major metallurgical industries in the Greater Buenos Aires area. 17 Chile was the classic case during the late 1960s and early 1970s. See my Politics and Social Forces in Chilean Development, Berkeley 1968. 18 A typical list of declarations from the foro appears in America Libre (Buenos Aires), no. 7, July 1995, pp. 115–18.
22
the popular struggles in the shanty towns, countryside and factories. Some have been assimilated into the ngo framework, working in the niches of the World Bank’s free-market and anti-statist politics. In most of these parties or movements there remain leftist and activist currents but they are marginalized in the interests of respectability.
The third wave of the movement which is currently emerging overlaps with the second group but demonstrates greater force and resilience. Its leaders tend to be young, in their early twenties to mid thirties, and are drawn from the peasantry, provincial trade unions and school teachers. These activists differ significantly from their predecessors.19 First, many are not from the university—in fact, the intellectuals are still largely ori- ented to the centre-left electoral machines or to their professional careers. Second, the new movements have few financial resources, but tremen- dous élan and ‘mystique’. Their leaders travel to meetings by bus (some- times thirty or forty hours), live on their wages or farm income and have Spartan offices. There are very few full-time paid officials and virtually no bureaucracy. There are no privileges—no cars, office equipment or staff. The leaders are ‘moral persons’, honest and scrupulous in their financial affairs and personal relations. Very few are ‘personalist’ leaders. Rather, they debate in assemblies and are part of collective leaderships. The idea of the new organizations is that each member should be an organizer. To a greater or lesser extent, these leaders are highly critical of the opportunism of the electoral Left and ngo intellectuals who they experience as manipulative outsiders serving external patrons. Those who were previously part of guerrilla struggles are today highly critical of the vertical style of leadership in those organizations and their use as ‘transmission belts’. They reject the call to become cogs in the electoral machines, choosing instead to deepen ties to their social base. Even so, while this third wave represents intransigent opposition to the imposi- tion of neoliberalism, it does not as yet offer a fully articulated plan for the seizure of power.
Brazil: The MST
The mst is not strictly a revolutionary organization, and is not directed towards the seizure of state power. Rather, it is working towards the proper implementation of the Constitution which stipulates that un- cultivated land can be expropriated for social use. Thus it is both ‘legalist’ and oriented to direct-action. The politics of direct action are inserted in the gap between democratic ideology—and progressive clauses of the Constitution—and the ruling-class socio-economic ties of the liberal regime.
The resurgence of the Left takes place in distinct settings and cannot eas- ily be pigeon-holed. The mst has grown from a regional movement based largely in the south-central region to a national movement with organiz-
19 This section as well as other discussions in this essay are based on a series of interviews, informal discussions and seminars that have taken place between 1993–96. In May and August 1996 I led seminars by the mst and cut of Brazil, the Miners’ Union and coca peasant growers in Bolivia, the Peasant Federation in Paraguay, the ezln in Mexico. Much of the discussion in this essay reflects a ‘participant observer’ perspective.
23
ers increasingly active in the north, north-east and western regions of the country.20 Their struggle increasingly draws support from the cities, among trade unions and sectors of the church. They are viewed with respect and sympathy by the bulk of the favelados of Rio and São Paulo. In recent months they have shifted toward organizing large-scale land occupations near provincial cities, both to facilitate the gathering of mass support and to form urban alliances.21 As they move into the inner heart- land of large uncultivated estates, they face increasing violence and in some cases have been forced to set up self-defence committees to prevent marauding pistoleros hired by the landowners driving out the settlers. They have organized over 139,000 families into productive cooperatives, some of whom are engaged in export agriculture. They have ‘expropri- ated’ a total of 7.2 million hectares of land, and have organized 55 rural cooperatives in 12 states. They have established 880 schools with 38,000 pupils.22 Successful cooperatives usually free activists to participate in the support of landless peasants making new occupations, and contribute food to land occupants waiting for government expropriation and credits. The mst Congress in July 1995 drew over 5,000 delegates representing several hundred thousand peasants.23 Each state hired buses and brought their own food and bedding. The leadership training school in Santa Catarina houses about 80 persons in bunk beds. There is bread, cheese and coffee for breakfast, cold showers and rudimentary classrooms. But it all comes together.
Today the countryside in Brazil is a tinderbox. The problem is not orga- nizing land occupations—hundreds of thousands of hungry families are ready, and would respond to an mst appeal—but organizing to win. For that, there needs to be political support prior to any occupation, political organization to resist displacement, and logistical support—food, sup- plies and so forth—while the movement negotiates with the government to finance production.
In 1995 the mst led 92 land occupations. By June 1996, 120 land occu- pations had taken place and there were a total of 168 campamentos (land site occupations) with 40,000 families awaiting government exprop- riation.24 The rightward shift of the pt in 1995 following its defeat in the presidential elections set the stage for the current land occupation offensive. The occupations resulted from a recognition that Cardoso was closely tied to the right-wing landlord parties (the pfl and pmdm) as well as to reactionary sectors of his own party (the psdb). His links with the World Bank and overseas multinational corporations deepened his commitment to privatize strategic industries, promote agro-export sectors and encourage large-scale foreign investment in Brazil under favourable ‘rules of the game’. Another reason for the offensive was growing pressure from a number of mst militants pushing for a more
20 A Luta pela Terra No Brazil, pp. 23–39. 21 Interview with João Pedro Stedile, 13 May 1996. 22 An example of the redistributive and productionist approach of the mst—and a favourable response from the mass media is found in ‘De sem-terra a productor rural’, A Noticia, 31 May 1996, p. 1. On the data, see Brazil Report: Latin American Research Report, 19 September 1996, pp. 6–7. 23 Jornal dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (São Paulo), August 1995. 24 Sem Terra, July 1996, p. 8.
24
aggressive policy outside of and independent of the pt which was cor- rectly perceived as being an increasingly electoral party in which sectors were moving beyond classical social-democratic politics toward ‘social liberal’ policies.25 Finally, it was recognized that ‘objective’ conditions and ‘subjective factors’ in the countryside were increasingly ‘maturing’ for an offensive. The initial response to the first occupations was extremely positive in the areas adjoining them. Spontaneous land occu- pations began to take place. The mst decided to provide organizational leadership and conscious organization to turn these spontaneous local activities into a national movement. Toward the end of 1995 and in early 1996, land invasions became everyday affairs in regions which had previ- ously been bulwarks of the Right. Cardoso responded by threatening to use force and with empty promises to settle squatters in exchange for a moratorium on new occupations. The mst negotiated but pointedly refused to stop the land occupations—knowing that a truce would elimi- nate its main negotiating card, weaken its appeal to the landless and demobilize hundreds of its young leaders and activists.26 So the struggle deepened and extended into the most dangerous regions. The overall climate in Brazil, particularly in São Paulo, is quite favourable to the mst. Following the massacre of 19 April 1996, polls in São Paulo showed huge majorities in favour of agrarian reform (over 65 per cent) and an absolute majority in favour of the mst, including its land occu- pation strategy.
The mst is developing an effective counter-hegemonic strategy and a powerful political bloc integrating city and countryside. How durable the bloc will be, particularly if the mst moves beyond its agenda of land reform to a socialist transformation, remains to be seen. mst leader João Pedro Stedile provides a useful analysis of the national conjunctures that favour the movement’s activities.27 He identifies three moments in recent history: the final stages in the struggle against the military dicta- torship in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the mass struggle to impeach ex-President Collor, and the current phase in which Cardoso is imple- menting the neoliberal agenda. In each period, important sectors of the bourgeoisie and their allies in the mass media and the major political parties were interested in weakening the incumbent power-holders and thus gave ‘conjunctural support’ to the mst. When their ends were accomplished, they withdrew that support. Thus, from the point of view of the mst, the points of internal division within the ruling bloc provide propitious moments to launch activities which at least have the tacit backing of sectors of the elite and the press.
The contemporary upsurge of peasant revolutionaries can also be seen in Bolivia. There the dialectic of capitalist exploitation and restructuring confronts a labour force which resisted, was displaced and then reor- ganized to become a formidable opposition to imperialism and its local apologists.
25 Interviews with regional leaders of the mst, Santa Catarina. 26 ‘Sem-terra nao aceitan a trégua dos ruralistas’, Jornal do Brasil, 4 June 1996, p. 1–b. 27 Interview with João Pedro Stedile, 22 June 1996.
25
Bolivia: The Triangle of Popular Power
In Bolivia there are at least three distinct centres of popular mobiliza- tion: the peasant movements in the south, the mining regions, and the trade unions in La Paz, each formally coordinated by the cob (The Bolivian Workers’ Confederation). In the past, the miners were both strategically and organizationally the decisive force. This was expressed in the statutes of the cob which declared that the first secretary had to be a mining leader. The cob, unlike other labour confederations, is not, strictly speaking, a wage workers’ organization: street vendors, profes- sionals, students, as well as peasants and small producers, women and ecologists are members, but each is allotted a proportion of delegates.28 The peasants are struggling for greater recognition and influence within the cob as a leading, if not hegemonic, force. This was evident in the cob Congress in June of 1996 where the challenge to the miners’ domi- nance was forcefully raised.
In the Bolivian revolution of 1952, armed worker and peasant militias expropriated the mines, lands and factories under the government of the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement. By 1996 every revolutionary change had been reversed or was at least under challenge. The decisive turning point was 1985 when the government of Jaime Paz Zamora under imf tutelage decided to close most of the state tin mines, firing 30,000 miners and effectively undermining the traditional centres of trade union power. Today the miners’ unions, particularly the state sec- tor, have declined substantially—over 50,000 more miners were fired under the restructuring project designed by the imf, the World Bank and us academic advisers. Despite their reduced size—approximately 15,000—now mostly employed by foreign-owned multinationals, the miners still generate nearly 75 per cent of legal foreign exchange.29 Thus they still hold sway over a highly strategic sector of the economy.
While the miners have receded, the peasants, including a contingent of over 30,000 former miners, have emerged as the most dynamic and influential sector in direct confrontation with the regime. One can dis- tinguish two sectors, the coca farmers, made up of peasants who are ex-miners, and traditional peasant producers. The break of the peasants with the traditional nationalist parties was partly a product of the shift by the Centre-Left toward neoliberal policies and outright subordination to us policy-makers, particularly the military, the Drug Enforcement Agency (dea) and the Embassy. The political independence of the peas- ant movement was strengthened by the influx of former miners, led by Filomen Escobar, who have brought a high degree of organization and political experience to the movement. Young leaders like Evo Morales and Alejo Velez Lazo have brought new ideas and political projects from the countryside to the larger Bolivian public. The fusion of two distinct political cultures has created a movement which combines organiza- tional forms, tactics and strategies of confrontation from the advanced sectors of the working class with demands for land, cultural autonomy
28 Los Tiempos (Cochabamba), 12 May 1996, p. a9. 29 Gabriel Tabera Soliz, ‘Mineria boliviana en manos de Comsur e Inti Raymi’, La Razon (La Paz), 21 January 1996, pp. d8, 9.
26
and respect for traditional spiritual values rooted in Indian peasant com- munities. The peasant movements, particularly the coca farmers, have engaged in the largest and most sustained struggle with the neoliberal regime and its us overseers. The result has been a heightening of national consciousness in which the concept of an ‘Indian nation’ has become common currency.30
Like the Mexican Zapatistas, the ‘new peasant movement’ has harnessed the struggle for land and cultural autonomy to the problem of us mili- tary and political incursions. Unlike Mexico, however, the public spokespeople are the Indian peasant leaders themselves: sophisticated, self-taught, militant intellectuals who share the hardships of the rank and file. As in Brazil, their offices are rudimentary; a few old chairs, bat- tered desks and posters of past mobilizations and revolutionary leaders.
Important sectors of the peasant movement have also taken a serious step toward combining direct action with electoral politics through independent political organization. This has raised a debate about the relation between social movements and parties, throwing into doubt the old position that they were distinct elements in social and political struggles. The peasant movement, frustrated by the actions of national- ist and leftist parties, have launched a new political formation, the Assembly for the Sovereignty of the Peoples (asp), and won a dozen local elections in the coca-growing regions. Today the cocaleros are proposing the asp as a national alternative, hoping to give the peasantry a decisive voice in shaping class politics at the national level. The poli- tics of the coca growers involves harnessing ancestral spiritual beliefs to modern forms of class and anti-imperial struggle. Marxist analysis is linked to pre-European values. The cosmology of the past is evoked in support of earning a living in the interstices of a world dominated by multinational capital and overseas banks.31 While the land issue contin- ues to be important for the many coca growers who own land, the main struggle is for free trade against the us-directed attempts to eradicate coca production. The traditional defence of coca revolves around the revindication of the historical Indian nation, a concept that subsumes class into nation. The paradox of a neoliberal regime promoting state intervention, and peasant rebels fighting for unrestricted production of traditional crops highlights the heterodox nature of the peasant move- ment in Bolivia.32
The Indian-peasant movements face a dual challenge: not only the use of the Bolivian military against coca production but the neoliberal regime’s ‘culturalist’ strategies which pay lip-service to Indian demands. These are largely symbolic gratification focusing on token representation—the vice-president is an Indian—and bilingual education. While the cocaleros have made cogent critiques of class-reductionist leftist parties, the rejec- tion of cultural manipulation is based more on ‘empirical factors’: the
30 See H.C.F. Mansilla and Maria Teresa Zegada, Politica, Cultura y Etnicidad en Bolivia, La Paz 1996. 31 Interview with Evo Morales, Cochabamba, 12 June 1996. 32 Ibid. See also Alex Contreras Baspineiro, La Marcha Historica, Cochabamba 1994; Maria Lohman et al., ‘Guerra a las Drogas’: Un Vision desde las Andes, Cochabamba 1994.
27
vice-president, they told me, is not really an Indian since he serves the neoliberal elite.33
The conversion of miners into coca farmers shifted the axis of social power back to the countryside but also toward a quite different type of peasantry: small-scale producers linked to the mining struggles, clearly differentiated from the traditional peasantry. While distinctive in back- ground, class-conscious miners turned peasants have been able to dis- seminate an ideology and form of leadership among the wider peasantry that provides a qualitatively different perspective to the struggle. At the same time, the settlement of the miners in peasant areas, in particular in Indian coca-growing communities, has been accompanied by their acculturation into the traditional spiritual discourses and practices asso- ciated with the coca leaf and the demands for greater Indian autonomy.
In Bolivia one of the principle political opponents of the neoliberal regime of President Sanchez de Losada is the coca farmers of Chaparé— over 90,000 family farmers. Free-market policies led to cheap food imports, lowering the price of traditional crops such as corn below the level at which farmers could subsist. As a result, many of the ex-min- ers—and also ex-factory workers—turned to cultivating the coca leaf which provided income for an adequate diet, clothes and basic family needs. The us government, because of its close ties to the banking and financial elites which launder most of the drug profits, chose to press its anti-drug campaign most heavily against the peasant cultivators of a legal crop, coca. Under the operational leadership of the dea, the Bolivian regime has periodically launched eradication campaigns against the peasant producers, jailing hundreds and killing or injuring scores during marches, general strikes and highway blockades. According to peasant leaders, the much vaunted us funding for alternative crops, esti- mated at $15 million, ends up in the pockets of government officials.34 In early May 1996, the government announced a plan to totally eradicate coca production in excess of that intended for medicinal use. The Bolivian Rural Workers Confederation responded by calling the eradica- tion plan ‘crazy’ and ‘irrational’ and warned the government that if the plan was put into practice the peasants would rise up in arms ‘in defence of our families, our lives and our survival’.35 Evo Morales warned that ‘Chaparé will be a new version of the Mexican state of Chiapas in the heart of South America’.36 The coca farmers are determined to avoid the eradication of coca which would also mean, as they put it, the eradication of their families.
The deepening involvement of the us military advisors and dea agents in basic political decisions—through a nominally Bolivian President who speaks Spanish with an Ivy League accent—that adversely affect the coca farmers has deepened the nationalist, anti-imperialist nature of the struggle. ‘Coca cultivators versus the Empire’ is not a far cry from the reality of Bolivian politics. As the cob becomes entwined in internal
33 Discussion with coca farmers in a leadership training school, La Paz, 6 June 1996. 34 Interview of Evo Morales with Carlos D. Mesa Gisbert, De Cerca (La Paz), 1994. 35 Los Tiempos (Cochabamba), 13 June 1996, pp. a–1, a–9. 36 Ibid.
28
conflicts and its leaders in government negotiations, the initiative for political action has passed to sectoral movements and more specifically to the militant peasant movement.37 The prognosis, however, is that the space for political negotiation is shrinking as the us increases its pressure for immediate eradication. An armed confrontation is not to be excluded.
Peru
In Peru the revolutionary movements went into general retreat in the late 1980s and in particular after 1990. The legal Left, the pum, and the United Left broke up and were in part absorbed by ngos dependent on European, Canadian and us funding. Those activists that remained became immersed in electoral politics and were marginalized by Fujimori’s autogolpe in 1992 by which he dissolved Congress and the court system, reserving for himself something close to dictatorial powers. Sendero Luminoso, the major guerrilla organization, self-destructed. Despite its defence of some Indian communities, through its sectarian violence and fanaticism, its cult-like political leadership and its dictator- ial internal organization, it has destroyed most of its popular support. At its peak, Sendero had a powerful social base in the countryside and within the shantytowns of regional cities and in Lima.38 The capture of ‘Comrade Gonzalo’ and the discovery of names and locations of a network of sup- porters and activists decimated the organization. subsequently, a deep split and the eventual defection of a whole generation of veteran activists further reduced its effectiveness. Following the failure of its spectacular seizure of the Japanese embassy, the other Peruvian guerrilla group, the mrta is also greatly weakened. These guerrilla groups represented a hang-over from earlier phases rather than the resurgence seen elsewhere. While social resistance may take time to recover in Peru, experience sug- gests that Fujimori-style strong men store up trouble for the future.
Paraguay: Recovering the Past to Change the Future
In Paraguay the transition from the Stroessner dictatorship to a conserva- tive electoral regime has been accompanied by a growing mobilization of peasants and workers.39 In the immediate aftermath of the overthrow of the dictator, a wave of peasant land invasions was followed by a counter- attack from the landlord class; paramilitary forces and then the Army intervened to dislodge many families.40 This pattern of invasions and dislodgement has continued under the Wasmosy regime. Nevertheless,
37 The debates and controversies with the Bolivian trade union congress are summarized in Washington Estellano, ‘El Congreso Interrumpido’, Punto Final (Santiago), 15 July 1996. 38 Heraclio Bonilla, ‘Sendero Luminoso: metamorfos de la violencia’, Nariz del Diablo (Quito), 1994.
39 Daniel Campos Ruiz and Dianisio Borda, Las Organizaciones Campesinas en la Decada de los 80, Asunción n.d.; Guia de Organizaciones Campesinas 1992–1993, Asunción 1994; Censo de Organizaciones Campesinas 1992–1993, Asunción 1994; Myriam Cristina Davalos and Jose Carlos Rodriguez, Organizaciones Campesinas de Mugeres 1992–1993, Asunción 1994. 40 In 1990 there were 49 land occupations and 51 evictions—at times the same land is occupied more than once; in 1991, 17 occupations and 23 evictions; in 1992, 16 and 16; in 1993, 14 and 17. In the same period, 1,600 peasants were arrested. The same pattern persists in 1996: in April there were 11 occupied farms and 4 evictions. Monthly data is found in Informative Campesinas (Asunción), December 1993 and April 1996.
29
the cumulative effect of peasant pressure on the land has created a posi- tive outcome: some permanent settlement of occupying families and a growing sympathy for the peasant struggle in Asunción. The centre of the counter-hegemonic bloc is increasingly located in the peasant move- ment which demonstrates a capacity for sustained confrontation.
Peasant militancy is, however, uneven with some regions—such as San Pedro in the north—more prone to direct action than others. Likewise, there is not always a direct correlation between social activism and polit- ical loyalty: many peasants active in the radical National Federation of Peasants also continue to vote for Stroessner’s Colorado Party.41 The appeal of direct action does not obliterate the ties of the past.
The influence of the militant peasant movement in Asunción was brought home to me during my stay in Paraguay. In interviews in the mass media, and in restaurants, taxis and the streets, peasant leaders were greeted warmly with expressions of encouragement and open support. Major demonstrations against government policy were led first and fore- most by peasant groups, and the blunt-speaking peasants leaders are in no mood to be put off. In a recent meeting with President Wasmosy, Albert Areco began the interview in the following fashion: ‘Three months ago you told us that you would immediately deal with the issue of agrarian reform. Nothing has happened. Either you are a liar or incompetent.’42 Wasmosy flushed. Entangling himself in the telephone cord, he tipped the phone off the desk as he walked out, and only returned ten minutes later.
As in the rest of Latin America, any electoral transition is premised on the continuation in power of the economic elite, the impunity of the mil- itary, the deepening of economic liberalization and the repression of social mobilization. A key support for the transition is the us Embassy with its five-block-long installations, the size of a military base. When Wasmosy was threatened by a military coup, even though thousands of Paraguayan pro-democracy demonstrators filled the streets, his first reaction was to run to the us Embassy. The us strategy is to both main- tain the civilian regime and the right-wing military to promote and pro- tect the deepening of liberalization from trade union and peasant movement opposition.
Rapid military intervention reflects the symbiosis between the generals and the landowners: not infrequently fallow land occupied by peasants has been appropriated—often illegally—by high-ranking military offi- cers. In a land squatter settlement I visited in eastern Paraguay, the peas- ants had sought an out-of-the-way plot of land in the ‘monte’.43 They did not know that a general had illegally acquired title to the land. First pri- vate gunmen and bulldozers were sent in, but they were successfully repulsed by the peasant community. Local small farmers contributed
41 Interview with Alfonso Cohere, Vice-President of the fnc, 1 July 1996. 42 Interview with Alberto Areco, member of the executive committee of the National Peasant Federation (fnc), 7 July 1996. 43 The peasant settlement Santa Carmen was in the department of Caguazu, 250 kilo- meters from Asunción. The landowner was the ex-General Roberto Knopfelmacher.
30
food and seeds in support. Organized in a semi-circle, working in collec- tives, the land settlers were prepared to resist the paramilitary but not the army. Shortly after, 200 soldiers with armoured troop-carriers des- troyed the houses and crops and killed the farm animals while driving out a hundred families, beating men, women and children in the process. The electoral regime has a much more democratic face in us press flyers than in the Paraguayan countryside.
The current peasant movement has its roots in the 1970s when blossom- ing peasant leagues were crushed by military repression.44 Those activists who survived began the slow process of clandestine organizing throughout the early 1980s, and by the end of the decade regional orga- nizations were formed which coordinated activities.45 The fall of Stroessner and divisions within the elite were the signal for a large-scale land occupation movement. The outcome is the growing recognition that the peasant movement is no longer a ‘rural issue’ but a major actor in national politics. Despite the shift to an electoral regime, scores of peas- ants are arrested each month, violent military intervention dislodging peasants from unused land is routine, and dozens of peasants are beaten and killed by paramilitary forces working with the state.46 While in Asunción the progressive middle class and public employees debate the scope and depth of liberalization, the crucial rural struggle has gathered steam, held back only by physical force.
To date, the peasant movement is developing on two fronts: through the formation of local and regional organizations, and their growing affilia- tion with national federated structures. The National Peasant Federation is currently made up of thirty regional groups, loosely associ- ated and without formal ‘membership cards’, a practice common throughout Latin America.47 The leaders are themselves working peas- ants. Again, there are no ‘full-time’ paid functionaries, no vehicles (they travel by bus) and few if any professional advisors. Yet they are growing. Once again, the secret is the ‘virtuous’ nature of the leaders: they orga- nize, discuss, and share with their followers both struggles and jails.
In Paraguay, as in Brazil and Bolivia, there is a deep estrangement between intellectuals and peasant activists. The intellectuals are increas- ingly tied to ngos and to projects that are responsive to overseas donors. The peasants are increasingly suspicious of, if not hostile to, organiza- tional competition and manipulation by the ngos—‘who use the move- ment to secure overseas funding’, as one Paraguayan peasant leader put it. The Marxist revolutionary outlook of the peasant militants is in direct conflict with the varieties of ‘post-Marxism’ embraced by the intellectu- als. Very few intellectuals are willing and able to serve as subordinates to the peasant movements. While the peasant leaders are eager and deeply interested in working with committed intellectuals, they reject working together through the ‘institutes’ of the intellectuals.
44 See Daniel Campos Ruis et al., Las Organizaciones Campesinas. 45 Interviews with Eladio Flecha and Alfonso Cohere, 1 July 1996. 46 See Noticias (Asunción), 8 May 1996; 19 June 1996; 9 May 1996. On 8 May 1996 peas- ant leaders walked out of negotiations protesting the jailing of 160 peasants. 47 Interview with Alberto Areco.
31
Apart from the land issue, three discernible strands are embedded in the appeal and growth of the peasant movement. First, there is the incorpora- tion, conscious or not, of Indian traditions. Guarani is the common lan- guage; Paraguay is the only nation in which the ‘country’ linguistically conquered the city. In the countryside, there is a fusion of ‘Indian’ and peasant styles of cultivation—community-based farming and ‘market’ activity. The cohesion, urban orientation and political sophistication of the peasant leaders is combined with a desire to farm in the ‘monte’, to be left to themselves close to nature, and to produce primarily for self-consump- tion and secondarily for the market. Second, among some peasant leaders, socialism has become an important political tendency. Theirs is a socialism remote from theoretical elaboration, rooted in common opposition to capi- talist depredation and embedded in traditional peasant communities. Third, nationalism in the countryside is based on the opposition between Guarani-speaking small cultivators and landless workers, and the wealthy European settlers who own vast tracts of fertile land. Tens of thousands of acres of irrigated land are owned by Mennonites, as well as German, Dutch and us corporate farmers, seasonally employing Guarani-speaking peas- ants. The national-ethnic question is linked to memories of Paraguay’s nineteenth-century nationalist experience. Successful state-directed in- dustrialization had been pioneered in Paraguay and was only destroyed through external intervention during the war of the Triple Alliance. The historical memory remains because of the valour of the fighters, and the success of the experiment as long as it lasted.
During the March days during the threatened military coup, while Wasmosy was shamefully hiding in the us Embassy, the peasants para- lyzed highways and mobilized to march on the capital. Although stu- dents received most of the publicity, it was largely young workers and peasants who stood ready to paralyze the country if the military made its move. A few days after the threat had dissipated, Paraguay experienced the most powerful general strike in over a half century, shutting down all major activity. Tens of thousands of peasants filled the streets and the issue of land was highlighted.
Colombia: The Revolution Advances
Colombia possesses the most developed guerrilla movement in Latin America and most likely in the world. While in the rest of Latin America guerrilla movements were defeated or assimilated into liberal electoral politics, in Columbia the guerrilla movement has increased its influence in new regions, gaining significant popular support among the peasantry while at the same time increasing its military strength. Despite inter- national neglect and disinterest, the guerrillas can count on a high degree of legitimation at the local and regional level. The guerrillas, particularly the Colombian Armed Forces (farc), offer peasants protection against military and landlord depredation and support food cultivation and social services. While the farc, which began its struggle in the 1940s, was influenced by Soviet Marxism, today it is principally engaged in an agrar- ian struggle for land reform and democratic transformation. The farc leadership continues to be strongly influenced by Marxist ideology and is still led by the legendary Manual ‘Tirofigo’ (Sure-shot) Marulanda. They number approximately 13,000 armed guerrillas and several hundred
32
thousand civilian activists, overwhelmingly peasants.48 The other three guerrilla groups are much smaller and number about 4,000 armed fight- ers. Informed observers estimate that the guerrillas have a presence in half of the 1,000 municipalities in the country and are strongly established in the principal productive areas, including the coffee, banana and petro- leum regions.49 The farc has built its power base patiently over time with a precise strategic plan—the accumulation of local power.
Like the other peasant-based movements, the Colombian guerrillas have little or no support from university students or intellectuals, most of whom originally joined a disbanded guerrilla group, mr-19, in an elec- toral coalition. The initial vote of nearly 20 per cent was dissipated when mr-19 entered the neoliberal Gaviria regime. They are now an insignifi- cant political force and Antonio Navarro Wolf, once its candidate for president, is the mayor of a small city near the border with Ecuador.
In September 1996 the guerrillas inflicted their greatest defeat on the Colombian Army in thirty years: a military post—ironically called Las Del- icias—in the jungle province of Putumayo was overrun; 27 soldiers were killed, 19 injured and 67 taken prisoner. The farc and its allies in the eln (National Liberation Army) organized in the Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Movement is in daily combat with the military in 15 of the 32 departments (provinces) of the country. Over the past six years the farc has increased its number of military fronts from 10 to 105. The guerrillas, armed with automatic rifles, grenade launchers and rockets, are attacking military garrisons and airbases; so far, the government concedes that almost 500 sol- diers have been killed or wounded. A press release from the farc announced the first liberated zone in the departments of Guavaire, Meta, Caqueta, Putumayo and Amazonas. Increasingly a dual-power situation is emerging.
While Marulanda is still the undisputed leader, the guerrilla leader in charge of the current offensive and his likely successor is Jorge Briceno— better known as ‘Mono (rubio) Jojoy’. The son of a guerrilla and raised with the farc from birth, he is a protégé of Marulanda. He commands the most powerful guerrilla front, Bloque Oriental, in the eastern cordillera (mountain range). Briceno’s headquarters in Sumarpaz is virtu- ally the doorway to Bogotá.
The war has produced an appalling refugee crisis in which many thous- ands of people, threatened with violence, have been forced to flee their homes, often ending up in shanty towns in the big cities, where the most basic of amenities are lacking.50 Faced with a devastating attack on trad- itional crops by cheap us imports of grains, and under an intense cam- paign to eradicate the cultivation of coca, the only profitable cash-crop for campesinos, thousands of peasants are joining the farc. To counteract peas- ant organization, over 100 paramilitary groups with over 2,000 members have been formed and financed by the military and the landowners.
48 Clarin (Buenos Aires), 30 June 1996. See also Resistencia (the organ of the farc), 15 May 1996. 49 Ibid. 50 See Jeremy Lennard, ‘Fearful Colombians Flee to the Cities’, The Guardian, 31 March 1997.
33
Operating in areas of peasant militancy, they have murdered hundreds of activists. The principal target of the paramilitary and military is Uraba: in the past year more than 500 workers have been killed, including entire executive committees of rural workers’ unions. Where the government and its landowner allies resolve labour disputes with bullets, it is not sur- prising that Uraba has become a centre for guerrilla recruitment.
During late 1995 and 1996 the farc began to encroach upon the major urban centres.51 The spread of the guerrilla struggle from the countryside to the city is evident in the recent attack in Bogotá itself upon the Escuela de Artilleria Francisco Aguilar. This development was the result of several fac- tors. The foremost is the profound divisions within the ruling elite, and between President Ernesto Samper and the us. Washington has launched a full-scale diplomatic and political campaign to force Samper’s resignation, alleging ties with the cocaine cartels. This has divided the Congress, the rul- ing Liberal Party and the Executive. The resulting political weakness has led Samper to launch the coca-eradication campaign. Another factor is that the Petroleum Companies ‘rent’ military units, paying fees to commanding offi- cers to protect oil pipelines from guerrilla attacks.52 The result is that fewer elite army units are available to confront the guerrillas. Furthermore, the break-up of the old drug cartels has led to increased competition between new traffickers, the military and political officers over pay-offs. In this situa- tion, the farc, operating a mere thirty miles from the capital, has been suc- cessful in cutting transport which provides food to Bogotá. This is the furthest guerrilla penetration in the thirty-year war and reflects the growing political and social power of the peasant guerrillas. It is not so far-fetched to believe that Briceno’s goal of ‘entering triumphantly into Plaza Bolivar’ (the centre of Bogotá) could be realized in the near future. Colombia could become the first successful peasant revolution since the Vietnam war.
The Resurgent Left: Chile
Besides these new revolutionary forces, there are other positive develop- ments on the Latin American Left. In Chile, after a series of setbacks result- ing from the dictatorship, the isolation imposed by the collaboration of the Socialists with the ultra-liberal ‘Concertacion’ regime, and the disorienta- tion and defections resulting from the collapse of the ussr, the Communist Party is once again the major force in the trade union movement. In the recent cut union elections, despite desperate last-minute manoeuvres to manipulate voting patterns by the Christian Democrats and Socialists, the Communists emerged with the most delegates even as they agreed to vote for a dissident Socialist as the new president to democratize the union.53 The Communists won elections in three major unions, health, education and coal. They also increased their influence in a number of others unions
51 Interview with farc spokesperson in Buenos Aires, 15 June 1996, and farc commu- niqués, February–April 1996. 52 New York Times, 22 August 1996. 53 The Communist Party increased its representation in the executive committee of the cut by 44 per cent, the Christian Democrats declined by 33 per cent and the Socialists lost 6 per cent. The present executive committee includes 16 Communists (up from 10), 15 Socialists (down from 16), 11 Christian Democrats (down from 17) and 6 others. El Siglo (Santiago) 19–25 April 1996. See also ‘Como Avanzan los Comunistas’, El Mercurio, 26 May 1996, pp. d–1, d–22, d–23.
34
and won the presidency of the student federation. Under the dynamic lead- ership of Gladys Marin—a popular Party Secretary, often to be found in the front line of demonstrations—the cp has opened itself to new debates on the working class and social movements; while retaining a basic Marxist class analysis, it has critically analyzed the Soviet past.54
Chile, despite appearances, is one of the most tightly controlled societies in Latin America. This is evident in the senators ensconced for life, in Pinochet’s control of the military and intelligence services, in the author- itarian Constitution, and the restrictive and unjust electoral laws. The Christian Democratic and Socialist regime and the right-wing opposi- tion together totally control the electoral system, campaign financing and the media to promote their candidates and uphold the electoral laws perpetuating bi-party rule. Control emanates from the tightly inte- grated relationships between the government and big business. The result is the virtual absence of any institution or outlet in the mass media which might criticize neoliberal strategy. Individuals promoting public debate on military atrocities are subject to judicial proceedings. Such a closure of debate is enforced by civilian politicians, namely Christian Democrats and Socialists who control state funds, manage enterprises, direct research institutions and important sectors of the mass media. They are obsessed with gaining the confidence of the corporate dir- ectorates.55 They have opposed efforts to investigate the culpability of notorious military officials identified by survivors and human rights groups. The great bulk of the judiciary are veterans from the military regime or beholden to the new civilian power wielders. The bulk of the Chilean academics and upwardly mobile professionals are embedded in the middle levels of power and increasingly conformist.56 Ministerial ‘Socialists’ celebrate the miracle of the model even as it has produced the worst inequalities in recent Chilean history, and among the most lop- sided of income patterns in Latin America.
Yet there are signs of a left revival, aside from the growth of Communist Party influence in the trade unions, working-class neighbourhoods and the universities. The growing power of the Left reflects the dissatisfac- tion of rank-and-file trade unionists with union officials who have been mere transmission belts of neoliberal policy. As ‘outsiders’, the Comm- unists have been actively defending workers’ interests against the harsh Pinochet labour laws enforced by Socialist and Christian Democratic officials. Virtual exclusion from Parliament has favoured Communist activism in the social movements. A new generation of autonomous trade union and student leaders have joined in forging the growth of Communist Party influence.
Two questions, however, confront the Communist Party. The first is the flight of intellectuals. Most of its economists left for lucrative salaries in the government. Others left for political reasons, claiming that there was no room for open debate. The challenge for the Party is to allow internal
54 Interview with Gladys Marin, 29 March 1996. 55 See James Petras, Fernando Leiva and Henry Veltmeyer, Democracy and Poverty in Chile, Boulder 1994, especially pp. 85–9. 56 Ibid., pp. 46–75.
35
debate and provide autonomy for the new popular leaders. The problem of the intellectuals can only be solved with a new generation attracted to an open party. Secondly, the Party’s continued growth depends on accepting the autonomy of the new trade union and student leaders; cen- tralist attempts to impose a political line will quickly alienate these lead- ers who were not formed in the previous Communist culture.
The Party also needs to develop an analysis of the new conditions of factory work and a better understanding of the class and state relations behind the ‘globalization’ rhetoric, freely and uncritically circulating in Chile. There are other leftist groups such as the network of independent trade unions (co-ordinadores) which are gaining influence in the industrial zones around Santiago. The Democratic Forum—a group of centre-left professionals—a small group of independent political economists and a burgeoning anti-corporate ecology movement could, if they converge, pro- vide the impetus for a significant left-wing political presence in Chile.
Argentina: Between Stagnation and Rebellion
The political struggles in Argentina have been cyclical. There was wide- spread mobilization in the transition from the military regime—following the Malvinas defeat—and during the subsequent attempted military coups. There were six general strikes against the Radical Government in the mid- to late-1980s. In the 1990s there have been widespread provincial riots. More recently, in August 1996, the first successful general strike against the faltering Menem regime could be symptomatic of a new cycle of class conflict. The crucial issue in Argentina is not the periodic outbursts of mass popular protest but its dissociation from any alternative political project. Where politics has been joined to the social struggle, the general strikes of the cgt in the 1980s, the urban protests in the early 1990s, it has been channelled into political projects that have been assimilated to the neoliberal project.57 The cgt helped bring down Alfonsin only to become a vehicle for the ultra-liberal policies of the Menem regime. The dissident trade unionists (cta) of the early 1990s were instrumental in the creation of the Frente Grande which later supported neoliberal stabilization poli- cies. The organized social movements have thus far not been able to create a political instrument expressive of their own social bases.
Another feature of the Left in Argentina is its dissociation from the major spontaneous uprisings in the provinces, with some notable excep- tions in Jujuy. This was brought home to me while I was in Neuquen speaking to a group of trade unionists, academics and professionals. Just fifty miles away, over 20,000 people had blocked a major highway in protest over the Governor’s policies. When I questioned the local orga- nizers of the Neuquen meeting about the leadership of this mass action, they told me that none of the leftist or other organized groups were involved. More generally, the revolt of the provinces has not yet been theorized by any of the Buenos Aires intellectuals, this being their own brand of provincialism—they are well versed, however, in the latest
57 One of the best sources on popular struggles is the monthly Madres de Plaza de Mayo published by the group with the same name. See also ‘El Fuego de Santiago’, America Libre, no. 5, June 1994, pp. 92–100.
36
nuances of postmodern discourses, another example of cultural alien- ation and political dissociation. Similar uprisings have taken place in Salta, Rosario, Cordoba, San Juan, Mendoza and Tierra del Fuego. In some cases, the riots led to the burning of public buildings and large- scale street confrontations with very little to show for it in the way of building a national or regional political alternative. Not infrequently, the demonstrators return to previous client political relations with one or the other of the traditional parties.
On the surface, the Left is divided between the centre-left electoral front in Buenos Aires and the provincial movements involved in direct action. In practice, these differences are subject to severe qualification. The human rights group, the Madres del Plaza de Mayo, has become an important ref- erence point for popular mobilization of young people, dissident trade unionists and neighbourhood organizations, as well as nuclei of university students and academics. Hebe Bonafini, the principal spokesperson, told me of her conception of building an inclusive national movement, inde- pendent of the existing centre-left coalitions.58 There is no question that the Madres have an important political presence due to their intransigent insistence on bringing to justice the military personnel responsible for the deaths of 30,000 people. Beyond that, they have been able to raise militant demonstrations of over 50,000 people, mostly the young. The problem of moving from protest to politics, however, remains to be resolved.
The Marxist Left remains very small, internally divided and socially iso- lated, although individual militants are found in some of the major trade unions. What is lacking is a left-wing movement that has political credi- bility among participants in the urban social struggles. Electoral politics could only have meaning as part of a growing political identity that comes out of the social struggles and polarizations of the direct action movements. In the meantime, as in Mexico, the social decomposition of the corrupt and inept Menem regime is accompanied by a growing mili- tarization of politics.59 During the August general strike, the military packed the streets, blocking public protests.
The general strike of August has an ambiguous character: on the one hand, it was important in defining the further decline of support for Menem and the growing pressure on the cgt bureaucracy; on the other hand, the trade union officials saw it as an escape valve to deflect internal opposition, and had no intention of deepening the struggle. In other words, the Argentine Left stands between the stagnation of the official Left of the Frente Grande and the cgt, and the promising politicization of provincial rebellion as a source of political renewal.
Mexico
In Mexico, the internationally famous Zapatista movement and its leader, Subcommandante ‘Marcos’, is only one of several important peasant movements in Guerrero, Oaxaca and other regions. Nonetheless, what is
58 Interview with Hebe Bonafini, 20 June 1996. 59 Nestor Lopez and Alberto Minujin ‘Nueva Pobreza y exclusion: El caso Argentino’, Nueva Sociedad, no. 131, May-June 1994, pp. 88–105.
37
important about the Zapatista movement is its blend of Marxist analysis and Indian practice, the linkage of national and international strategic thinking and local community-based support. Equally important, since the centre-left party, the prd (Revolutionary Democratic Party), contin- ues to be marginalized from any legislative role, it is the peasant move- ment and in particular the ezln which has established the basis for a national political debate on the issues of nafta, democratization, land reform and social justice. Like its more powerful and numerical counter- parts in Latin America, the ezln combines social struggle with efforts to forge a political instrument to transform the larger society.60
It would be a mistake, however, in discussing the perspectives for revolu- tion in Mexico to focus exclusively on the ezln. The potential for radical change is located in several areas: the eruption of new guerrilla groups, the proliferation of local and regional peasant movements, the radical social base of the prd, and the emergence of significant splits in the offi- cial trade unions, parallel to the emergence of autonomous ‘class oriented unions’ like ‘Ruta 100’. Each component has some overlap: for example, it is clear that the epr (Ejercito Popular Revolucionario), which is com- mitted to seizing state power, has substantial support among at least some peasant communities in Guerrero.61 The radical social activists in the peasant struggle are also part of the left-wing of the prd. These move- ments are not responding to the political space opened by President Zedillo’s ‘electoral reform’. On the contrary, they are creating their own political space despite the growing militarization of the country. Mexico’s political rulers are the product of a marriage between Mexican trustees for Wall Street, narco-capitalists and viceroys from the World Bank and imf. The growth of the politico-social movements is in part the result of a tran- sition from an authoritarian state-capitalism to a police-state kleptocracy which dubs itself ‘free-market liberalism’ and describes its electoral reforms and the assassination of opponents as a ‘transition to democracy’.
A characteristic phenomenon of the new phase has been the wave of freight train heists which followed the privatization of the railways. Until recently, the Mexican rail network was indissolubly linked to the Revolution and the national idea. Over the last year, over a dozen freight trains, often carrying grain, have been stopped by crowds of rural people who proceed to make off with their cargo.
The fundamental point about the extension and deepening of radical opposition, however, is that it lacks a political axis. The movement’s diverse and local character attracts substantial following in search of immediate solutions but has thus far inhibited the creation of a national movement capable of challenging the party-state. Nevertheless, it is clear that the decomposition of the pri and its internal intrigues, power struggles and violent vendettas have loosened its tentacles on the popu-
60 Many books have been written on the ezln. One of the best on-going analytical sources is found in Chiapas, edited by Ana Esther Ceceña (Mexico City). 61 Leticia Hernandez Montoya, ‘Rechazamos el Dialogo; Derrocar al Estado, Nuestro Objetivo: epr’, Excelsior, 10 August 1996, pp. 1, 8, 17, 25; Mexico City Times, 10 August 1996, p. 1. For an analysis of the politics of the epr, and its parallel political party, the pdpr, see Dan La Botz, ‘Mexico at the Turning Point, Part I: Rebellion and Militarization’, Againt the Current, no. 65, November-December 1996, pp. 22–3.
38
lar classes in civil society. At the electoral level, the right-wing pan is the main beneficiary, almost doubling its electoral base over the past six years to almost 15 million voters. The prd is torn between its leftist social base, pressuring it for more active intervention, and its parliamen- tary leaders who want to make it an electoral machine catering to mid- dle-class voters in the large cities of the north. With the election of Obregon Lopez to the presidency of the Party, the prd promises to attempt the difficult exercise of riding both horses.
The growth of revolutionary politics in Mexico should not be any sur- prise to students of revolution. Vice-President Gore compares nafta to the nineteenth-century Louisiana Purchase. As John Saxe Fernandez points out, it is easy to speak of us policy in the late-twentieth century as the ‘Mexico Purchase’.62 With the financial squeeze by the banks on the Mexican debtor, 40-cent-an-hour wages, the massive displacement of peasants by agro-business, there is a revolution waiting to be made.
The EZLN: Arms and Politics
The Zapatista Army of National Liberation has captured the imagin- ation, sympathy and support of a substantial part of the Left in Mexico and throughout the world. This was evident in the international ‘Encuentro’ organized by the Zapatistas in the jungles of Chiapas (27 July to 3 August 1996) in which over 4,000 participants gathered from 41 countries. From interviews and discussion, including one session with Marcos, a complex picture emerges of the evolution and current situation of the ezln.
Since the initial uprising on New Year’s Day 1994, the ezln have gone through substantial shifts in political perspective.63 It is important to note that these changes and the policies of the Zapatistas have signifi- cance far beyond the twenty-five communities in Chiapas influenced by the ezln. From conversations with Marcos and other ezln leaders as well as from published speeches, communiqués and interviews, it is clear firstly that the ezln has narrowed its goals. From the broad focus on basic socio-economic transformation at the beginning (in which Zapatista militants even spoke of a socialist transformation), the over- whelming emphasis today is on ‘democratization’, ‘demilitarization’ and a ‘political transition’. This is in part because of the tightening military encirclement. The intransigence of the government and its ‘salami tac- tics’—isolating, starving and bribing Indian communities to break with the ezln—has heightened the prospects for a direct military assault on the remaining communities.
For the ezln to transform itself from a military to a political structure and to establish corresponding democratic systems of accountability would pose many problems. First and foremost is the immediate military threat; army forces are positioned less than a kilometre from some
62 Interview with John Saxe-Fernandez, 7 August 1996, Mexico City. His forthcoming study in us-Mexican relations draws heavily on nineteenth-century Porfirismo and us annexation policies to explain nafta and the us buy-out of Mexican resources. 63 Ibid.
39
Zapatista communities.64 To prematurely put assembly-type structures at the centre of decision-making would be to ignore the lesson of the lightning invasion of February 1995, and to increase the vulnerability of the leadership who support democratic values. The culture of commu- nity solidarity and survival is a necessary prerequisite for the construc- tion of democracy. The continuance in present circumstances of the Zapatista Army is one guarantee. Marcos is of course aware of the cen- tralist tendency in guerrilla formations and anguishes over the issue. The tension between military defence and democracy cannot be resolved by simply issuing democratic directives—it can only be dealt with in the concrete context of an occupied Chiapas, with helicopters hovering over- head and special airborne troops awaiting orders to strike. In the event of a government attack, the ezln would be separated from their social base and the public image projected by the media would shift from a struggle between Indian communities and the one-party state to a military con- flict between guerrillas and the armed forces. Such a polarization would weaken progressive urban support.
The question of war or peace cannot be resolved by unilateral concessions from Marcos. Any war will be decided in the larger political struggle in which forces outside Chiapas will play a major role. Can the Mexican regime wage a multi-front struggle with guerrillas in Guerrero, peasant mobilization in Oaxaca, and growing trade union discontent—over 300,000 marched on May Day 1996 in Mexico City —a precipitous decline in voter support in the north, and an economy heavily dependent on liquid capital, ready to flee at the least sign of instability? In June elections are scheduled for the mayorship of Mexico City and there is a possibility that the prd candidate, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, will win. This prospect may well have induced both the government and the ezln to act cautiously.
The ezln’s narrowing of goals is accompanied by the broadening of inter- national support. The indefinition of the ezln leadership results in each group reading into the ezln its own political concerns. For example, some French intellectuals praise the Zapatistas as the reincarnation of nine- teenth-century republican citizens.65 Spanish anarchists see them in terms of Durrutti’s peasant armies. While indefinition has its advantages, it also has limitations in building a coherent national movement beyond Chiapas. Moreover, it is not clear if the narrowing of goals is not a reflection of an internal shift among the political currents that make up the ezln.66
The second shift in the ezln approach is away from diffuse appeals to ‘civil society’—which has not led to ‘self-organization’—and to increas- ing collaboration and coordination with specific groups in Mexico which have a demonstrated capacity to resist the government. In June and July 1996, the debtors’ organization barzon, which claims one million affili- ates, held a national conference in Zapatista territory and established links. Shortly thereafter a number of national and regional Indian or- ganizations met in the same terrain. In the same period, the ezln leader-
64 Since the initial uprising, the Mexican government has spent a great deal building roads into the jungles of Chiapas—strictly for counter-insurgency purposes. 65 Alan Touraine, who was at the Encuentro, made this comparison. 66 Interview with Marcos, 29 July 1996.
40
ship participated in a week-long seminar with Mexican intellectuals about reform of the state. These ties with organized groups hold greater promise for building a national political alternative and serve notice to the government that the encirclement strategy is not working. More important, it begins to give substance to the social character of the movement that Marcos envisions.
The third shift in the Zapatista policy is the preponderant if not exclu- sive emphasis on a political solution and the qualified renunciation of armed struggle. In his speech to the Encuentro, Marcos placed the armed struggle in the context of an early ‘phase’ in the struggle—as a means of achieving recognition, opening a political dialogue with the regime and advancing towards a political solution. This is particularly highlighted by the strong overtures to liberal-democratic public opinion and the dis- tant, if not hostile, relation to the new guerrilla movement in Guerrero (epr) that emerged in June 1996.67
In our interview, Marcos articulated the dilemma of choosing between military and political struggle. While he clearly was intent on moving toward legal political activity, the regime was tightening the military cir- cle, increasing the repression of peasants in Chiapas by its support for paramilitary groups, and offering no concessions in ending the strangle- hold that the pri state has over all aspects of political and social life. The real political conditions in Mexico are deeply repressive; an average of two prd leaders or activists are killed every week—over 250 since the election of President Zedillo. One can imagine what would happen to the Zapatistas if they came out of the jungles and began serious organizing.
Marcos emphasized that agrarian reform and cultural autonomy were essential to any peace settlement. For Marcos and the ezln, the issue of land distribution is linked to the self-government of the Indian com- munities. The Mexican government, like its counterparts in Bolivia, Guatemala and Ecuador, attempts to disassociate Indian cultural issues from socio-economic changes and autonomous political power. In any case, the government negotiators are putting no meaningful concessions on the table, hoping through time and a war of attrition to tire outside supporters, wear down the communities through deprivation and then deal a quick military blow.
The Rift Between Old and New Lefts
In Latin America as a whole, what is striking in the current situation is the minimal influence that the ex-leftists of the 1960s have on the third- wave revolutionaries of the 1990s. The ‘halo’ effect of the past no longer holds. The eruption of peasant land occupations, the politics of direct action creates tension between the legalist, electoralist politics of the sec- ond wave and their pragmatic centre-left coalitions. The new revolution- aries call on the Centre-Left to support their struggles, to pass progressive legislation, to resign from repressive regimes even as they develop the strategy of building autonomous centres of popular power in communi- ties, cooperatives and provincial municipalities. It appears to be only a
67 Ibid.
41
question of time until the rightward moving electoral coalitions and the leftward moving new social-political movements will part ways.
Popular disenchantment with Centre Left governments has been provoked by their endemic corruption, and by their resort to austerity, repression and privatization. Thus formerly revolutionary or leftist politicians associated with the governments in, for example, Chile, Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua, have all brought one or another of these types of discredit upon themselves. The insurgent politicians of the 1980s who have failed to win power nationally have been undermined in a different way. Their electoral bids have been defeated and their mystique has gone. With some local exceptions, they have failed to use electoral interventions as a way of build- ing movements and propagating a long-term programme of social transfor- mation. Even the pt in Brazil and the prd in Mexico now lack clear programmes for tackling the crises in their countries, having been out- flanked by agile new forces on the Right (Cardoso and pan) and new extra- parliamentary movements on the Left. They risk being seen as pure politicos awaiting their turn. Nevertheless, if Cárdenas wins election as mayor of Mexico City, activists will hope that a prd administration will clip the wings of the repressive forces and use municipal initiative to strengthen popular movements. Marcos is keenly aware of the pitfalls of the peace accords in Central America and the limited nature of ‘democratization’ under the auspices of the military and the imf in much of the rest of Latin America. Even where the Left advances electorally, this may hide actual retreats. In El Salvador the peace accords of 1992 have allowed for electoral advances by the fmln, with the Left winning control of the capital, San Salvador, for the first time in March 1997. The peasant activists of the Asociación Democratico Campesino naturally welcome the ending of the death squad’s reign of terror and the advent of a local administration which is more likely to be open to pressure. But government policies have hit poor peasants and rural labourers hard while the fmln’s orientation to ‘produc- tive capitalists’ leads to reduced concern for their interests. In these last elec- tions abstentions ran at 60 per cent, with many poorer or rural voters staying at home. Although landlord and employer intimidation is much reduced, nevertheless four activists were killed during the election period.
Politics and Revolutionary Ethics
Marcos offers a new type of leadership in Latin America. The differences between Marcos and the other peasant leaders are obvious: Marcos is an intellectual of urban origins with a literary flair unmatched among his counterparts in Latin America. Yet Marcos is equally concerned with the cultural, subjective and historical dimensions of social revolution; while thinking ‘internationally’, Marcos and the new leadership are deeply grounded in ‘national’ and regional realities with a sensibility for the nuances of local customs, traditions and norms. None of the leaders today follow a ‘model’ extrapolated from other countries, past or present. Most leaders are conscious of the need to avoid personality cults and to be responsive to the rank and file. While the new leaders are excellent orga- nizers and effective leaders, they are not charismatic spell-binders nor apparatchiks. They rule by obeying, at least to some degree, and do not force their ideas on the militants through emotional fervour but seek to convince through discussion.
42
Despite the widely circulated democratic rhetoric and ongoing electoral system, the new leaders are aware of the ongoing risk of assassination directed by the governments through a variety of extra-judicial paramili- tary groups that function with impunity. Marcos, for example, was well aware of the intention of the Mexican government to have him killed. While the constant presence of mortal danger surfaces occasionally, it is not an obsession, nor does it lessen or modify the leaders’ activity. To direct from a bunker would be a sign of weakness or even cowardice. They are always present in the meetings and demonstrations, and in many cases have been beaten, arrested and sent to remote prisons. The militants respect those leaders who share their fight: ‘showing face’ gives courage to the poor. The new leaders have helped to create new movements, but they are also a product of them—in ethics as well as its socio-economic interests. The resurgence of the new peasant and urban movements of the 1990s flows from the fact that they are defending vital interests and that no one ques- tions the personal integrity of their leaders. If they lose these qualities, the movements will dissolve or become fragmented into electoral clienteles.
Such groups are not simply ‘new social movements’. They retain and develop Marxism in new circumstances adapted to new class actors engaged in novel types of struggle with the clear perspective of changing the national, if not international, structure of political and economic power. Ex-miners become coca cultivators, Indian communities linked to urban intellectuals become guerrilla leaders, rural landless workers build anti-liberal power blocs, Guarani-speaking peasants challenge the hege- mony of drug and contraband ‘capitalists’—Marxism can be a creative tool in coming to terms with these new protagonists of social change.
An encouraging feature of the new movements is that, confronting an environmentally rapacious socio-economic system, their resistance is often infused with a strong commitment to the defence of a sustainable ecology. The indigenous people’s identification with their native earth remains a powerful strand of rural radicalism. And since women so often bear the brunt of popular survival strategies, the new movements only thrive when they display a concern for women’s issues and gender equal- ity. While most of the nationally-known leaders are still men, there are increasing numbers of women taking the lead at community level. Where water supplies are polluted or traditional cultivation plots taken over by developers, it is very often the women who are in the forefront of the resulting popular struggles.68
Almost all the new leaders have a ‘religious background’, either directly or through their association with their members. The Zapatistas drew heavily on the consciousness-raising of the progressive Catholics of Chiapas, partic- ularly Bishop Samuel Ruiz. Most of the original organizers of the mst came out of seminaries and rural pastoral movements. Some of the Paraguayan peasant leaders are sons and daughters of earlier militants organized in the Ligas Campesinas promoted by progressive church people; the Bolivian leadership draws on the spiritual traditions of the Indian communities. Popular religiosity can fuse with Marxism in a syncretic fashion. However,
68 See, for example, Cesar Fonseca and Enrique Mayer, Comunidad y Produccion en el Peru, Lima 1988, p. 187.
43
we should beware of simply carrying over 1980s stereotypes. Catholic Liberation theology remains a socially radical force, but in a number of countries its strength has waned somewhat, partly because of the Vatican’s hostility and partly because of its partial recuperation by the ngo culture. Protestant and Pentecostal groups are a dynamic and growing presence in many parts of Latin America, with a special appeal to the rural and urban poor, to women and to Indian and black populations—indeed, it is said that in Latin America there are now more Protestants than Catholics. Latin American Protestantism should be seen as the Left’s keenest rival for the allegiance of the poor, channelling popular hostility to the political estab- lishment into other-worldly directions and stimulating a culture of self- help and self-reform amongst the most deprived. While the established left parties have failed to respond to this challenge, the practical, extra-electoral orientation of the new movements equips them to do so.69
Unions, the City and the Country
Last summer the trade union confederations of Brazil and Argentina organized successful general strikes. In Argentina the strike totally halted industry and almost all commerce.70 In Brazil twelve million strikers shut down industry and most provincial commerce. The massive participation in these actions can be set against their meagre political impact. The deepening unemployment crises—in Argentina over 17 per cent of the labour force, and a quarter of the working class; in Brazil close to 15 per cent in the greater São Paulo region—are the worst in fifty years. Discontent is increasingly directed not just at the Cardoso and Menem regimes but at the official trade union leadership, especially the national leaders in São Paulo and Buenos Aires.71 The convocation of the general strikes by the cgt and cut leaders was essentially meant to deflect this anger. They were ritualistic actions lacking strategic perspec- tive and largely confined to registering protest. The political leaders understood them as such, and made little or no effort to meet any of the demands, let alone modify their neoliberal agenda. Nevertheless, the symbolic meaning of the general strike invokes the spectre of an alliance between urban and rural interests. There are growing bonds between the provinces and the big city proletariat in Argentina, the landless rural workers movement and the São Paulo industrial belts.
While the public-sector workers, particularly in the provinces, have been at the cutting-edge of the new trade union militancy—understandable given the budget cuts in education and health, and the massive lay-offs of public employees to meet World Bank and imf budget goals—the new round of cuts are directed at lowering the labour costs of private-sec- tor capitalists and facilitating ‘no cost’ firings to increase the profits of exporters and attract new investors. The result is an emerging ‘conflu- ence’ of common interest between downwardly mobile public employees and private wage workers threatened with redundancy and the loss of
69 See Michael Löwy, The War of the Gods. Religion and Politics in Latin America, Verso, London 1996; Richard Gott, ‘The Latin Conversion’, The Guardian, 10 June 1995. 70 Correio Sindical (Rio de Janeiro), June 1996, p. 3; Jornal Do Brasil, 22 June 1996, pp. 1, 12. 71 Interview with Ina Merieles, President of cut, Rio de Janeiro, 4 June 1996; seminar meeting with dissident trade unionists São Paulo, 23 May 1996; interviews with dissi- dent trade union leaders of the cta in Rosario, Cordoba, Neuquen and Resistencia.
44
social benefits—family allowances, bonus payments, vacations and so forth. The general strikes are thus only the first indications of this new and potentially destabilizing confluence that, if sustained, could endan- ger the neoliberal regimes. The question is how durable is the re-emer- gence of the trade union struggle and working-class combativity?
The principle feature of the trade union insurgency is a defence of existing social legislation and previous wage gains against the new wave of budget cuts and downward pressures on wages. Their militancy is based on con- serving residual elements from the previous populist and social democratic era. Thus, while the strikes and increasing militancy reflects a growing rejection of ‘neoliberalism’, they have not been accompanied by an alterna- tive strategic conception that converts the periodic paralysis of capitalism into a transition to new forms of socialized production and distribution.
The upsurge of peasant movements has provided examples that have had a significant impact on urban labour, stimulating a new militancy which in turn opens channels for the creation of a ‘new trade unionism’, inde- pendent of the old guard ‘pactism’ and collaborationist leadership. As the centre-left political parties abandon the social movements, the rural movements turn to land occupations, provincial civic associations and the trade unions to general strikes, and armed groups create ‘liberated territories.’ However, organizational fragmentation poses a serious chal- lenge to the success of such movements. It is the single major obstacle to a serious challenge for power. This is most evident in Mexico where hun- dreds of local militant peasant, debtor, Indian and community groups are active, each in limited fashion against the centralized power of the one-party state. In such circumstances, the revival of peasant militancy in the countryside requires a political instrument rooted at least in part in the cities, and ultimately a national political-social organization.
The New Colonialism
The attempt by the us government to give its legislation, the Helms- Burton Law, sway over the entire globe—referred to in legal terms as ‘extra-territoriality’—reflects the growing centrality of imperial interests in defining us foreign policy. This imposition should be seen in the context of de facto us penetration of the higher echelons of the executive, military and intelligence apparatuses of the Latin American states. While most commentators have criticized the financial controls exercised by us banks, particularly throughout the debt crisis, and others the pervasive influence exercised by the us through its shared power in the World Bank and imf, few have given an account of how these powerful economic levers work alongside direct political and military control exercised by us officials. Under the guise of fighting drug traffickers, Washington has organized Latin American military forces under us command, a goal set in the 1960s and 1970s but unattainable until now. In Mexico, Bolivia and Colombia, the us Ambassadors and State Department routinely dictate which mili- tary officials and Cabinet Ministers are acceptable and which are to be dis- missed. And, as a matter of routine, Latin executive officials comply.
The strengthening of us control over Latin American internal security affairs is paralleled by Washington’s policy of pressuring governments to
45
reduce the size of their conventional armed forces while strengthening their internal police and military repressive apparatuses. Even at the tac- tical level, fbi and dea officials direct investigations, calling in their Latin officials to provide intelligence and oversee operations.72 In Chaparé, Bolivia and in the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru, dea officials make no effort to disguise who is in charge of operations. Most Latin American generals and presidents are very self-conscious of the fact that the us labelling them ‘drug trafficker’ can cost them their position. The formidable influence of the us is evident in the eagerness of President Menem to anticipate us foreign policy positions, and of Mexico’s President Zedillo who makes debt payments in advance despite the deepening impoverishment of millions of fellow citizens.
The drug issue is a pretext for increasing us power in Latin America. The use of drug money in financing us trade imbalances by money-laundering through us banks never emerges as an issue in the drug-eradication pro- grammes. At the end of the twentieth century, the Latin American Pur- chase is in full force. All of the major lucrative Latin American public petroleum companies are up for sale. The maquiladora or sweat-shop free- trade zones are becoming emblematic of the new foreign directed indus- trial export strategies. us corporations now control greater shares of the fast-food industry and cultural and media sales.73 us corporations are active in real estate as well as retail outlets and shopping malls. us-spon- sored militarization is directed at safeguarding ‘the Purchase’. The New Imperialism is not ‘neo-colonial’—it is rather a matter of direct and rou- tine executive control.
The New Imperialism attempts to strengthen the global position of the us through greater exploitation of the Latin American economies. The underlying drive of us empire building is determined by the decisive dependence of the largest us multi- nationals on overseas profits, and of the us economy on favourable accounts with Latin America to compensate for deficits in Asia and Germany.74 The us has estab- lished two new vehicles for containing unrest: the ideology of ‘globalization’ and the promotion of non-profit ngos. The first is to mystify intellectuals into submission before the Inevitable Wave of the Future, the second toprovide them with the means to dismantle the national welfare state.75 Nonetheless, the scope and depth of imperial penetration continues to undermine an ever-widening circle of social classes: small and medium firms are forced into bankruptcy, public employees are impoverished, peasants are displaced, factory workers are employed on insecure terms and receive very low pay. In the face of this, even a minority of intellectuals have tentatively begun to revive the notion of imperialism as a central concept for analysis and politics.
72 A visit to Chaparé disabuses any observer of the sovereignty of the Bolivian state. Even everyday operational activities are overseen by the dozen or so dea officials stationed there. 73 Between 1983 and 1993, us media services exports increased by 138 per cent compared to total service exports which grew only 90 per cent. us media goods exports increased 2,143 per cent while total goods exports increased only 110 per cent. us Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the US 1995, Washington, dc 1995; Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, September 1995. pp. 85, 93, 104.
74 James Petras and Todd Cavaluzzi, ‘Lucratives bases arrière pour 1’économie américaine’, Le Monde Diplomatique, February 1995, pp. 6–7. us transfers (rent, interest, profits and favourable trade balances) cover 40 per cent of the negative trade balance with Japan over the last decade. 75 See my ‘Intellectuals: A Marxist Critique of Post-Marxism’ forthcoming in America: Libre.
46
Conclustion
Empire building is about the extraction of interest payments, the pillage of natural resources, and the large-scale transfer of public property to multinationals. Together these forces have put tremendous pressure on the Latin American social system. Since the ‘local power structure’ is located in the central cities, in this process of extraction and appropria- tion, the ‘provinces’ and the rural areas have been especially hard hit.
The logic of the expansion of the new peasant movements is intimately related to the internal transformations of the peasantry—politically, cul- turally and economically—as well as a dialectical resistance to the deep- ening encroachment of imperial demands. The peasantry today is both market- and worker-oriented. Access to credit, markets and technical aid is linked to their increasing class conditions as wage workers. The dis- placement of educated peasants linked to modern urban centres creates a new peasantry with modern organizational and media skills that link agricultural activities to urban class struggle.
It would be a serious mistake to dismiss contemporary peasant move- ments as the last gasp of rebellion. The movements between country and city are no longer one-way. High levels of crime and the decline of social services in the cities have lessened the advantages of urban living. As movements take over land and build communities there could be a stabil- ization, if not reversal, of the rural to urban migration. There is no inher- ent, historical logic that compels that demographic change—it is in large part a political question. Interest payments, the repression of coca farm- ers, the subsidy of agro-export conglomerates are, after all, state directed.
To date, the Empire has flourished as never before: conditions of mineral appropriation, access to markets, low labour costs and influence over gov- ernments and the military were never better. The space for ‘reform’ is almost non-existent within the formula of free markets, electoral regimes and military supervision.76 The dialectical opposite pole of this success, however, is the decay of the urban middle sector and the rapid accumula- tion of increasingly impoverished workers and public employees moving towards direct social action. It is because of this imperial excess that the new rural movements are gaining national political influence and promi- nence.
The fundamental turn that must be made from strictly agrarian issues to social transformation has to be built around the renewal of a socialist praxis that links cultural autonomy and small-scale production with con- trol over the strategic heights of the economy. The Empire has struck and torn asunder the economic, cultural and political fabric of Latin American societies. It has assimilated a few and exploited many. But the Left has struck back—in the villages of Paraguay and Bolivia, in the rural squatter settlements of Brazil, in the jungles of Mexico, a new movement is taking hold that is developing its own theory and writing its own history.
76 For a critique of the ‘reformist’ perspective, see James Petras and Steve Vieux, ‘Prag- matism Unmasked: History and Strategy in Castañeda’s Utopia Unarmed’, Science and Society, vol. 60, no. 2, Summer 1996, pp. 207–19.
47
