2007
Geography
Journal of Latin American Geography
Resistance and Social Reform in Latin America: Speaking with João edro Stedile of Brazil’s “O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra” (the MST)
Jeff Garmany

Department of Geography and Regional Development University of Arizona
Flávia Bessa Maia
Departamento de Geografia Universidade de São Paulo
For those concerned with social resistance and civil society, Brazil’s O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST) stands out as one of today’s most intrigu- ing social movements. Having emerged towards the end of Brazil’s military dictatorship period in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the MST was initially formulated to address the concerns of Brazil’s camponês1 population. As Brazil moved towards a more decen- tralized form of state democracy, many on the left doubted whether federal legislation alone would ever sufficiently address the country’s “landless” issue (where millions of agricultural workers lived as peasants, having no ownership of the land on which they lived and worked). The primary objective of those within the movement was not merely to petition, but to force the federal government to implement what was perceived as long overdue agrarian reform measures. The MST quickly gained international fame for their land occupation strategies, in which landless camponês families often squatted on “unused” sections of agricultural land in an effort to obligate federal agencies to enact constitutionally provisioned land reform policies (Fernandes 2000). Currently, as the MST still continues to push for agrarian reform in nearly every region of Latin America’s largest country, the movement has also become deeply involved in a multitude of other political and social debates pertaining to issues of globalization.
The most publicly-recognized figure within the MST today is writer and critic João Pedro Stedile. The author and editor of numerous books regarding agrarian reform and the MST (Stedile 1997, 1999, 2002, 2005), Stedile has become increasingly critical in recent years of neoliberal economic policies, globalization discourses, large-scale agro- industrial practices, and the consolidating networks of global capitalism. We met with Stedile at the MST headquarters in São Paulo in July of 2006 to discuss the contemporary state of the movement. What follows is an expanded excerpt from that conversation, one begun in truncated form in the journal Antipode (Garmany and Maia 2007). That
Journal of Latin American Geography, 6 (2), 2007
138	Journal of Latin American Geography
interview focused upon the spatial politics of the MST in relation to agrarian reform, while this one concerns the MST’s current position within the social, political, and eco- nomic landscape of modern Brazil.
Jeff Garmany and Flávia Bessa Maia: Considering, as you’ve said before, that many of the social problems in Brazil are
interrelated, and that the root causes for social inequality in the country (rural space) are the same as the ones in the city (urban space), then do you think that the MST’s current model of social resistance should also work in the city, that it would be effective?
João Pedro Stedile: Well, the biggest challenge we have in constructing a social movement in the city is
that the traditional forms of urban organization are already insufficient. It’s not that they are disappearing, but that they are insufficient. How do the people organize during this period of industrial capitalism? Unions, neighborhood associations, and political par- ties: these three tools, however, are insufficient to organize the poor people of the city. So our greatest challenge is to find what forms of organization, particularly for young people, will develop a powerful alliance. This appears to be the problem that we have in the camponês movement: we have to unite with the city, but when we come here to the city we find that there is no organization in the city. We have to first help them organize in order for us to join with them.
JG/FBM: Well, the movement is growing enormously today, perhaps because it is so open to
many people. It has even been said that it’s the largest social movement in Latin America, which clearly is a sign of success, but does this not also create problems and have some drawbacks?
JPS:
Well, first, we don’t like this type of adjective: if it’s the largest in the world, the largest in Latin America, this doesn’t do any good. The principal force that we work for overall is in the agricultural sector and the camponês movement. We look for solutions to the problems we face today, and we find that they’re deeply related to the dilemmas that all the componês movements in Latin America and the world face. So in the last five, six years, we have continued to strengthen our relations with other camponês move- ments. Always with the spirit to learn, to trade experiences, to search to discover what are the solutions to these problems that profoundly affect the small agriculturalists in Canada, the United States, Mexico, in Brazil, etc. And they’re the same today, the same problems. And as such, if the problems are the same, the solutions should be very similar even though each group of people has their own culture, their own idiosyncrasies (rarezas), as the Mexicans say. So we have to be open, and we’ve learned that over the years. We’re only going to find a real solution if we exchange ideas with others, if we learn with them and they learn with us.
This is what we are constructing together with the other camponês movements in Latin America; to have regional agroecology schools like the one we’re building here in Paraná na Lapa, we’re working on one in Venezuela,2 our Nicaraguan companheiros are expanding their school for Central America, and we’ll put one together, God willing, in Haiti. All this is creating a network for us to train our militantes3 within another vision, and to train new agronomists with, as Leonardo Boff 4 said, a more holistic vision, where we don’t look at the occupation of land as simply a rational way to produce agricultural
Forum	139
products and earn money. We look at the land as a necessity for production, we respect nature, produce healthy foods, and at the same time reproduce the camponês culture which is important for humanity. And with this we don’t stay trapped in this stupid eco- nomic rationalism of capitalism that only wants to reproduce dollars and more dollars and more dollars regardless of the consequences.
JG/FBM: Returning once again to this question of the struggle between social classes, I’ve
spoken with many working class people here in Brazil who don’t agree with the actions of the MST and don’t like the movement’s ideas. Could you speak a little about this, like how the movement is responding to this sentiment, or how the movement negotiates these debates and problems?
JPS:
First, someone who does not live here in Brazil has to understand the historical context that we’re living in, and with that, our forum for communicating with people in the working class. The history of class struggle here in Brazil is a somewhat recent de- velopment. It was not until nearly the twentieth century when industrial capitalism was implanted and social classes clearly emerged. The real camponês class has existed here for 130 years, since abolition, because before that work was done by slaves. And so the camponês class in Brazil is a relatively young class, it has only 130 years of history, as op- posed to Mexico where campesinos have been around for 500, maybe even 1,000 years.
Here in Brazil the struggle between classes has always, like in other countries, gone in waves. Here there was a period of roughly fifteen to twenty years when the proletariat gained strength, disputing the agenda of the dominant class, and then a subsequent re- flux in the proletariat masses. What’s the period that we’re living in today? It’s the reflux of the proletariat. We had a great rising that was the origin of the MST, the CUT,5 and the PT6 that occurred between 1978 and 1989. The population mobilized, the working class accumulated strength and ideology, and this permitted the removal of the military dictatorship, it permitted us to have a campaign for human rights, and it permitted the construction of Lula’s image in 1989. In ’89 we had a whole series of projects, but they were defeated. And it was then that neoliberalism was implanted, with Collor7 and the two terms of Fernando Henrique Cardoso.8
Well, since 1990 the strength of the working class has declined. The people have become apathetic, they feel defeated. It’s a generation that has historically been de- feated, and the CUT losses strength, the PT loses mysticism, and we don’t know what will happen to the MST. By the logic of class struggle the MST should already have been defeated, like how CONTAG9 was defeated. CONTAG doesn’t count for very much in terms of class struggle today in Brazil. It’s not because it doesn’t exist, CONTAG has, I don’t know, 5,000 unions. It exists, but the bourgeoisie controls it because CONTAG has no ideology. Well, we have ideology, we have an agenda, we want to defeat this economic model and implant another! But with this slump of the proletariat, it’s like you have to row against the current. You have to survive, resist, and this is what The Landless Movement is doing. We’re resisting and holding onto the flag, “agrarian reform is possible, socialism is possible, the land must be distributed!” But we know that we don’t have much strength because of this slump. In this slump who has hegemony in society? The dominant class! And everything it says turns to gold, everything it says becomes the truth, whichever idiot who says some stupid thing on the television is right because they have hegemony. So they convince the others. This is the period that we’re living right now.
140	Journal of Latin American Geography
We’re conscious of the fact that the urban masses where the Brazilian people are concentrated suffer from these perverse ideological influences. They don’t have a clear vision for where to go, they are unorganized, and they are not involved in political debate regarding the future. And evidently, in relation to what they hear about the MST, they always repeat what they hear from the dominant class. It’s not their true sentiment. But the poor young people will one day discover a tool, or maybe the unions will reemerge. It doesn’t matter how, but the young people will organize. And when the youth organize, and the proletariat rises again here in Brazil, they’ll remember that the MST was right. Right now we don’t want to be famous, we’re not worried about what they think of us at this time. We’re concerned with whether or not our proposal is suited for reality and for a better future. The most efficient advertisement we have is in our struggles. When we go to the streets, whether they want to or not, the bourgeoisie has to talk about us. They say bad things, but they talk. They’re obligated to talk about us. When we did the march to Brasilia, over twenty days, they had to talk about us.10	They’re critical, that’s fine, but they have to talk. So in regards to communication and how we’re perceived by the Brazilian people, what we need is to gather our strength again, to unite with the other movements so that the process of communication to the masses is more effective. Doing radio programs, alternative television programs, and using the Internet more effectively really work to strengthen this. Still, our biggest problem today, which is the biggest challenge to the entire left in terms of communication, is the television. Television is the only true instrument of mass communication in modern society today, and it’s expensive. We can’t afford to create an alternative television channel at this time. So this is a real dilemma, a serious dilemma for everyone, not just the MST.
JG/FBM: If indeed we’re currently in, as you say, a period of decline for proletariat mass
movements, then wouldn’t Lula’s victory in 2002 indicate a significant change?
JPS:
The great Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm once made an interesting commen- tary. He said that throughout the twentieth century not one leftist party won an election during a period of decline for the proletariat masses. According to this, the fact that Lula won here in Brazil appears difficult to explain. So what explains it? Was it a change in his discourse? Well, he didn’t introduce any debate or any projects during the election. His platform was of peace and love. The people voted for him looking to the past. They were tired of the neoliberal Cardoso agenda, so they voted for the guy that for twenty years had been fighting with us and for labor. But they forgot to check-in with him! He had already shifted his agenda. And the other thing that’s now evident is that parts of the dominant class in Brazil, the neoliberals, were wary of the revolts in Argentina, so they aligned with Lula. Being so close, the neoliberal crisis in Argentina really scared a lot of people within the dominant Brazilian classes. They were worried the same thing might happen here, and it actually did. If Serra had won the election (in 2002), if he had imbedded Brazil even further in neoliberal economic policies, and that’s exactly what’s happened here in São Paulo with Alckmin,11 the entire country could go the way Argen- tina did. You can write that.
So Lula won the election during this era of a weakened proletariat, but truthfully it’s not the Lula from 1989; now it’s another Lula. Deep down it’s not the left who won the election, you can see it. It’s been transformed into an ambiguous government. Sure, there are leftists within the government, and we support it because it’s better than having
Forum	141
a right-leaning government, but Lula’s administration is not a leftist one. It has some on the left, some on the right, and some in the center.
But now I’ll defend Lula, because it’s short-sighted for us throw the blame on him, saying that Lula’s done nothing. Deep down the government is like a mirror that reflects society. And if in society the working class is weak, if it’s in reflux, a leftist government can’t advance its agenda. Look at Venezuela: why hasn’t Chávez been able to realize his proposed agenda? Because the only real force that he has behind him is the military. The Venezuelan people are still disorganized. So nothing happens when Chávez says “Let’s work for agrarian reform!” Where are the campesinos of Venezuela? Completely disorganized! We’re the ones who are actually there! We’re trying to help the campesinos saying “Look folks, stop waiting for Chávez! Are you going to occupy the land or are you going to wait for Chávez to come here and do it for you?”
So in relation to Lula, of course there’s been an ideological metamorphosis since he’s become a larger political leader. I’m not absolving him of his responsibility, but Lula’s administration hasn’t been able to make changes because of the reflux in the prole- tariat that hasn’t yet reversed. We didn’t count on this. We thought that a simple electoral victory would give a shock to the masses, as it did with our base. During the first year of Lula’s presidency we had 250,000 families set up encampments (assentamentos). We thought this was it, the time had come! And it hadn’t. It was really frustrating. Of the 250,000 families we had encamped, 100,000 left and went home. They saw that things weren’t changing like they had hoped. But if Lula had settled those 250,000 families, then the next year we would have had 500,000, you see? This is the greatest challenge that we face today: we’re waiting around, seeing if the government will do this or that instead of just acting on our own. And of course it’s better that Lula be reelected than to have Alckmin win. Obviously we’ll vote for Lula, but real change will only come with the pro- cess of organization among the people and the rising of the proletariat. This is the only chance we have. You’ll still have plenty to write about before we re-shape Brazil.
JG/FBM: If there really is a slump in proletariat masses today in Brazil, then outside of the
camponês base, where else does the MST find support?
JPS:
The people that are socially conscious in Brazilian society, the same people that at some level understand the importance of organization, they like the MST. They’re actually the only reason that the MST still exists. If it was only our organized base, the pressure from the right would be too strong. Their anger towards us is enormous. But the people that are socially conscious and have some type of organizational skills in the city often defend us, they like us a lot. This helps to create the structural sup- port that defends us. And the intellectuals, the left likes us because, you’ve probably read this in Brava Gente,12 because we’re a novelty in the camponês world. We’re able to incorporate in the camponês movement organizational principals that come from the working class more than anything. The camponês movements that you’ve proba- bly studied a lot, in all of Latin America, were always spontaneous movements-- mass ones, sometimes radical, but without consistent organizational and ideological princi- pals. The novelty of the MST is that it cultivates the generosity of the camponês, that radicalism of the camponês, that spirit of sacrifice that the camponês has. We join this, what comes from our culture, with organizational principals. It gives a tradition to the working class to change capitalism. What traditions? Love, learning, discipline,
142	Journal of Latin American Geography
respect for the collective, always work together, don’t think that you’re more impor- tant than the others, leadership, and freedom. And this is what makes up the MST.
Notes
1 Rural landless worker – analogous to campesino. 2 For further information regarding the Venezuelan program, please go to http://www.
landaction.org/display.php?article=325
3 The “worker bees” within the movement that handle much of the day-to-day organi- zational labor.
4 Influential figure for the MST, particularly for his work regarding liberation theology.
5 Central Única dos Trabalhadores (Unique Workers Center), the chief Brazilian union federation founded in 1983.
6 Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers Party); leftist political party founded in 1980. Elected in 2002, Brazil’s current president Luiz Inácio “Lula” da Silva is the most recog- nizable face of the PT.
7 President of Brazil from 1990-92 who resigned while facing impeachment hearings for charges of corruption.
8 President of Brazil from 1995-2003 who instituted the “Real” economic plan.
9 Confederaão Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura (National Confederation of Agricultural Workers), a confederation of various agricultural unions founded in 1964.
10 March that took place in April and May of 2005, it included 12,726 MST participants who walked over 200 kilometers from Goiânia to Brasilia to raise awareness for agrarian reform.
11 Governor of the state of São Paulo at the time this interview was conducted, and the presidential candidate from the Partido da Social Democracia Brasileira (Brazil Social Democracy Party – the PSDB) in the 2006 election. The PSDB is currently the main political rival of the PT.
12 Book published in 1999 by João Pedro Stedile and Bernardo Manano Fernandes detailing the historical origins and rise of the MST, as well as providing a description of the movement’s characteristics (Editora da Fundaão Perseu Abramo, São Paulo, Brazil; www.fpabramo.org.br).
References
Fernandes, B. M. 2000. A Formação do MST no Brasil. Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes. Garmany, J. and F. B. Maia. 2007. Considering Space, Politics, and Social Movements: An Interview with João Pedro Stedile, a leader within Brazil’s O Movimento dos Traba-
Forum	143 lhadores Rurais Sem Terra (the MST). Antipode 39(4).
Stedile, J. P. (ed.). 1997. Reforma Agrária e a Luta do MST. Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes. __________ . 2002. A Questão Agrária Hoje (3rd edn.) Porto Alegre, Brazil: Editora
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.
__________ . 2005. A Questão Agraria no Brasil (vols. 1-3). São Paulo, Brazil: Expressão Popular.
Stedile, J. P. and B. M. Fernandes. 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo, Brazil: Editora da Fundaão Perseu Abramo.
