2004
Sociology
Latin American Perspectives
Of Land and Labor: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane Plantations of Northeast Brazil
Wendy Wolford 

Source: Latin American Perspectives, Vol. 31, No. 2, Brazilian Northeast: Globalization, Labor, and Poverty (Mar., 2004), pp. 147-170
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3185029 .
Accessed: 15/03/2011 18:44
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=sage. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
OfLandandLabor
AgrarianReformon the SugarcanePlantations of NortheastBrazil
by WendyWolford
The sugarcaneregionof Pernambucoin northeasternBrazil(knownas the
zona da mata, or forest region) has historicallybeen characterizedby pov-
erty,paternalisticpolitics,andrigidsocialhierarchies.1Theregionalsohasa long historyof social mobilizationas ruralworkersandsmallfarmershave
resisted the oppressive conditions of plantationproductionand struggled variouslyforaredefinitionorexpansionof politicalandeconomicrights.In the mid-1990s, when a new social actor,the Movimentodos Trabalhadores
RuraisSem Terra(Movementof RuralLandlessWorkers-MST), beganto
organizeplantationworkersand the ruralpoor in the region to fight for agrarianreform.
It was initially very difficult for the MST to build its membershipin the sugarcaneregion.Ruralworkerswho hadworkedall theirlives on theplanta-
tions had internalized"spatialimaginaries,"or understandingsof the land, that conflicted with the MST's conceptualizationof land as the privileged
spaceof productionandsocialreproduction(Wolford,2003a;2003b).These spatialimaginarieswereproduced,in Lefebvre's(1991) words,throughcon-
ceptions,perceptions,andexperiencesof access to landas signifying stabil- ity and statuswithin the hierarchicalorderingof plantationspace. The rural
workersconceived of full employmentand paternalisticprotectionon the plantationratherthanownershipofasmallplotoflandastheideal.Itwasnot until the early 1990s that an economic crisis in the sugarcaneindustry enabledthe MST to organizeincreasingnumbersof landoccupationsand build a political position in the region.
WendyWolfordis anassistantprofessorof geographyattheUniversityof NorthCarolina,Cha- pel Hill. The researchfor this paperwas fundedby the Social Science ResearchCouncil, the NationalScienceFoundation,theInstituteforInternationaSltudiesattheUniversityofCalifor- nia,Berkeley,andtheInstitutefortheStudyof WorldPolitics.TheauthorthankstheLatinAmer- ican Perspectivesreviewers,AngusWright,AndyPerrin,MeenuTewari,andFeliciaMebanefor their comments.
LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES,Issue 135, Vbl.31 No. 2, March2004	147-170 DOI:10. 177/0094582X03261378 O 2004 LatinAmericanPerspectives
147
148 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
The extreme economic crisis of the 1990s had its immediate roots in Brazil'stransitionto democracy.Beginningin 1989, newly elected civilian governmentsat the state and federallevel began to dismantlethe generous
systemof productionsubsidiesthathaddisproportionatelysupportednorth- easternproducersvis-a-vis moreefficientproducersin the southof the coun-
try(LimaandSilva, 1995). Whilenationalcaneproductionincreasedsignifi- cantly between 1982-1983 and 1994-1995, the Northeast region's contributionfell from 30.1 percentto 19.4 percentduringthe same period (MEPF,1998: 3). At the same time, internationalprices for sugarcanefell steadilyfrom1996to 1999,andsuccessivedroughtsduringthe1990sforced distilleries(usinas)andmills (engenhos)aliketo shutdown.
As theyhadduringpreviouscrisesin sugarcaneproduction,local govern- ment officials discussed the possibility of implementingagrarianreform.2
Thelarge-scaleproducersresistedtheideaoflanddistributionb,uttheyfaced anewpoliticalandsocialmomentinthehistoryof theregion.Withthewith- drawalof the militarygovernmentand direct civil elections in 1985, the demandforagrarianreformwasbackonthepoliticalagenda,andtheMST was increasinglyactivein the sugarcaneregion.As hundredsof thousandsof ruralplantationworkerswerelaidoff becauseof theregionaleconomiccri- sis, the MST organizedgroupsof smallholders,ruralworkers,andthe urban poor andoccupiedplantationsthatwere eithernot producingcane or heavily indebted.Stories aboutMST occupationsand public demonstrationswere featuredregularlyin the state newspapers,and by the mid-1990s the state governmenthadmadeagrarianreformintheregionapriority.Between 1986 and 2001, 2,199 families were settled in 27 former plantation areas.3
Throughouthe coastal sugarcaneregion, temporarysquatterencampments weresetup,andtheMST'sbrightredflagcouldbeseenhangingfromimpro- vised flagpoles. It seemed evidentthata regionaltransformationwas under
way. Inthisarticle,I examinetherelationshipbetweentheMST,theruralwork-
ers, the sugarcaneindustry,andthe statein the largestmunicipalityof the zona da mata,Agua Preta,Pernambuco(see Fig. 1). In the latestagricultural census (2000), Agua Pretawas characterizedby the largestconcentrationof landin theregionandthehighestnumberof landreformsettlements.4One
settlementinparticularF,lora,willbepresentedasacasestudy.5Forty-six familieslivedonFlora,13of whomhadreceivedlandbecausetheyoccupied theareawiththeMSTin 1996and33 of whomhadbeengivenlandbecause of theirpreviousassociationwiththeproperty,whichhadbeenalarge-scale sugarcaneplantationbefore its expropriationin 1997.
I arguethatruralworkersin the sugarcaneregionresistedthe MST's early attemptsat organizationbecause their spatial imaginaries,forged on the
-
r,&~. ..........
Figure 1: Agua Preta, Pernambuco
plantations,did not resonatewith the movement'sideologies or methods. Theyjoinedthemovementonlywhentheeconomicsituationbecametoodif- ficulttonavigatealoneandthemovementestablishedapositionofinfluence with local political leaders, including municipalmayors and state agrarian reformagents. Once on the settlement,MST leaderswere able to persuade thesettlerstomoveawayfromsugarcaneproductiontowardspecialtyitems such as high-valuefruitsandvegetables.
The disjuncturebetween spatialimaginaries,however,made it difficult fortheruralworkerstoadopttheMST'sideology,eitherintheoryorinprac- tice.Thisbecameevidentin2002-2003, whenthesugarcaneindustryinthe
regionmadeadramaticrecoveryandcanewasbeingprocessedagaininthe distilleriessurroundingAguaPreta.Thelocalpriceof sugarcanepertonwas twotothreetimeshigherthanithadbeenin 1999becauseof anincreasein internationalprices and federal deregulationthat removed restrictionson exports. As the distilleries roared back into life, they turned to a new,
supremelyflexible source of sugarcanesupply-the	agrarian-reformset- tlers.Theywereabletolurethesettlersbackintoproductionbecausetheset-
tlerscontinuedto valuewages andpaternalpoliticalprotectionoversubsis- tence agricultural production and what the MST referred to as their "universal"rightto goods and services such as education,healthcare, and
runningwater. The MST was unableto maintaina stronghold in the sugarcaneregion
because the settlers'spatialimaginarieswere shapedby social hierarchies
andreproductionstrategiesfirmlysegmentedin carefullydelineatedliving andworkingspaces.Havingaccesstolandmadeadifferenceinthesettlers'
lives, butthatdifferencewas situatedwithinanunderstandingof landas
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	149
150 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
providingindependencefromoutsiders(includingtheMST)andapaternal-
istic interpretationof politicalrights.Because the governmentwas the ulti- mate overseerof the settlements,the settlersnow turnedto local and state
officials ratherthan the distillery or mill owners when they needed assis-
tance. The settlers willingly sold their sugarcaneat relatively low prices becausetheydidnotsubtractfamilylaborcostsfromtheirexpensesanddid
not demandthe same set of rightsthatplantationworkershad won in the
1960s (Sigaud, 1979). TheargumentsmadeherearebasedonresearchconductedinMSTsettle-
mentsbetween1998and2003.Thebulkofthefieldworktookplacebetween September1998 andOctober1999, when I interviewedapproximately100 settlersin the southernstateof SantaCatarinaand 100 settlersin the north- easternstate of Pernambuco.The settlersinterviewedare not the object of thisstudy;rather,theyprovidethepointof departurefromwhichtoobserve thelargerprocessesof changingsocialrelations(cf. GarciaJr.,1990).
SUGARCANE PRODUCTION IN NORTHEASTERN BRAZIL: ACCOMMODATIONAND CRISIS
Sugarproductionhasdominatedpolitics,economics,society,andculture inPernambucoforalmost500 years(Andrade,1988).WhenthePortuguese first colonized the new territoryof Brazil, sugarcanewas a valuablecom- modity in the Europeanmarket,and productionspreadrapidlyalong the coastalreachesof thenewcolony.By 1570therewerereportedly23 sugar mills in Pernambuco, and by 1580 that number had almost doubled (Schwartz,1987:73). Between 1580and1680,the"landof Brazil,otherwise called America"(Lery,1992), was the most importantsugarproducerin the world.Itwasnotuntilthe 1700sthatDutchproductionintheAntillesbegan
to challengeBrazilianproducers. Sugarproductionin the coastalareasof Pernambucogave rise to a socio-
economic structurethat remains markedlyevident today. The rigid class structureimportedfrom Portugalsimultaneouslysupportedsugarproduc-
tion andwas supportedby the commodity'sneed for largequantitiesof land andlabor(Schwartz,1987).Highoverheadandimmenserisksmadeover-
seeing the process from plantingto shippingexpensive and thereforean activitysuitableonlyfortheveryrich-the senhoresdeengenho,or"masters of the mill."They achievedthe statusof nobility throughplantationowner- ship, and their title was one that "demandedto be heard, obeyed, and
respected"(Pinto,1963:61). Thesugarproducedontheplantationswaspri- marilyintendedfor export.Planterssold some rawsugar(knownas "clayed
sugar"becauseof itsbrowncolorandheavy,wetconsistency)ontheBrazil- ian market,butthe majoritywas shippedto Britainto be distilled.Industrial- izationof thecommodityinEuropemeantthatfew upstreambenefitssuchas alcohol productionand distillationtechnology were capturedlocally.
To run the plantation,the owners depended on a limited number of
employees who understoodthe complicatedmachineryand administrative
issues.Themajorityof thetasks,however,requiredrelativelylittleskilland tremendousexertion.Theseconditionsservedto segmentthelaborforceinto two distinct groups: skilled and unskilled. Because the plantationsrelied heavily on slaves importedfrom the Africancontinent,laborsegmentation was color-codedfrom the outset.
Inthelate 1800s,thePerambuco plantationeconomyexperienceda double- edged crisis. Producersin Cubamodernizedthe industry'sprocessingtech- niques,andthe island'sfavorableaccess to the NorthAmericanmarkethurt Brazil'sexportopportunitiesA.	tthesametime,thegradualdeclineof slavery threatenedBrazil'ssupplyof cheaplabor.6The stratifiedplantationsystem allowedtheownerstorespondtothecrisisbyabsorbinganalternativelabor source-the	subsistence farmerswho had carved out family farms on the edges of the plantations(Eisenberg, 1974). These moradores(residents) were alreadytied into productionthroughnonmarketobligationsandrights thattheownersmanipulatedin orderto engagethemin sugarcaneproduction (Sigaud, 1979). The sugarcaneplantationsrepresentedan entireeconomic, social, and political system that revolved aroundthe Casa Grandeand the workers'quarters(see Freyre,1978).Theplantationownerusuallysoldbasic foodstuffsandworksuppliesto the workers.If the workerslackedthe money topurchasegoodsattheweeklymarketintown,theywereoftenforcedtopay highpricesattheplantationstore,andmanyaccumulatedenormousdebts.
The crisis of the late 1800s also pushedthe sugarcaneplantationowners fartherinto formalpolitics, their survivalbeing heavily dependenton their abilityto acquirestateresources(LimaandSilva, 1995;Wanderley,1978). Early reliance on state protection shaped the industry's future in that it encouragedplantersto increasetheirprofitsby securingstatesubsidies
ratherthanby improvingproductiontechniques(LimaandSilva, 1995:188). The northeasternsugar producerswere very successful in garneringstate support.In the 1930s the federalgovernmentcreatedan ambitiousprogram
to promotethe sugarindustry.Particularemphasiswas placedon protecting
the northeasternproducers from the increasingly competitive southern states. The Institutode Alcool e Aqiucar(Institutefor Alcohol and Sugar- IAA),createdin 1933,maintainedproductionintheNortheastwithacompli- catedset of productionquotasanddifferentialprices,butby theearly 1950s thestateof SaoPaulowasproducingtentimesmoresugarperhectarethan
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	151
152 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
producersin the Northeast(Maybury-Lewis,1994: 65). To boost Brazilian
productivityvis-a-vis Cuba,theIAA modernizedproductionby centralizing plantationswithinindustrialdistilleriesthatintroduceda higherlevel of tech-
nology into the productionprocess and paved the way for superiorethanol productionin the 1970s.
Governmentinterventionc,ombinedwithafavorableexportmarketinthe
early and mid-1900s, breathednew life into the limping plantationsof the Northeast.The plantersrespondedwith a concertedincreasein production andadoptionof newtechniquesthatreducedtheirrelianceonlabor.Between 1950 and 1960 they cut theirpermanentlaborforce in half (Maybury-Lewis, 1994:65). Througha varietyof means,moradoreswereencouraged,moreor less directlydependingon the circumstances,to leave the plantationfor the town.Plantersreliedheavilyon workforcesegmentationto persuadethemto go (Sigaud, 1979). Moradoresaccustomedto doing one job were often orderedtodoanotherforwhichtheywereill suited,andtheyoftenfounditin their best interestto move to town. The capacity to resist or challenge the pressure to leave depended on one's outside family connections and alternativework opportunities.
Resistance to the changing land-laborarrangementswas surprisingly strong.In1955workersoftheGalileiaMill,undertheleadershipoftheplan- tation-bor lawyerFranciscoJuliao,foundedthePeasantLeaguesinprotest over the owner'srefusalto providea coffin for a worker'sburialas tradition required(Pereira,1997).ThePeasantLeagues,madeupprimarilyof small- scalefarmerswhohadbeendrivenofftheplantationsbyreturningownersin the 1950s, grewrapidly.7Ruralunrestattributedto themwas partlyresponsi- ble for the 1964 coup thatturnedthe governmentover to the militaryfor the next21 years.ThemilitarydismantledthePeasantLeagues,althoughaunion structureremained that allowed some branches to continue organizing
among plantation workers who had the proper legal working papers
(Maybury-Lewis,1994). Tighter labor regulations,however, encouraged manyplantationsto use clandestinos(illegal workers)fromthe smalltowns
nearby. At this time, state officials in Pernambucodebated the possibility of
implementinga progressivedistributionof landin the sugarcaneregion.The memoryof peasantandworkerunrestlingeredeventhoughthemilitarygov- ernmenthadbrokenup the PeasantLeaguesandpenetratedthe ruralunions.
At one meetingof agronomists,academics,andpoliticians,those attending recalled the words of Joaquim Nabuco that "abolition without agrarian
reform is only half done." Ultimately, however, discussions of agrarian reformfocused more on addressingthe tendencytowardstructuralcrisis in
sugarcaneproductionthan on alleviating the suffering of the ruralpoor. Agrarianreformwould help the local sugarcaneeconomy by removingthe landless (and discontented)poor to anotherregion where they would find unlimitedresourcesandservetheircountryby colonizingBrazil'sinterior. As theagronomistFranciscoTarginode Siqueira,of theInstitutoNacionalde
Imigraqaoe Colonizagaosaidatthemeeting(Canae reformaagrdria,1970),
Wehavetoo	herein the	and	of manypeople	Northeast, they'redying hunger;
wehavefamiliesanxioustooccupyemptyland,andmeanwhilweedonothing.
[Outside]agitatorscome andorderus to distributelandhere,wherethereis no
land,or if thereis, it's an ungratefulland,an erodedland,a hilly land,a land
with impropertopography.I thinkthatthe agitatorsshould,as patrioticmen, havethespirittooccupyemptyland,astheydidintheUnitedStatesless thana
centuryago.
In the early 1970s, the federalgovernmentbeganto subsidizemigration outof theNortheastintotheless populatedAmazonregion,moving,inPresi- dentMedici's words,"menwithoutlandto a landwithoutmen."Ambitious colonization schemes were established in the Amazonian region and the grasslands of the Center-West.8Between 1964 and 1985, millions of Northeasternersmigratedto the Amazonor to the growingindustrialdevel- opmentpole of Sao Paulo(GarciaJr.,1990).
At the same time, the federal governmentcreated new legislation that wouldprotectandfosterthesugarcaneindustry.In1974asignificantdropin sugarcanepricescoincidedwithhighoil prices,motivatingthemilitarygov- ernmentto searchfor a low-cost fuel alternative.The NationalAlcohol Pro- gram(PROALCOOLw)ascreatedin1975toprovideincentivesforprocess- ing sugarcaneandtherebyreducethecountry'srelianceon foreignimportsof oil. Between 1975 and 1989, the governmentinvested US$10.5 billion in PROALCOOL and ethanol production increased from approximately 500,000 litersin 1975tooverfive-and-a-halfmillionin 1982(Andrade1988: 671). The investmentwas crucialin enablingthe relativelyinefficientpro- ducersof the Northeastto remainin business (Maybury-Lewis,1994: 35).9
Duringthis period,distilleriescontinuedto rationalizetheirproductive
base,rentingoutpartof theirpropertiesto rendeiros(renters)who essentially
oversawthe planting,harvesting,andtransportationfor the distillery.The move fromdirectto indirectcontrolwas experiencedbitterlyon the planta- tions. As one formerruralworkersaid,
InthedistillerywehadourfullrightsT.herewasaregularcestabasica(food
Andattheendof the	wereceived	Nowthedistill- basket).	year,	[ourights]....
eriesarehavingsomedifficulties.... Butevennowtheystillpay,theydon't
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	153
154 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
allatoncebutthen	Butwiththe	no-with the pay	theykeeppaying.	rendeiro,
rendeirwoedon'thave foodbasketsw,edon't the thereisn'ta regular	get tenth,
quartesralarythatispaidbythebankw,hichisarighthathegovernmengtave
totheworkerT.hereisn'ta itdoesn'texist.Wedon't familygiftanymore,	get
weneverdid the The isdifferenbtecauseit anything,	[from renter]. distillery
allofthis-andthesame	thatweusedto tothe pays	obligations	pay	distillery
we to[the	But can't after	because[it'shard]. pay	rendeiro].	you	go	yourights,
After 30 years of relativeprosperity,the Pernambucosugarcaneregion was again hit by economic, political, and ecological crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Andradeand Andrade,2001). The marketfor both sugar- cane andethanolwas rapidlyshrinking,partlybecauseof the increasedpar- ticipationof theindustrializedcountriesinglobalsugarproduction.Between 1975 and 1985, the industrializedcountriesincreasedtheirsugarexports from 20 percentof the world's total to 43 percent(De Souza, Irmao,and Araijo, 1997:2). Atthesametime,theproductionof popularartificialsweet- enersreducedthedemandforrefinedsugar,andworldpricesweresteadily
dropping. The crisis in Perambuco was exacerbatedby the loss of the industry's
main source of support-government funds. In the 1990s the new civilian
governmentderegulatedthe military'ssupportprogramfor sugarcaneand revised regional legislation that had previously protectedthe northeastern producers(Buarque,1997:3). Seriousdroughtsin 1992-1993 and 1997-
1999 also hurtthe industry(Andradeand Andrade,2001), and by 1995 44 percentof thesugarcanerefiningdistilleriesinPernambucowereconsidered
"paralyzedorfunctioningwithdifficulty"(Linsetal., 1996:2). In responseto the crisis, the stategovernmentof Pernambucopinpointed
agrarianreformasoneof theregion'smostviablealternatives.A 1998gov-
ernmentreportread:"Thecrisis of the sugarcaneindustryin the northeastern
tropicalforestregionis acrisisof the[productive]model.Thecrisisprovides
a	to	out	structural	thatwill elimi- uniqueopportunity carry sweeping	changes
natetheconcentrationoflandholdingsandmonoculturaplroduction,inorder to benefit the economic developmentof the region with equalityand social justice"(MEPF,1998: 1).
Between 1986 and 2001, 27 formerplantationsin the sugarcaneregion wereexpropriatedanddistributedamongtheruralworkers.These expropria-
tions representeda revolutionarytransformationof productiveand social relationson the plantationsas rendeiros,administrativeworkers,and ordi- naryworkersalikeweregiventherightstosmallplotsof land.Thenewset- tlers were also providedwith initial grantsfor short-termsubsistenceand materialsto build a house. They were eventuallyprovidedwith investment
funds geared towardthe productionof subsistence and alternativemarket crops such as banana,coconuts, and pineapples.
THE MOVEMENT OF RURAL LANDLESS WORKERS
Foundedin 1984, the MST began in southernBrazil as landless farmers
occupiedidlepropertiestopressurethefederalgovernmenttodistributethe land. The movement's leaders emphasized the importanceof building a nationalorganization,onethatwouldunitepeoplefromaroundthecountry (Fernandes,1999;WrightandWolford,2003). Tobe animportantpolitical actorthemovementneededtobe seennotjustasanexpressionof regional
problemsbut as an expressionof the broaderstrugglefor citizenshipat the nationallevel.?1 By the late 1980s MST was aggressivelybuildingits mem-
bership throughoutthe country and had established local offices in 22 of Brazil's26 states.MSTleadersconsideredtheplantationregionof northeast-
ernBrazilparticularlyimportantfor organizationbecausethe long historyof sugarcaneproductionhad generatedsuch extreme poverty,hunger,and violence (Fernandes,1999).
Butorganizingastrugglearoundthelandwouldprovetobeverydifficult
becausethe landembodieddifferentmeaningsfor differentpeople (Wolford,
2003a;2003b).TheMST'svisionof agrarianreformwasconstructedwithin
theculturaltraditionsandexperiencesof smallfarmersandlandlessworkers
in southernBrazil,a regioncharacterizedby a relativelystrongpeasanttradi-
tion. In the southernstateof SantaCatarina,the sons anddaughtersof small
farmerswhojoinedtheMSTdidso becausetheyvaluedtheirwayof life on
thelandandwerecomingtotheendof thespatialfrontierintheregion.These
peopleacceptedtheMST'smethodsof occupyinglandas legitimatebecause of theirown culturaltraditionsof mobilityandcolonizationof "emptyland"
as the meansto acquiringaccess to theirmost importantproductiveresource. Land was also needed for social reproduction,as new generationsneeded access to theirown landto begin a family.
Ruralworkerswho had spenttheirentirelives workingon the plantation didnotvaluethelandinthesamewayasthoseinsouthernBrazil,anditwas difficultto persuadethemto fightplantationownersfor a piece of land.Most oftheruralworkersinthesugarcaneregionprivilegedaccesstoasalaryover access to land, and there was little in their occupationalhistory that legiti- matedthenotionof occupying"someoneelse's property."Thesettlersrelied
ontheirregularincometopurchasetheirgroceriesattheweeklymarket,pay theirbills, andfeed themselves.AlthoughMST leadershadtriedto organize
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	155
156 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
occupations in 1989 and the early 1990s (Branford and Rocha, 2002;
Fernandes,1999), membershipdid not grow significantlyin the sugarcane region until economic crisis in the early 1990s coincided with expanded
1 political will for reform.
RuralworkersintheforestregionjoinedtheMSTintwodistinctgroups. The firstgroup,usuallyruralworkerswho hadoccupiedthe most insecure
positions on the plantation,joined MST occupationsto fight for access to land.The second group,moradoreswho continuedto live on the plantations
even afterthey stoppedplantingcane,joined the movementonly afterthe InstitutoNacionalde Colonizaqaoe ReformaAgrairia(NationalInstitutefor
Colonizationand AgrarianReform-INCRA)	expropriatedthe plantation forredistributionA.	ccordingto federallaw,themoradoresreceivedfirstpri- ority, although there was usually sufficient land to provide some for the people who occupiedwith the MST.
Ultimately,people accepted the land because they had few other eco-
nomic opportunitiesand membershipat least providedthem with political representationvis-a-vis local governmentandstateagrarianreformofficials.
Accordingto developmentstatisticspublishedby the mayor'soffice in Agua Preta,the level of developmentin the municipalitywas abouthalf thatof the nationas a whole. Withoutsugarcaneproduction,therewere no otherjobs available.Theseverityofthecrisisintheregionmeantthatmostofthepeople associatedwith the plantation,includingthe formerrendeiros,skilledadmin- istrativeworkers,andmoradores,acceptedthe offer of land.The local MST leaderin AguaPretawasanagronomisttappedforhisjob by themayor.He was exceptionallyadroitpoliticallyandmanagedto secureresourcesfor the settlersthatincorporatedthemintoapaternalisticwebof gifts,services,and allegiancesothatmembershipinMSTprovidedmanyofthesamebenefitsas the ruralunions or plantationowner used to: medicines, an occasional food
for	andaccesstothe	ear.Inreturn,set- transportation,	mayor's
basket,money tlersbroughttheMSTleadersgiftssuchasbottlesofrumorahandfuloffresh manioc.
Inspiteof theMST'srapidgrowthinthesugarcaneregion,manyof those whojoined the movementwere ambivalentaboutwhatit represented.Many of the ruralworkershad a difficulttime reconcilingtheirunderstandingof land as privatepropertywith the movement'sconcept of land as a social good. Fortheruralworkers,landon theplantationshadalwaysbelongedto someone-and eventhoughtheyemployedmobilityasasurvivalstrategyin thefaceofcrueltreatmentbytheplantationowners,theydidnotnecessarily envisagefreedomasthecolonizationof openoremptylandinthewaythat farmersfrom southernBrazil did. The ruralworkersdistancedthemselves
from the movement'spracticeand ideology of occupying land. As one for- mer resident who had won land throughthe expropriationprocess said in 2003, "Weall owe what we have today to the movement.I myself, I owe everythingto it, I just don't agree with this business of invadingland. Who wants to have what is theirs and then arriveand see it invaded?I have this house here and I leave, and when I get back, it's invaded?"
Anothersettlerwho had been an administratoron the plantationbefore receivinglanddemonstratedhis ambivalencetowardthe movement:
Researcher(R): Andnowareyoupartof themovement? Settler (S): I am now part[of the movement]because trulyI live on [the settle-
andin	caseI haveto be	of the	becausewhetherI ment]	any	[part	movement]
wanttoornotIhavetobepart[ofthemovement]becausewe arrangethings
within the movement.
R: And do you pay the movementsomething?
S: They[thepeoplefromthemovement]chargeafee, andso Ipaidsomefees and now we arewaitingfor otherchargesfor us to continuepayingagain.
R: Howwasit decidedthatyouwouldpay?
S:Thepresident[oftheassociation]decided.Hegottogetherwiththeagricultural extensionagents[whowereallMSTmilitants]... tomakesomechargesthat would be put into practice...	[with] the settlers.
R: Haveyou everspokenwiththemilitants,theleadersof MST? S: Until now I have neverbeen close to the leadersof MST becauseI trulydon't knowthemwell, no.Ionlyspeakwiththeagronomistswhohavetotalkwith
them.ButIamnotveryclosetotheseleaderosfMSTn,o.Ihardlyknowthem.
R: Do	MST? yousupport
S:IsupporMtST. R: Haveyou participatedin some mobilization,a march,or somethinglike that? S: UntilnownotthatI knowof. R:Doesthemovemenhtelpyoutoday? S: No,uptothispoint,themovemenhtasn'thelpedmewithanything.
In spite of this ambivalence and differing levels of commitment among the two groups of ruralworkers on the settlement, by 1999 many of the settlers in Agua Preta and all of the settlers on Flora had joined the MST and were
respondingto its vigorous call for an end to sugarcane.They were planting bananasandcoconutsin additionto subsistencecrops,andmanyhadplans
for introducingcattleonto the land.These productiondecisions were madein accordancewith the regional"productionplan"formulatedby MST leaders andINCRAofficials.ThesettlersreceivedapproximatelyR$7,500ininvest- mentcreditin 1999-2000, andtheywererequiredto fill outproductionand repaymentschedules with the settlementagronomistbefore receiving the money.Themoneywaseligibleonlyforplantingbananasandcoconutsand buying cattle.
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	157
158 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
SAVINGSUGARCANE: THE INDUSTRY RETURNS
In2000-2001 sugarcanepricesbegantoriseagain.Afterfallingforsix straightyears,internationaplricesincreasedbecauseofreducedproduction
inIndiaandCuba,twoofthelargestexportersglobally.Theextinctionofthe
IAA liberalizedexportquotasandalloweda greaterproportionof production to be orientedtowardthe externalmarket.A droughtin southernBrazil in
2001 alsoincreasedthevalueof productionintheNortheast.Withtherisein
sugarcaneprices, the distilleries in the forest region were planting and
processingsugarcaneagain. In 2003 most of the settlerson Florahadcoveredtheirlandwith sugar-
cane.Theyhadweatheredthesugarcanecrisisby plantingsubsistencecrops
and receiving money from the governmentin the form of both investment
creditandshort-termwelfareassistance.Theyhadactivelyparticipatedin
discussions about alternativecrops and moving away from sugarcane,but
whenhighpricesreturnedtheycouldnotresistthetemptationto havemoney
in theirpocketsagain.In 1999, a formermoradorwho was activein settle-
mentpoliticsasthetreasurerof theassociationandmetoftenwithMSTlead-
ers had said he would never plant cane again: "No, look, you can't make
enough money plantingcane, and now we read in the papersthat cane is
goingtofallby8percent-and itwasalreadycheap!ItisatR$21.70(perton)
nowandsoifitfallsby8percent,thepricewillbeaboutR$14.00.... Canyou
imagine-we plantcaneandsellitforR$14.00?That'salotofwork.... You
haveto stop,reallystop,plantingcane."By 2003, however,thismoradorwas
workingfor a neighboringmill cuttingsugarcaneas well as plantingcane on hisownland.Hearguedthatitwasnotpossibletomakealivingfarming,and
so the settlersfoundworkon the plantations:"Atthis moment,almostevery-
one is workingin one of the mills overthere,Barrad'Ouro.They'recutting
cane, filling bags, doing everything.And then when it's evening, they work on theirown land."
Sugarcaneovertookthe alternativecropspeople hadplantedearlier.The bananaplants and coconut trees were either gone or disappearing.As an MST militantsaid, "Therearea lot of parceleiroswho didn'tplantcane- they planted banana,potato, green corn, vegetables-and	today they are
beginningto plantcane. They arebeginningto give up the potato,to plant less, andtoplantcanebecausethey'reseeingthatthat'stheway-it	isn'tthe
way
out but,	it's been 500	As one settler unfortunately,	years."	said,
Look,thesituationwiththebananaiss this.I wasteda lotof moneywiththat bananaN.ow,IplanteditjusttomaketheboysfromthemovemenhtappyI. said,I amgoingtoplant[this],butIamgoingtolosethemoneyI.thasbeen45
sinceI arrivedin this	is a	It'sa years	place.... [Now,]sugarcane goodcrop.
cropthatis exportedall overtheworld,as sugar.I harvested170tonsof canethisyear.... Ifthedistilleriespaytheproperprice,Godwilling,Iwill keep plantingcane and takingcare of my lavourazinhas(little garden plants).
The sugarcanedistilleriesaroundAgua Pretafacilitatedthe settlers'incor-
porationintotheirproductionsystemby sendingbuyersoutbeforethehar- vest to coordinatethe settlerswho hadcane to sell, offeringto set up accounts
for them at the distillery.When the cane had been harvested,the settlers loadeditontrucksandpaidafee fordeliverytothedistillery.As anMSTmil- itantsaid with some resignation,
it's	to sell	to the	The Nowadays	veryeasy	yoursugarcane	distillery.	distillery
a	this	who	aroundon a	Hecomes assigns person[to	job]	goes	motorcycle.	[to
the	anddoes	Hetakes	takesit to the settlement]	everything.	yourinformation,
Thetruck	the	arriveisnthe	andallof distillery.	[with sugarcane]	distillery	your
informatioins therealready....Beforei,twasmoredifficultohaveanaccount
withthedistillerybecauseyouhadtohaveacertainamounotf cane,youhadto
be a	But	cantakeone littletruckloadand large-scalesupplier. todayyou	go
there[tothedistillerya]ndwhethertheyhaveyourinformatioonrnot,youget thereandtakecareof business.
Thisreorganizationof productionandprioritiesonthesettlementwascar- riedoutwiththeimplicitassistanceof thestategovernment.Evenasthestate
was arguingthatthe sugarcanecrisis of the late 1990s providedthe opportu-
nity for a "dramaticrestructuringof the industry,"it essentiallyreorganized productionin a more efficient mannerfor the sugarcaneindustry.The
"sweepingstructuralchanges"anticipatedwould,however,havebeenvery
difficult to implementgiven that the economic and social structureof the
Pernambucosugarcaneregionwas builtaroundexpectationsof marketpro-
tection, governmentsubsidies, and debt pardons(Lima and Silva, 1995:
188). Even amidstgeneralizedcrisis, few people suggestedthatsugarcane
productionbe entirely abandoned(Andradeand Andrade,2001). Instead,
plansfor diversificationincludedagrarianreformprimarilyas a meansof
occupying land that was inappropriatefor sugar production,employing excess laboron a seasonalbasis, andfosteringsmallholdersuppliersof cane
for the large distilleries (MEPF, 1998: 2). The governmentpledged to
encouragethe modernizationof sugarcanethroughtargetedprogramsthat would "free"more labor for small-scale cane productionand supply the
large-scale distilleries. And this labor would even be provided at a price belowsubsistence,asonesettlementpresidentinAguaPretasaid:"Thereare somany[settlers],myGod,whohavelandand-Idon'tknowwhy-theyhave
Wolfor/dOFLANDANDLABOR 159
160 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
landandthey'redyingof hunger."Whenaskedwhythosesettlershadn't
plantedanythingon theirland,thepresidentresponded,"They'retired,they have to leave the house early to cut cane so they have somethingto eat."A documentpreparedfordiscussionby INCRA(Buarque,1997:9) statesthat agrarianreformin the sugarcaneregion would ideally allow the settlersto plantpartof theirlandin cane andpartof theirlandin goods targeted"above all for the subsistenceof the family in the interharvestperiod."
The returnof sugarcanein Agua Pretacoincided with the virtualdisap- pearanceof theMSTthere.Ithadbeenactiveenoughin 1999toclaimatleast threesettlements,butby 2003 it flew its flag on only one. Even thatsettle- ment was only officially affiliatedwith movementbecause of the settlers' allegiance to their association president,a woman who had occupied the plantationwith the MST and continuedto be faithful. As she preparedto leave the presidency, she believed that the settlers would also leave the movement.
EXPLAINING THE MST'S DISAPPEARANCE FROM THE SUGARCANE REGION
Asimportantasthestructuraclonditionsforsugarcaneproductionarein
explainingthedisappearanceoftheMSTinthezonadamata,theydonottell
the whole story. The apparentfragility of the movement's position as an importantintermediarybetween the settlersand local governmentneeds to
beexplainedinthecontextofhowsocial,economic,andpoliticalrelationson
the plantationshaped a particularperceptionof the value of land and the natureof "rights."Althoughmost of the settlerson Florawere glad to have
landof theirown,theyvalueditbecauseexperiencehadtaughtthemthatland
meant stability,independence,and the freedom from outside intervention
(Sigaud, 1977). As JaimeAmorim,the MST leaderfor Pernambuco,put it,
"There'sthecultureoftheregion-the peopleareindividualistic,theydon't
trustotherpeople, so there'sa strongresistanceto workingcollectively." Theirunderstandingof "rights"was embeddedin the assistanceorientation
of the plantationratherthan in universalisticnotions of "citizenship"or
humanrights. On the plantation,the space of residence was an indicationof occupa-
tionalpositionwithina fairlystricthierarchy(see Fig. 2). Residentialspaces
were clearly distinguishedby proximityto others,qualityof housing, and accesstoland.Theplantationowners,atthetopof thehierarchyl,ivedinthe CasaGrande,setapartfromtherestof theresidentsandgracedwithsuffi- cient space for fruit trees, decorativeplants, and a vegetable garden.The
Figure2:	Spatial Orderon a TypicalPlantation,Agua Preta,1999
owner was the only person who had free run of the plantation; the workers all
kept to the spaces inscribed by their rank. The administrative workers
(empregados) generally had individual houses as well, situated between the
Casa Grande and the common workers' (trabalhadores) houses. The com-
mon workers lived in small, two- or three-room houses connected to each
other in a long row (see Fig. 3). These houses had no proprietary space out-
side, and when the price was high sugarcane would be planted "right up to the door." Another group of workers lived inside the plantation on small farms
(sitios). When the plantation owner wished to show respect or favor to partic- ular workers, he granted them access to a sitio. These workers not only lived apart from the rest of the people on the plantation but also had land on which to grow subsistence crops and fruit trees. Isolation and access to land were privileges accorded to those who did well, and in this way access to land became a signifier of status. At the opposite end of the occupational hierar- chy, undocumented workers (clandestinos) occupied the most insecure posi- tions, both demonstrated and exacerbated by their inability to claim any liv- ing space on the plantation. These workers lived in the nearby towns and cities and sold their labor on a seasonal or daily basis.
In the 1960s and 1970s the increasing numbers of undocumented workers
heightened the sense of competition among plantation workers. The exis- tence of a highly flexible, low-paid workforce in the cities meant that planta-
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	161
162 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Figure3: TheCasaGrande(top)andRowHouses
tion residents had to fight harder to cut enough sugarcane to make the daily quota and a living wage. As the son of an older settler on Flora who had worked under several different owners since 1963 said,
Look,wakingupearlyinthemorningis apriority.Thefightoverthesugarcane meansthatyou haveto leave [yourhouse]earlierthantheothersif you are
goingtogetyourfullsalary.Thosepeoplewhoworkillegallyalsohavetolive offofthesugarcaneharvest,andsowhentheybur partofthecanefield-say, [anareawith]500tonsofcaneplanted-then 400peoplewillgotheretocut this cane. If they were all to do two salaries'worth[of cutting],it wouldn'tbe enough,andso there'sconstantfighting.Eachpersonwantsto get therefirst, beforetheothers,andthismakesitdifficult.Itmeansthattheworkerisobliged
towakeupearly-even sometimesatoneinthemorning,ormidnight,theyare alreadyworking.
Because of the way in which people negotiated access to land within the
hierarchically segregated plantation space, the settlers on Flora valued their new lots because they provided independent spaces where they would be
allowed to live as they pleased. This interpretation of personal freedom went beyond individualism because the histories of hierarchy and competition on the plantation had bred distrust among the workers. One of the MST activists
working in the region put it this way:
First,thepeoplehereleft slaveryandendedupin the [sugarcaneregion].... The people who stayed in the sugarcaneregion were the negros who left the senzalas (slave houses) andthengot into neo-senzalas,which were the shacks theplantationbosses hadforthem,similarto whattheyusedto have....	Now
[they are saying], "I want my land. I want my space."Within [the settler's] spacehe feels his freedom[andsays], 'OnthesetenhectaresI amthemaster,I amfree.IfIdon'twanttodoanything,Iwillsitontheriverbankandstaythere looking at it, but the view is mine."
The desire for land as a space free from the supervision or influence of others was evident when INCRA divided the expropriated land among the settlers. The settlers were very worried that others would gain access to land
unfairly by using political connections or simply by making a better case with the government officials in charge. One settler preemptively cleared a plot of land to stake his claim:
AfteritcameoutinthenewspaperthatthisareawasgoingtobeexpropriatedI, wentthereinsidetheplantationandIsaid,Iamgoingtostartrightawayhere.I plantedsome ...	gardencropsrightaway.I weeded some bananatreesthat were in the valley, and I opened up some streambeds.And so when INCRA cametosurveyeveryone,toexpropriatetheland,thedoctorsaidthatIhadthe righttostaywhereIwas,maybealittlemoretowardsthefront,maybealittle towardsthe back, butI would stay in thatarea.And thankGod, I managedto stay.
Wolford/ OFLANDANDLABOR	163
164 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Threeyearsafterthe landhadbeen dividedamongthe settlers,bitterness
remainedbecause,accordingtothesettlers,therewereseveralsuchpreemp- tive plots. As one settlersaid,
Therewasa lotof	andthesonof theformerenterwas	of the fighting,	president
association-the	himthere-hewantedallof thisland	allof this groupput	here,
landinfrontof us.He'ssmarti,sn'the?Thelandwas	andhe's expropriated,
goingtogetallof thebestland?...Buttherewasaresident-whios evenagood person-whosaidtome,"Ifyouhaveabused[ourplan],I amgoingtheretothat
place[youpickedout],I amgoingtoplantandI wantoseeif youcomedown onme."Isaid"No,Iamnotgoingcomedownonyou,no,boy.... Iamnot
goingtofightwithyou,becauseyouaren'gtoingtoplantP.lantwhatyouwant, becauseI amwithinmyrightsI.fthedoctorsaysthatitisformetostay,thenI amstaying.W"esawthatitwasn'tgoingtogowellbecauseifwe[allindividu- ally]askedfortheselittlethingsfromINCRA[wewouldendupwithnothing].
The son of the formerplantationowner did go to the governmentoffices
anddemandhispickof theland,buttheINCRAagentsinchargewentback
to the settlersandnegotiateda mapthateveryonefinally agreedto. The set- tlers resigned themselves to receiving the land that INCRA allocated,
althoughthey protestedloudly when they learnedthatthe governmentwas goingtoallowtheformerownertostayintheCasaGrande.Thesettlersorga- nized two large-scaledemonstrationsin front of the house and sent several delegations to INCRA requesting that the decision be overturned.They arguedthateveryonewasequalonthesettlementnowandthereforetheCasa Grande should be turned over to the settlement association ratherthan remainingin one person'shands.In the end, the formerplantationboss was able to secure his place by appealingto a local judge who happenedto be relatedto his wife. Thejudge orderedthe settlersoff of the landsurrounding theCasaGrande,andtheINCRAofficialsallowedthejudge's orderto stand.
Thesestrugglesoverthedistributionandallocationof landreflectedthe
ongoingperceptionsof spaceashierarchicallyorderedandmadeitdifficult tofosterasenseofcommunityonthesettlement.AsJaimeAmorim,theMST
leaderforPernambuco,said,"Intheforestregionthereis no regionalattach- ment. The [settlers]don't think about themselves as belonging to a settle- ment,let alone a region.Thereis no unitywithinthe settlement."
Once the processof distributingthe landon Florawas completed,most of thesettlerswerepleasedtobelandowners,andmanyofthemattributedtheir newstatusaslandownerstotheMST.Thisgratitude,however,didnotmani- fest itself as allegianceto the movementbecausethe settlerssaw theirlandas themeanstoindependence-even fromthemovement.Thesettlerswillingly "joined"the movementonly when they believed doing so would provide
themwithaccesstocertainbenefits.Theyreservedtherighttoleaveandsub- mit themselvesto a differentpatronwhen they chose. As an MST activistin theregionsaid,"Theresidentswanttobreatheintheirownfreedom.[They say]'nowIwantmypieceofland,Iamgoingtotakecareofmyownlife.'"
The settlers were particularlyresistantto the MST's attemptto claim physicalspaceonthesettlement.In2002-2003 MSTturnedwhathadbeen horsestablesatFlora'smainentranceintoanattractivesmallhouseintended to be used as the movement'snew	All of the settlers
regionalheadquarters. agreedthatthehousewasveryniceandconstitutedanimprovementoverthe
stables,butastheworkcametoanendtheygottogetherandsentagroupof representativesto the INCRA offices in Recife. The settlersprotestedthe movement'sintrusionon theirspace,even thoughtheyhadapparentlysigned an"institutionaalct"agreeingtotheconstruction.TheyarguedthattheMST had trickedthem into signing a documentthey did not understand.They insistedthatit buildits	in the	townratherthan
headquarters	nearby	occupying settlementland.IftheMSTwasabletoclaimspacewithinthesettlement,the
settlersworriedthatit would also be able to claim a set of rightsover them: "Whenevertheycome,theywillwanttoorderusaround."Onesettlerwhoin 2003saidthathestillsupportedtheMSTsaid,"Idon'tevenknowwhattosay aboutthemovement.... [Themovementactivists]onlyvisitedthesettlement when that[investment]money [PROCERA]came out, andthenthey wanted to have the office built [on the settlement],but I think that INCRA con- demnedit....	Manyof thesettlerswenttoINCRA....	several[people]went, they said thatit was going to turninto a rowdy bar."
Thelonghistoryof life andworkontheplantationalsoshapedanunder-
standingof "rights"as a set of goods providedby plantationowners.These rights had been set in Brazilian law in 1963, but because implementation
depended on the relationshipbetween plantationowners and workersthe lawswereopentointerpretationm,anipulation,andnegotiation.Whenthe
plantationswereoperating,ownerswereseenasfulfillingtheirresponsibili- ties if they took careof theirworkers.One formerruralworkerwho received landon Floradescribedhis life as an administratorfor a nearbydistilleryas follows:
[Theland]wasownedbythedistillery-everythinwgaswellorganized[.On
the	therewasfullworkfor	Weallhad	andwe had distillery]	everyone.	papers
our	Weworked	therewasnolackofwork... We properights.	righthrough;
weren'tmissinganythingn,o,theypaidallourproperightscorrectly....
Therewereabout180peoplewiththeirpapersinthedistilleryatthistime,all
the ofthe livedonthe and responsibility	distillery.... Everyone	[plantation]
workedt,herewasn'tanydifficultywithsalaryorwithlackof moneyt,hings
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	165
166 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
wereverydifferent.Wealwayshadabetterlife thanwe havenow,betterthan thelifethatwearestartingnow,butIdon'tknowhowitwillbefromnowon.
Iftheplantationownersdidnotfulfilltheirobligationstotheworkersand were seen as not tryinghardenough, the workersexercisedtheirhistorical rightto leave the plantation.As a formerruralworkersaid, "Atthattime, therewasn'tanythingholdingyouinoneplace.... Iwouldspendtwoorthree yearsinoneplace,andwhenthatstartedtogetbadIwasalreadyleavingfor somewhereelse." On the settlement,the ruralworkersexercised this same rightto exit. One settlerwho becamefrustratedwiththe movement'sinability toprovidehimwithmaterialassistancesaid,"Iwaspartof themovementtoo, along with the boys, but afterwardsI said, 'I am going to get out of this, becauseit'snotgoingtoworkforme,justgoingallovertheplaceandnever gettinganythingtogetherformyself.Iamgoingtodropout.'"Althoughthis settlerhad occupied the plantationwith MST and undergonethe formative experienceoflivinginanencampment,hewithdrewfromsettlementpolitics afterhis firstdisagreementwiththeothersettlers:"Ididn'tvote [atthesettle- ment's second associationmeeting]....	They called everyonetogether,but noteveryonewent,andso [thosewhowent]didwhattheywanted.Imyself, if Ihadbeenthere,Iwouldn'thavevotedforanyone.Iprefertobeworking on my land,battlingslowly, ratherthanalwaysbeing in meetings."
When the movementarrivedin Agua Preta,movementleaderswere able to buildtheirmembershipbecausethey were in a positionto providethe set- tlerswiththesameassistancetheyhadcometoexpectfromtheirformerplan- tationbosses. Althoughthe MST arguesthataccess to land,runningwater, andelectricityarebasicrightsdueanycitizenof thenation,inpracticeitwas difficultfor the settlersto believe in theirrightsas universalgoods. MST leadersandactivistswereableto securethismaterialassistancefortheset- tlersbecauseof theirties to the local mayor'soffice. It was the mayorwho had selected the settlement'sagronomist,and the two maintaineda close workingrelationship.Throughthemayor,themovementwas ableto provide materialassistanceforthesettlers.As aleaderintheregionsaid,"[Atthat time,] we neverneededto go to Recife for a mobilization,for transportation, orevenforfood. [Themayor]alwayswenttomeetings,togivespeeches,he participated in everything .... Whenever settlers affiliated with the MST neededthe mayor'soffice, the doorswere open."
In 2000, Flora'sagronomistworkedlong hourson the mayor'sreelection campaign,passingthroughallof thesettlementsin AguaPretaandencourag- ingpeopletovote.Whenthemayorwasreelected,theagronomistaccepteda full-timepositionashisassistant.Atthesametimeastheagronomistleftthe settlement(althoughhiswifewasstilltechnicallyasettleronFlora),theMST
also rearrangedits regionalleadership,bringingin new leadersandactivists. Peopleconsideredthenewleadershipinconsideratebecauseitwasunableto
provide the sort of resources they had come to expect. Even though they understoodthattherewerefinancialdifficultiescausedbythewithdrawalof agrarianreformresourcesatthefederallevel, theystillbelievedthattheMST leadershipwas not trying hard enough. Their perceptiongained strength when the new leader violated local political norms by supportingan MST candidatefor statedeputyin the 2002 elections ratherthanthe mayor'sson, who was also running.Although the MST candidatebelonged to a party closely allied with the movementat the nationallevel (the Workers'party), even movementmilitantsin Agua Pretacriticizedthe new leaderfor not sup- portingthemayor'ssonbecause,asoneactivistsaid,"afterthislastelection, [oursupport]has diminished."
CONCLUSION
The MST is one of the most importantpoliticalactorsin Braziltodayand the most importantgrassrootssocial movementin the country'shistory.Peo-
ple from across Brazil-including	people in the sugarcaneregion-have
joinedthemovementbyoccupyinglargefarmsorplantationsandpressuring the governmentfor a set of rights defined as those due any citizen of the
nation.Themovementwill,however,havelittleeffectonthesocialstructure
produced and supported by the sugarcane industry unless reforms are enacted with the region's specific history in mind. Functiondoes not auto-
matically follow form-place	matters.The MST constructeda significant presencein the sugarcaneregion,butits mobilizationeffortswere weakened
by the singularconceptionof land:accordingto JaimeAmorim,the move-
mentwassuccessfulinbuildinganationalmembershipbecause"wepicked
an issue thatunitedeveryone-the	land. [Land]is a necessity. Landis the
wordthatunifies.Landbecametheelementofthestruggle.Youofferthe
workerstheopportunitytohaveland-but throughanoccupation[thatthey
participatein]."An analysisof movementmembershipandpolitics in Agua Pretasuggeststhatlandis indeedimportantbutpeopleattachmanydifferent
meaningstoit.A certainsetof valuesordesirescannotbeinferredfromthe actofjoiningtheMST.NotallofthepeoplewhojoinedtheMSTinthesugar- cane regionof Pernambucodid so for the land,andeven those who did want land wanted it for stability ratherthan subsistence and for political status
ratherthanpolitical rights. As the MST continuesto grow,its biggest challengewill be buildingan
organizationthat can representpeople from the many differentregions of
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	167
168 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Brazil who bring with them very different spatial imaginaries. The difficulty
lies in the need for diversity and ideological and methodological coherence. AsanMSTleaderfromtheSouthofBrazilsaid,"Youhavetofightdiversity
with diversity, but how do you do that and maintain a principle?" This strug- gle for inclusive representation has plagued rural social movements around the world, and the MST is no exception.
NOTES
1. A stripof land about 100 kilometerswide runningalong the coast from Sergipeto Rio GrandedoNorte(see Andrade,1988),thezonadamatais ahumidtropicalregionthatusedtobe coveredwithAtlanticforest,aswasmuchof thecountry'seasterncoast.
2.A"partiaalndvoluntary"landdistributionprogramP,ROTERRAw,asinstitutedin1971,
buttheprogramwasneververyeffectiveindistributingood-qualityland,asmillanddistillery ownerswereableto designatethelandavailablefordistributionT.	heprogramlargelycameto a halt when PROALCOOLwas implementedin 1975, offering incentivesfor the productionof ethanolfrom sugarcane(Andrade,1988).
3. This informationis updatedregularlyon MST-PE'sweb site, http://www.mst.org.br/ mstpe/.
4. Accordingto a reportpublishedby the mayor'soffice, in 2001 therewere 24 settlements in Agua Preta, 11 of which were establishedbetween 1973-1978 and 12 of which were estab- lished between 1992-2000.
5. Not the community'sreal name.
6. Slaveryasaninstitutionwasabolishedin 1888.BrazilwasthelastcountryintheWestern
Hemisphereto do so. 7.Martins(1981:77-79) distinguishesbetweentwogroupsofworkersexpelledwiththe
rise of centralizationandmodernization:"peasants"(small-scalefarmers)and"ruralworkers"
(residentsof the plantationswho workedfor the distilleries).Juliaopreferredto workwith the peasantsbecausethey were betterinstrumentsof revolution(see also Forman,1975).
8. The government'sdevelopmentprogramfor the Amazon region, POLONORTE,was designedto attractbothlargeandsmallfarmers,while thedevelopmentprogramfortheCerrado, thegrasslandsoftheCenter-WestP,OLOCENTROw,aslargelydesignedforlarge-scalefarmers whohadthecapitaltopurchasemoder agriculturaelquipment.
9. The cost of fostering the inefficient industryis today conservativelyvalued at over US$6.5 billion(De Souza,Irmao,andAradjo,1997:3). In 1994thecost of producinga tonof sugarin the Northeastwas US$319.12 in comparisonwith US$216.05 in the South (Buarque, 1997: 2).
10.MSTactivistshavecreatedanationalnetworkbyspreadingoutfromtheSouthintothe restof the country.In the mid-1980s,MST sent 20 young activistsfromthe Southto the North- east,andsincethenonlyonehasreturnedtotheSouth.Manyof thosewhoremainedintheNorth- east continueto play key roles in the movement'sleadershipat the statelevels. Perhapsthe best exampleis JaimeAmorim,an activistfromSantaCatarinawho has been the leaderof MST in Pernambucofor 12 years.Leaderssuch as Jaimeareclosely connectedto the mainoffices of the movementandbringa remarkableuniformityto MST'sideology andactionsin differentregions. These activists make it possible for MST to coordinatedemonstrationsand land occupations throughouthe country.
11.Thenumberof occupationsinPernambucorosesteadilyafter1992.Themovementcar- ried out 3 occupationsin 1991, 9 in 1992, 35 in 1996, and 51 in 1997 (see the MST web site for Pernambuco:www.mst-pe.org.br).
REFERENCES
Andrade,ManuelCorreiade 1988 Area do sistema canavieiro. Recife: Superint6ndenciado Desenvolvimento do Nordeste.
Andrade,ManuelCorreiade and SandraCorreiade Andrade 2001 As usinas de Pernambucoe a crise atual. Recife: UNTEPPE.
Branford,Sue andJanRocha 2002 Cuttingthe Wire:TheStoryof theLandlessMovementin Brazil.London:LatinAmeri- can Bureau.
Buarque,Sergio C. 1997 "Propostade reestruturaqadoo setorsucro-alcooleiroe negociaqcode dividaporterra
paraassentamentosde reformaagraria."Paperpreparedfor the workshop"Reestruturaqao do SetorSucro-Alcooleiroe ReformaAgrarianaZonadaMatade Pernamuco,"Recife.
Canae reformaagraria 1970 Recife: InstitutoJoaquimNabucode PesquisasSociais.
De Souza, HerminoR., Jose FerreiraIrmao,andTacisioPatriciode Araijo 1997 "Canade aqiucare cacau:reestruturaqaporodutivae mercadode trabalhona zona da mata do Nordeste," MS, Graduate Program in Economics, Federal University of Pernambuco,Recife, Pernambuco.
Eisenberg,Peter 1974 TheSugarIndustryin Sao Paulo:ModernizationWithoutChange,1840-1910. Berke- ley: Universityof CaliforniaPress.
Fernandes,BernardoMancano 1999MST,Movimentodos TrabalhadoresRuraisSemTerra:Formaqaoe territorializacao. Sao Paulo:EditoraHucitec.
Forman,Shepard 1975 TheBrazilianPeasantry.New York:ColumbiaUniversityPress.
Freyre,Gilberto 1978 TheMastersand the Slaves. New York:Knopf.
GarciaJr.,Raul Afranio
1990 O Sul, caminhodo roqado:Estratdgiasde reproducaocamponesae transformacao social. Sao Paulo:EditoraMarcoZero.
Lefebvre,Henri 1991 TheProductionof Space.Translatedby DonaldNicholson-Smith.Oxford:Blackwell.
Lery,Jeande 1992Historyof a Voyageto theLandof Brazil,OtherwiseCalledAmerica.Berkeley:Uni- versityof CaliforniaPress.
Lima,JoaoPolicarpoR. andGersonVictorSilva 1995 "A economia canavieirade Pernambucoe a reestruturacaonecesaria."Revista de EconomiaNordestede Fortaleza26: 181-203.
Wolford/ OF LAND AND LABOR	169
170 LATINAMERICANPERSPECTIVES
Lins, CarlosJos6 Caldaset al. 1996 Programade acio para o desenvolvimentoda zona da mata do Nordeste. Recife: SUDENE.
Martins,Jose de Sousa 1981OscamponeseseapoliticanoBrasil:Aslutassociaisnocampoeseulugarnoprocesso
polftico. Petr6polis:Vozes. Maybury-Lewis,Biorn
1994 ThePolitics of the Possible: TheBrazilianRural Workers'TradeUnionMovement,
1964-1985. Philadelphia:TempleUniversityPress. MEPF(MinisterioExtraordinarioda PoliticaFundiaria)
1998 Programaintegradode reformana zona da mata nordestina.Recife. Pereira,AnthonyW.
1997TheEndof thePeasantry:TheRuralLaborMovementinNortheastBrazil,1961-1988.
Pittsburgh:Universityof PittsburghPress. Pinto, Estevao
1963"Oproblemaagrarionazonacanvieirade pernambuco."Paperpreparedfortheconfer- ence "OProblemaAgrarionaZonaCanavieirade Pernambuco,"Recife, May.
Schwartz,StuartB. 1987 "Plantationsand peripheries,c. 1580-c. 1750,"pp. 67-144 in Leslie Bethell (ed.), Colonial Brazil.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Sigaud,Lygia 1977 "Aidealizaqaodo passadonumaareade plantation"Contraponto2: 115-126. 1979 Os clandestinose os direitos.Sao Paulo:EditoraDuas Cidades.
WanderleyM,ariadeNazarethBaudel 1978 Capital e propriedadefundiaria: Suas articulao~es na economia asucareira de Pernambuco.Rio de Janeiro:Paze Terra.
Wolford,Wendy 2003a "Families,fields, andfightingfor land:the spatialdynamicsof contentionin rural Brazil."Mobilization8: 201-215. 2003b "Producingcommunity:geographiesof commitmenton landreformsettlementsin Brazil."Journalof AgrarianChange3: 500-520.
Wright,Angus and WendyWolford 2003 ToInherittheEarth:TheLandlessMovementandtheStrugglefor a NewBrazil.Oak- land, CA: Food FirstPublications.
