2006
Political Science
Latin American Politics and Society
Repression, Opportunity, u d Protest: Explaining the Takeoff of
Brazil's Landless Movement
Gabiel Ondetti

ABSTRACT
During the mid-l990s, Brazil experienced a rapid intensification of protest for land reform. Official land reform efforts also accelerated, and the issue became a central topic of public concern and debate. This article seeks to account for the abrupt intensification of collec- tive action and to explain its relationship to the other changes, focusing on the political impact of two massacres of landless pro- testers in 1995and 1996.These incidentsforced authoritiesto accel- erate land reform and to exercise somewhat greater caution in repressing the movement. The shifts in state behavior then helped to accelerate collective action. This argument lends weight to the idea that state repression against a social movement can sometimes serve to engender even greater protest. It also identifies a previ- ously undescribed causal mechanism, political opportunity, linking repression to protest.
During the mid-l990s, Brazil experienced a rapid intensification of grassroots protest for agrarian reform. Land occupations had been growing gradually for several years, led by an organization called the Movement of Landless Rural Workers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Ruraak Sem Terra, MST). In late 1995 and 1996, however, occupations increased dramatically. The total number of occupations in 1996 was close to three times that of 1995. After this abrupt leap they continued to increase at a more gradual pace through 1999. By early 2000, some 60,000 families were camped on occupied properties or at the margins of public roads waiting to be settled on small plots of farmland. The landless movement had become arguably the largest rural movement in Brazilian history and one of the most influential social movements in contemporary Brazil, rural or urban. During this period, moreover, two other major shifts occurred in Brazil related to land reform. The issue itself emerged from relative obscurity to become a central topic of public concern and debate, and official agrarian reform efforts acceler- ated markedly relative to earlier periods in Brazilian history.
The rise of the land issue was particularly surprising, given the events of the previous decade. The issue of rural land distribution, which had contributed to the implantation of a military dictatorship in 1964, reemerged in 1985 with the announcement of a major new reform
61
62	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
plan by the first civilian president following the coup. President Jose Sarney’splan, however, was buried by landlord opposition. Brazil’s landholding structure, one of the most concentrated in the world, remained untouched. By the early 1990s, agrarian reform seemed largely forgotten as a national political issue.
The abrupt intensification of collective action for land reform and its relationship to the two other changes are the focus of this article. The empirical case sheds light on an interesting theoretical puzzle: why state repression intended to squelch protest for change sometimes ends up inflaming it instead. More specifically, this study identifies a particular causal mechanism through which repression can trigger greater protest, and suggests some conditions under which it is likely to operate. The article thus answers the recent call in the literature to devote more effort to understanding the causal mechanisms and processes that shape episodes of “contentious politics” (McAdam et al. 2001; McAdam 2003).
This study argues that two changes that took place in Brazil during the first half of the 1990s provided a moderately more favorable social and political context for movement expansion. These changes were the neoliberal restructuring of the agricultural sector and a move toward less conservative and more urban-based national governments. Collective protest for land would probably have grown much more gradually in the mid-l990s, however, had it not been for a third factor: the powerful political impact of two brutal massacres of landless protestors by official security forces, at Corumbiara in August 1995 and Eldorado d o Carajis in April 1996.These two episodes outraged domestic and international public opinion, mobilized civil society, dnd focused attention and con- cern on the land issue; they thereby obligated Brazilian authorities to accelerate the pace of reform and exercise greater caution in repressing the movement. These changes provoked, in turn, a major intensification of land occupations by people who wished to be included in the reform process and were determined to force authorities to make good on their policy commitments.
This interpretation of the landless movement’s growth during this period lends additional weight to the idea that repression, though intended to discourage protest, can, at times, serve to engender more of it. This idea is fairly well established in the literature on social move- ments and political conflict (Gurr 1970; Lichbach 1987; Goldstone and Tilly 2001). Existing analyses in this vein have emphasized the impact of repression on the perceptions of actual or potential activists about the legitimacy of established authorities and the efficacy of using protest as a means to bring about change. When repressive actions provoke even greater outbursts of collective action, these analyses suggest, it is because such tactics exacerbate discontent, goading activists into intensifying their efforts and drawing previously passive observers into active dissent.
ONDElTI: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	63
This analysis, however, suggests that official repression can also foment protest more indirectly. By currying additional support for the social movement in question among politically influential third parties, acts of repression may end up forcing state authorities to be more responsive to the movement’s demands for change. This shift toward greater accommodation may, in turn, prompt broader or more deter- mined attempts by the movement to pressure the state for concessions. In other words, instances of repression can serve to strengthen a social movement not only by galvanizing actual or potential members, as exist- ing theory suggests, but by improving the broader “politicalopportunity structure” and thereby creating new incentives for activists to intensify their pressure on the state.
THEREPRESSION-PROTNESXTUS
The relationship between state repression and protest activity is a puzzle that has intrigued social scientists and defied easy explanation. At an empirical level, we can find numerous examples of instances in which repression did its job, discouraging committed activists and intimidating other potential “troublemakers.” Unfortunately for constituted authori- ties, however, we can probably also find in the history of just about any country episodes in which repression had precisely the opposite effect, inflaming protest action and diffusing it more broadly. As one scholar put it, “deterrence works. And then again, deterrence doesn’t work” (Lichbach 1987, 266).
This empirical puzzle is matched by a theoretical dilemma. Each of these reactions to repression can be explained by one of the major the- oretical perspectives on contentious collective action. For example, resource mobilization theory, which has tended to stress the calculated, strategic character of social movement activity, can readily account for why repression might reduce protest, since it raises the costs of protest and thus diminishes its desirability in the eyes of activists. Deprivation- oriented theories can explain why repression might cause greater protest, since repressive actions might deepen the sense of grievance against the government or regime among actual or potential dissidents. Neither of these perspectives by itself, however, at least in a pure version, can explain both outcomes (Lichbach 1987; Khawaja 1993). Over the years, a significant amount of scholarly effort has been devoted to developing a model that can bring both outcomes under one theoretical roof.
A number of authors have focused on the overall intensity of repres- sive action applied by the state. Early on, the discussion centered on whether the repression-protest relationship resembled a U-curve or an inverted U. Proponents of the latter view argued that rising levels of repression initially provoke greater anger among dissidents, accelerating
64	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
protest (Gurr 1970).At some point in the process of escalation, however, “anger gives way to fear,” and protest dies down. Other studies reached the opposite conclusion: repression initially slows protest by impeding organization and recruitment, but beyond some threshold it becomes counterproductive, underscoring the regime’s illegitimacy and helping dissident groups to attract new supporters (Lichbach and Gurr 1981).
A more recent approach to solving the puzzle involves focusing on the degree of consistency with which repression is used (Lichbach 1987; Rasler 1996;Francisco and Lichbach 2001). According to this view, poli- cies of straight repression are likely to intimidate protestors into sub- mission, while sweeping concessions will tend to undermine activism by granting dissidents much of what they seek. Responses that blend repression and concessions, however, are likely to inflame protest because they both provoke anger and signal authorities’ vulnerability to pressure without satisfying demands for change.
Some authors focus on more contextual factors. Gupta et al. (1993), for example, stress political regime type. They make the case that authoritarian regimes are more successful in using repression against protest. Democratically elected governments cannot easily muster the intensity of repressive action needed to intimidate activists into submis- sion, so repression only ends up provoking greater anger and resist- ance, Opp and Roehl (1990) focus on more micro-level factors. They argue that two variables affect whether repression will provoke protest: whether repression is perceived as unjustified or illegitimate by those directly affected in their social environment, and whether those affected are integrated into social networks that generally encourage protest activity. Other theoretical approaches have also been developed. The primary interest here, however, is to identify the exact character of the causal connection they posit between repression and increased protest activity. When official repression does aggravate protest, why does it d o so?What are the causal mechanisms involved?
As a rule, scholars who have addressed this issue see state repres- sion as provoking protest through its impact on the perceptions of actual and potential activists about the character of state authority and the legitimacy of using protest to bring about a desired change. Violent repression against protestors may prompt anger and moral outrage among its direct victims, their friends and relatives, and the broader society (Lichbach 1987; Opp and Roehl 1990; Khawaja 1993; Rasler 1996). It can thus lead not only to a desire on the part of activists to strike back, perhaps with more forceful methods, but to a more funda- mental questioning of the legitimacy or desirability of the government or political regime by the broader society. As a result, “the apathetic become politicized, the reformers become radicalized, and the revolu- tionaries redouble their efforts” (Lichbach 1987, 269). Protest intensifies
ONDMTI: BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	65
and spreads outward to previously uninvolved social groups and geo- graphical areas. This basic causal chain is what most researchers mean when they refer to a “backlash”from repression.
Some scholars have also stressed the grassroots social dynamics repression may give rise to, which may provide additional incentives for engaging in collective protest. For example, the diffusion of pro-protest sentiments as a result of repression may generate social incentives for individuals to get involved in activism, as a result of the prestige such involvement may bring in the individual’ssocial circle (Opp and Roehl 1990, 524). Repression directed against a particular social group, as Khawaja (1993) points out in his case study of protest in the Palestinian West Bank, may also end up strengthening that group’sidentity “byoper- ating as a symbolic reminder of a group’s shared circumstance vis-2-vis authorities and their agents of control.” As a result, repression “alsohelps foster an environment conducive to further collective action by over- coming social cleavages and rearranging previously factional groupings into a unitary whole” (Khawaja 1993, 66). Thus, although state repres- sion and violence may impose high direct costs on protestors and their families, it may also set in motion “micromobilizationprocesses” that can have a positive impact on protest (Opp and Roehl 1990;Rasler 1996).
These arguments focus on the relatively direct impact of state repression on the perceptions of actual and potential activists. What this article will argue, however, is that these theoretical treatments, though in themselves rather convincing, do not capture the full range of causal mechanisms through which state repression can provoke greater protest. In particular, they omit any discussion of how repressive actions may affect the broader political environment of a particular social move- ment. It can be argued that instances of excessive or otherwise ill-con- ceived repression can also end up provoking greater protest by putting authorities on the defensive politically and forcing them to become more responsive to a movement’s demands for policy change.
THEDEVELOPMOEFNTHE LANDLESS MOVEMENT, 1970-2002
Brazil’s rural land tenure structure is among the most concentrated in the world.’ Although a major land reform has never been carried out, the issue has surfaced repeatedly as a source of conflict. In the early 1960s, Brazil experienced its first episode of widespread agrarian activism, concentrated principally in the poor northeast. That move- ment, however, was repressed by the military regime that took power in 1964. Early signs that military authorities might implant their own reform quickly gave way to an agricultural policy based on moderniza- tion and frontier expansion. The gradual opening of the regime in the
66	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
second half of the 1970s was accompanied by a mounting wave of protest in both urban and rural areas (Sader 1988; Medeiros 1989; Keck 1992;Doimo 1995;Navarro 1996;Pereira 1997).
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, activists in the smallholder regions of southern Brazil began organizing large land occupations and road- side camps. Catholic activists inspired by liberation theology were cru- cial in organizing the movement, which became known as the “landless” movement.2 In early 1984 the organizational work culminated in the cre- ation of the MST, which aspired to be a national organization but was initially a southern entity (Wagner 1988;Navarro 1996; Fernandes 2000; Hammond 1999; Branford and Rocha 2002; Wright and Wolford 2003).
The return to civilian rule in 1985 brought optimism about the prospects for land reform, but this was ultimately short-lived. Soon after taking office, President Jose Sarney announced an ambitious agrarian reform plan, promising to settle 1.4 million landless families. Unfortu- nately for land reform proponents, the announcement provoked a major landowner countermobilization, led by the newly formed Democratic Rural Union (Uniao Democratica Ruralista, UDR). Sarney, a consewa- tive northeasterner leading a heterogeneous governing coalition, easily backed downU3The landowners virtually paralyzed the program, and their lobbying efforts helped impose a major defeat on proagrarian reform forces in the constitutional convention of 1987-88. The inten- tional vagueness of the new constitution made it difficult for federal authorities to expropriate privately owned lands4By the end of Sarney’s term, the government had settled fewer than 90,000 fa mi lie^.^
Despite the narrowing of the political space, the landless movement grew significantly during the second half of the 1980s. The driving force was mainly the MST, which expanded geographically and strengthened its internal organization. In addition to consolidating itself in the South, the MST gained a foothold in every other major region. By the end of the decade, it had some representation in 18 of Brazil’s 26 states. The MSTs basic characteristics, established during the 1980s, did not change greatly in subsequent years (Ondetti 2002). The organization combines national- level leadership with substantial state autonomy. Its leadership includes many who have gained land through the struggle; others have joined purely out of ideological commitment. Although the MST has never advo- cated armed struggle, its leaders hold a deep conviction that confronta- tional tactics are essential for achieving social reform under capitalism. At least in its internal communications, the MST advocates socialism.
From the beginning, the MST adopted as its central tactic the mas- sive land invasion, or occupation.6 In planning an occupation, MST activists spend weeks or months recruiting families in the countryside and smaller cities. They target a diverse social base, including small- holders and sharecroppers who have lost access to land, rural wage
ONDE’ITI: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	67
laborers, and even the urban unemployed.’ Typically, careful scouting leads to the identification of a large property believed to be unproduc- tive or otherwise eligible for agrarian reform.*Late at night, MST activists and their recruits, using cars, trucks, and buses, descend on the prop- erty. Occupations range in size from 50 to several thousand families. Once on the land, the families set up a large encampment made up of wooden huts covered with black plastic sheeting or palm fronds.
Policing of mass protest, including land occupations, is generally the responsibility of “militarypolice” forces, which are controlled by the government of each state. When forced by police or landowner repres- sion to leave an occupied property, the landless generally move their camp to the margin of a public road, where it is clearly visible to passersby and the news media. The idea is to stay together until land is won and to exert a maximum amount of pressure on authorities. During hard times for land reform, families have sometimes endured ten or more occupations, spread out over three to five years. While camped, the landless create an internal camp organization and engage in a vari- ety of other pressure tactics, such as marches, road blockages, and the occupation of government buildings.
The objective of all these tactics is usually to force the government to implement the constitutional clause mandating the expropriation of large, unproductive properties for agrarian reform. When successful, ucumpudos receive family-sized parcels of land in government-spon- sored settlements. Non-MST groups use similar tactics, but their occu- pations tend to be smaller, their camps less disciplined, and their lead- ers less militant. Some are linked to rural workers’ unions or smaller “landless”organizations, while others are autonomous.
Initially highly dependent on the Catholic Church, the MST became more independent in the second half of the 1980s.From the beginning, the MST leadership has had close ties to the two major organizations of the Brazilian left, the Workers’ Party (Partido dos Trubulhudores, PT) and the militant Unified Workers’ Central labor confederation (Central
Unicu dos Trubulhudores,CUT), both formed in the early 1980s. How- ever, its leadership has often been critical of the official rural union con- federation, CONTAG, which it considers excessively submissive to authorities. In terms of funding, the MST has relied mainly on foreign nongovernmental organizations and contributions from its settlers.
As the late 1980s and early 1990s wore on, the prospects for land reform seemed increasingly bleak. Sarney’s plan had helped make land reform a major issue of public debate, but as it became clear that this plan would not go forward, interest tended to wear off. Public debate focused increasingly on a mounting economic crisis. Sarney attempted a number of stabilization plans, but none was successful. His tentative fiscal adjustment, however, had a significant impact on agriculture. The
68	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
military regime’s generous credit program, initially pruned during the early 1980s, suffered new cuts. Other programs, including price sup- ports and government marketing systems, were also cut back (Coelho 2001; Dias and Amaral 2000).
Both neglect of land reform and efforts to tackle the economic crisis deepened under the next president, Fernando Collor de Mello, elected in late 1989.A conservative populist from the Northeast, Collor did well in the more backward regions and among both the disorganized poor and elite sectors (M0isi.s 1993). Elected to stop inflation and attack cor- ruption, he had little patience for social causes. Despite Collor’svague campaign promise to settle five hundred thousand families,land expro- priations were virtually halted. The federal police, an investigative force usually not involved in land conflicts, was used to harass MST leaders. Since the late 1980s,the MST had responded to the increasingly difficult political context by adopting a more radical posture, reflected in a deter- mination not to abandon occupied land, even in the face of repression. Nevertheless, facing an even more hostile government, it tended to put more emphasis on internal issues, including settlement production. The promotion of collective agricultural production became a particular pri- ority (Medeiros et al. 1994; Brenneisen 2001; Branford and Rocha 2002). Land occupations dropped significantly in the first year under Collor, then began to climb again slowly (CPT 1990, 1991).
Collor implemented harsh stabilization measures and began a pro- gram of liberalizing reforms. Agriculture was an important target as tar- iffs were slashed, price supports weakened, and markets for a number of important products deregulated. Subsidized credit was also cut fur- ther (Coelho 2001). These measures helped initiate a restructuring of the farm sector. They had mixed effects on more capitalized producers, who were hurt by subsidy cuts but who benefited from access to cheap imported inputs, enabling them to increase efficiency in response to competitive pressures. For poorer producers, mainly small family farm- ers, the effects were more uniformly negative, tending to push them out of agriculture (Dias and Amaral 2000).
Collor’s efforts failed to overcome Brazil’s economic troubles, and his political support deteriorated. In 1992 a massive corruption scandal erupted, leading to Collor’s impeachment and eventual resignation, in late December. He was replaced by his little-known vice president, Itamar Franco. A moderate with populist tendencies, Franco formed a more progressive coalition and promised to prioritize social issues. Although settlement results were very modest under Franco, advances were made in terms of land reform legislation.Most important, Congress passed a bill needed to fill the gaps in the constitution and facilitateland expropriations. Franco also named a moderate leftist to preside over the National Institute for Colonization and Reform (INCRA), and he met
ONDETII: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	69
with the MST, the first president to d o so. He announced a plan to settle 80,000 families, but, like many other aspects of his government, the actual results were disappointing, totaling about 20,000 families. Never- theless, landless activists experienced the Franco period as an improve- ment after Collor’s belligerence (Stedile 2000). Land occupations began to show signs of accelerating, especially in 1994 (see figure 2 below).
Desperate to slow Brazil’spersistent high inflation,Franco switched Fernando Henrique Cardoso, his prestigious foreign minister, to the finance ministry. A prominent progressive intellectual, Cardoso had entered politics during the dictatorship and, in 1988,had helped to form a new party, the Brazilian Social Democratic Party (Partido du Social DemocraciaBrusileira,PSDB),which promised an ethical style of poli- tics and moderate social reform. In early 1994, Cardoso announced a new stabilization plan, known as the Real Plan. At this point, conserva- tives were deeply concerned about the overwhelming lead held by PT candidate Luiz InPcio Lula da Silva in polls for the October presidential election. They were therefore more than happy to support the moder- ate Cardoso when, based on the anticipated success of his stabilization plan, he resigned his post and launched his candidacy for president. The candidate formed an explicit alliance with the powerful and con- servative Party of the Liberal Front (Partido da Frente Liberal, PFL) and a smaller conservative party, the Brazilian Labor Party (Partido Trubal- hista Brasileiro, PTB).
Cardoso laid out a broad platform with liberalizingeconomic reform at its center. In terms of land reform, the campaign literature proposed to settle 280,000 families, beginning with 40,000 in the first year and building up to 100,000in the last. While this program, if implemented, would represent a major change relative to past governments, agrarian reform was far from a central element of the campaign, and it received little media attention. When agrarian reform was mentioned, it was usu- ally in reference to the PT‘s bold proposal to settle 800,000landless fam- ilies. The MST, noting Cardoso’sconservative allies and neoliberal proj- ect, did not take his land reform program seriously. Its newspaper, the
Jornal Sem Terra,warned that, if elected, Cardoso would “bury”agrar- ian reform (lornal Sem Terra 1994).The Real Plan worked its expected electoral magic. As inflation declined in the months before the election, Cardoso’s support quickly rose, and Lula’s dwindled. Cardoso’s sweep- ing first-round victory was achieved with the backing of largely the same sectors that Collor had won over in 1989,plus a broader swath of the urban middle class, giving Cardoso an ample base of support.
In office, Cardoso’spriorities were to maintain macroeconomic sta- bility and to push forward market reforms. Despite having suggested during the campaign that reducing social inequality would be a priority, Cardoso introduced no major social programs. Although Cardoso did
70	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
officially launch his program in late March 1995, early signs of the gov- ernment’s intentions were generally unpromising. Cardoso appointed PTB president Jose Eduardo de Andrade Vieira to lead the Ministry of Agriculture,to which the INCRA was subordinated. In January, Andrade Vieira, a wealthy banker and landowner, told reporters that budget con- straints would keep the INCRA from reaching Cardoso’s settlement goals. To make matters worse, in May Andrade Vieira replaced a pro- gressive INCRA president with a large landowner, Brasilio de Ara6jo Neto, reportedly with ties to the UDR. By the middle of 1995,the INCRA had made little progress toward the goal of settling 40,000 families that year (lornal doDUP1995).
In July the MST held its third five-year congress. Despite the lead- ership’s pessimism about the new government’s intentions, the tone was optimistic (Stedile 2000). The MST had weathered the difficult Collor years and had become a truly national entity. Its leaders agreed that the key to further progress lay in activating the latent support for land reform in Brazilian society by taking the struggle to the cities, where the bulk of the population resided. Their belief in an underlying reserve of sympathy for the land reform cause was not unfounded. Since the early 1960s, public opinion polls in Brazil have registered substantial majori- ties (generally 60 to 70 percent) in favor of land reform. Even in the early 1970s,when the military dictatorship was at the height of its pop- ularity, 68.8 percent of respondents in a national poll said they were “completely in favor” of agrarian reform (CESOP 1995, 11).
Before the MST’sstrategy could be put into practice, however, the land reform unexpectedly surged as a topic of national debate. The key event in bringing about this change occurred on August 9, 1995,in the
munic@ioof Corumbiara, in the state of Rond6nia. Before dawn, police converged on a landless encampment located on an occupied property. In the ensuing conflict, 11 occupiers, including a 7-year-old girl, and 2 policemen were killed. Three of the landless were apparently executed and several were tortured and humiliated. The occupation had been organized by militants who had earlier split from the MST.
As details of the incident were gradually revealed, Corumbiara came to occupy headlines all over Brazil. Survivors interviewed spoke of being awakened by a barrage of gunfire before daylight, of an occupier being forced by police to eat the spilt brain tissue of a dead compan- ion, of a militant being taken away by police, never to be seen again. In response to these accounts, editorials and commentaries underscored the government’s responsibility to halt the appalling violence associated with land struggles. Many also stressed the need to begin in earnest the long-delayed refo,rm of Brazil’s agrarian structure (Beraba 1995). Two weeks after the killings, the influential National Conference of Catholic Bishops (CNBB) issued a statement condemning the violence at
ONDETTI: HKAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	71 Figure 1. Coverage of the Land Issue in Folhu de Sao Putdo, 1994-1999
1200	---__
___--
__-. __-
01	..~--,---.,--.-,vw	.-- ,	.7--- 0102a3a4a102 030401020304a102030401a2030401020304
1994	1995	1996
Source: Folha99 CD-Rotn Archive
1997	1988	1999
Corumbiara and calling for agrarian reform. The PT Ixgan organizing ;i campaign in Brasilia to press for land reform, culminating in the deliv- ery of a proreforin document t o the president in mid-September. Cov- erage of the massacre and the reactions to it by society and the state was responsible for the first significant surge in media attention t o the land question under Cardoso, as can be seen in figure 1,which depicts the total volume of coverage of this issue in the Folha de Suo Puulo, Brazil's largest daily newspaper."
The weeks following Corumhiara brought an increase in land occu- pation activity, particularly in the crucial state of S k i Paulo, where the MST intensified its offensive in the Pontal do Paranapanema region."' These events put pressure on Cardoso t o take firm measures.The Octo- ber edition of the fornal Sem Terru reflected the MST's surprise at the abrupt rise of the land question in recent months.
Newspapers that until then had been fierce adversaries o f c)ur strug- gle began t o publish editorials criticizing the timidity and slowness of the government in addressing this question. Spacc niultipliecl in newspapers and magazines to inform society about the ;it>surdityof the concentration of the lkazilian landholding structure. If someone were t o arrive in Brazil cluring these days, tie would certainly get the impression that the necessity of agrarian reform had just been discovered at this moment. (.JorrialSpm Tewu 1995a)
Quarter
>
72	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
Subsequent editorials argued that with the decisive shift in public opin- ion, landowners were now isolated and Cardoso was being forced to address the demands of pro-land reform forces.
At the end of September, Cardoso replaced Araujo Net0 with his own personal adviser, Francisco Graziano. The MST and the media interpreted this as a sign that the president was taking personal control of land reform (lornal Sem Terra 1995b). Graziano pledged to acceler- ate the pace of settlement efforts and quickly and energetically set about doing so. In late November, however, a scandal (unrelated to land reform) erupted, resulting in Graziano’s resignation and replacement by a little-known career INCRA functionary. In the months that followed, the pace of settlement seemed to bog down.
The government was shaken out of its lethargy only four months later. On April 17, 1996,another massacre of landless protestors occurred, this one even more violent and shocking that Corumbiara. It took place in the munic@io Eldorado do CarajPs in southeastern Para, a region known for deadly land conflicts. Military police attacked a group of some 1,200 MST demonstrators blocking a highway, killing 19 and injuring more than 60. As with Corumbiara, forensic evidence suggested that sev- eral landless had been executed. Unlike Corumbiara, this time there was film footage, shot by a local television news crew. Eldorado was the largest single incident of land-related violence in Brazil in several decades.
The media furor generated by Eldorado was almost instantaneous, and far exceeded the reaction to Corumbiara. Images of the massacre and its product, a truckload of mangled corpses, haunted the press for weeks. The story dominated domestic coverage and was reported by major foreign news outlets, including CNN. As figure 1 suggests, Eldo- rado set off the largest spike in coverage of the land question in the Folba de Srio Paul0 through 1999. Articles, editorials, columns, and op- ed pieces on the incident came out in droves. The main themes of the commentary were indignation about the killings and criticism of the government’s failure to address the land issue, even after Corumbiara. Criticism of the MST was initially muted. Even the Folha editorial page, generally pro-Cardoso and not a particularly enthusiastic defender of land reform, chided the president for neglecting his commitment to social justice and asserted that “all of the countries that have developed or are developing-from	the United States to today’s Asian ‘tigers’- have done some kind of agrarian reform” (Folba de Srio Paul0 1996a).
Only three days after the massacre, Cardoso convened a meeting of the heads of the three branches of government to, as his spokesman put it, “remove the obstacles in the way of agrarian reform and combat impunity” (Folba de SiZo Paul0 1996b). A few days later, the president gave in to an old demand of progressive groups and removed the INCRA from the historically conservative Ministry of Agriculture. He cre-
ONDETI’I: BRAZIL‘SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	73
ated a new ministry, the ExtraordinaryMinistry for Land Policy, to house it, Cardoso met with MST leaders and reaffirmed his commitment to his original settlement objectives. He also pledged to push forward legisla- tion to speed the process of reform and restrain police violence.
The president’s reaction did nothing to slow the growing interest in and concern about the land issue in Brazil and among foreign observers. Media coverage continued intensely through the end of 1996 and beyond. Vqu, Brazil’s largest weekly newsmagazine, published more stories on this issue in 1996 than in the previous five years combined. The content of domestic coverage was somewhat mixed but, on the whole, beneficial for the movement. On the negative side, following the initial reaction to Eldorado, criticism of the MSTs tactics and radical ide- ology grew (Veju 1996). In addition, some publications raised doubts about the efficacy of land reform, suggesting that previous attempts had produced mediocre results, However, much of the coverage was at least implicitly positive. Articles examined the problems of farm workers and smallholders and profiled the movement’s social base (Folha de Siio Puulo 1996~).Progressive columnists argued that land reform could contribute to resolving many of Brazil’s problems, including social inequality and urban violence.” Even pieces that expressed reservations about land reform usually refrained from sweeping rejections of this policy, pointing instead mainly to problems of implementation, such as high costs, political obstacles, official corruption, and the need for a wide array of ongoing support programs to assist settlers.
Just as important, the media also helped convey to the larger public expressions of support for land reform and the MST from civic leaders, human rights activists, union leaders, politicians, and artists, reflecting the impressive mobilization of domestic and international civil society around this issue. In Brazil, support came not only from the traditional left but from a diverse array of other groups and individuals. The Insti- tute of Brazilian Architects, for example, gave the MST its 1996 “person of the year” award (/ornu1Sem Terra 1997).World-famous photographer Sebastiio Salgado published a striking book of photographs on the struggle for land and donated the profits to the MST. Pop singer Chico Buarque launched a CD dedicated to the movement, and renowned architect Oscar Niemeyer designed a monument to commemorate Eldo- rado. Internationally, the MST received support from human rights and development organizations. As Cadji notes, Corumbiara and Eldorado were fundamentally important in the formation of an international advo- cacy network surrounding the struggle for land in Brazil (Cadji 2000). Even Pope John Paul 11,not generally a champion of progressive causes, urged Cardoso to devote more attention to the land issue.
That Brazilian society had awakened to this issue was also evident from other indicators. Polling firms began to devote questions and sur-
74	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY Figure 2. Land Occupations in Brazil, 1990-2002
48: 2
Source:CPT
800 I 500
599
581
I
200
100
0
I 11 I990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Year
1
146
81 81 89
veys to land reform, which had been largely ignored since the 1980s. The results consistently demonstrated that at least 80 percent of adult Brazilians supported land reform (IBOPE 1998). Public support for the MST was less pronounced but also substantial.**In August 1996, the struggle for land received perhaps the ultimate form of cultural recog- nition in Brazil when it became a central theme of one of the most suc- cessful telenovelas of recent years, The King of Cattle. The series por- trayed landless militants in a sympathetic light, which was striking considering that the station that produced the program, TV Globo, was notorious for its conservative outlook.
As these events were unfolding, land occupation activity was increasing rapidly in the countryside. The change began in late 1995 and was initially spearheaded mainly by the MST. It was concentrated prin- cipally in a few states, especially Silo Paulo. A much more striking increase came in 1996 (figure 2). The number of occupations increased by 173 percent, and the bulk of them took place between May and October. The upsurge was not concentrated in any particular state or region but generalized across the country (table 1). In terms of the number of families participating in occupations, only the Southeast showed a slight.decline in 1996.This was due mainly to the MST's mas- sive occupations in the Pontal do Paranapanema the previous year. Another notable change in 1996 was the growth of occupations organ-
398
-~
1
463
ONDE'ITI: BRAZIL'SLANDLESSMOVEMENT	75 Table 1. Land Occupations and Families Participating by Region,
1995-1996
1995	1996	% Change Region	Occupations Families Occupations Fadies Occupations Families
South 15 Southeast 37 Center-West 26 Northeast 57 North 11 Brazil 146
Source: CPT
3,134	52 10,512	68 3,771	68 11,057	157 2,002	53 30,476	398
13,823 8,947 10,321 23,091 6,898 63,080
247	341 84	-1 5 162	174 175	109 382	245 173	107
ized by groups other than the MST. Although MST occupations had gen- erally made up about two-thirds of the total since the late 1980s, that proportion fell to only 44 percent in 1996. l 3
Large landowners and their allies, though now on the defensive, were not passive. One of their complaints was that in the wake of the Eldorado do Carajis incident, some state governments had become reluctant to use their military police forces to expel land occupiers (Xavier 1999).Ina few states, landowners revitalizedthe UDR or formed new organizations to defend properties and push for official repression. Ingeneral, though, landowners preferred to use their institutional polit- ical weight to pressure the government to try to limit occupations and to block or water down legislative initiatives in Congress. Leaders of the powerful congressional agricultural caucus warned the president that his agrarian reform initiatives and his government's failure to crack down on land occupations could cause problems for the rest of his leg- islative program (Folha de S6o Paul0 1996d).
Apart from land reform, important changes were occurring in Brazil- ian agriculture. The government's macroeconomic policies provoked a debt crisis in the farm sector, undermining output, especially in 1996. Following a debt renegotiation, however, commercial agriculture rebounded strongly (Coelho 2001; Malin 2002). Trade liberalization con- tinued, and commercial producers responded by increasing productiv- ity. Output grew rapidly without a significant expansion in cultivated land. Agricultural exports boomed.
Small family farmers and wage laborers-the	rural poor-generally did not do as well. Increased agricultural imports depressed food prices, and productivity gains on large farms reduced the demand for wage labor. Between 1995 and 1997, both family farmers and wage laborers suffered declines in income (Del Grossi and Graziano da Silva 2000,
76
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2 Figure 3. Brazil’s Agricultural Workforce, 1981-1998
. - . . . . . . . , . .. , 4
..
OJI1 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1998 1997 1998
1
Source: Helfand and Castro de Resende 2001
table	l ) , l 4	The	total	agricultural	workforce	shrank	by	8.4	percent between 1992 and 1997 (Laurenti and Del Grossi 2000, table l).15	The decline was national in scope, but the Southeast and South, the most uniformly modern agricultural regions, suffered the largest losses (Lau- renti and Del Grossi 2000, table 3). These were spread fairly evenly between family and wage labor (Carneiro 2000). Most of the decline occurred in 1996,when production stagnated, but employment did not rebound when output growth accelerated in later years (see figure 3). Rural unemployment rose at an average rate of 7.4 percent per year between 1992 and 1997, and rural nonfarm employment also grew rap- idly (Graziano da Silva and Del Grossi 2001).16Urban job growth might have helped to offset the decline of farm employment, but urban unem- ployment, following a brief decline in 1994, began to climb again in 1995.It accelerated in 1997and more sharply in 1998,with the onset of
recession (Neri et al. 2000). Following Eldorado, the Cardoso government sought to give the
impression that it was proceeding rapidly with agrarian reform, using a combination of concrete measures and advertising. Authorities sought to isolate the MST politically, denouncing its tactics as unde- mocratic and politically motivated. The MST, for its part, continued to exert pressure and accused the government of inflating settlement fig- ures and ruining small farmers with its neoliberal policies. In early
Year
ONDE’ITI: BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	77
1997,the MST organized a national march, which reached Brasilia on April 17, the first anniversary of the Eldorado massacre. Although it served as a blow to the government’s isolation tactics, the march had little evident effect on policy.
Land occupations continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate, in 1997 and 1998. The proportion of occupations linked to the MST continued to decline, but the MST’s role in politicizing the land question, its abil- ity to coordinate its actions nationally, and its great combativeness meant that for the public, it was almost synonymous with the move- ment. At the end of 1998,federal officialsboasted of having exceeded their goals by settling more than 287,000 families. This figure, they claimed, exceeded the combined totals of all the other post-1964 gov- ernments. They also pointed to resources invested in support programs and a number of legislative victories related to land reform. Critics argued that the government was padding its settlement totals through a number of tactics (Pereira 2003, 51-52).
Cardoso’s second term, beginning in 1999, brought significant changes in both land reform-related policies and the land reform move- ment. Spending on land reform was cut sharply. Special credit and tech- nical assistance programs for settlers were eliminated. The MST responded by intensifying protest and, in May 2000, Cardoso struck back with unprecedented force. Most important, he issued a decree making all occupied rural properties ineligible for expropriation for at least two years. Authorities also began an investigation of the MST’s use of federal settler credits to fund its operations, a practice that had long been known and tolerated. At the end of 2002, as Cardoso prepared to leave office, the INCRA published a report claiming to have settled some six hundred thousand families in eight years (INCRA 2002). A growing body of evidence suggests, however, that the figure was substantially inflated (Sparovek 2003): .
Land occupations declined after Cardoso’s2000 crackdown, a trend that continued through 2002. Other types of protest for land, including road blockages and occupations of state INCRA offices, seemed to increase, but not enough to offset the decline. In mid-2000 a temporary upsurge in media attention to the land question focused on high-profile MST initiatives and Cardoso’s counterattack. Generally, however, after 1997, coverage was reduced. The tone of coverage, moreover, seemed to grow more aggressively anti-MST. Cardoso’scrackdown, for example, was unabashedly celebrated by Veja, the Folha, and other major news outlets. Available public opinion data tentatively suggest a decline in support for the MST and its tactics beginning in about the late 199Os.l7 In the face of such negative trends, MST activists participated energeti- cally in the 2002 national election campaign and rejoiced at the PT‘s vic- tory, though they worried about the party’s growing moderation.
78	LATIN MERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2 EXPLAININTGHE UPSURGOEF
COLLEC~AVCETION
How did the abiupt mid-1990s increase in grassroots collective action for land reform relate to the acceleration of agrarian reform and the apparent intensificationof public interest in the agrarian question during roughly the same period? Surprisingly,there have been almost no sys- tematic attempts to explain these developments. Apparently the only other scholar who has addressed this question explicitly, and then only in passing, has underscored the impact of an employment crisis in both the rural and urban sectors (Fernandes 1998, 2000). Contemporary media reports sometimes pointed to the effects of Cardoso’s land distri- bution program in encouraging workers to stake claims to underused land ( Veju 1998). Each of these arguments is partially correct, but misses crucial elements of the story. The rapid upsurge of protest for land reform actually responded to three basic factors: the social impact of agricultural restructuring, a progressive change in the character of national governments, and most important, the jarring political impact of the major landless massacres of 1995 and 1996.
The evidence regarding the impact of agricultural restructuring is mixed. On the one hand, the difficulties facing poorer agricultural fam- ilies during the early and mid-l990s, reflected in the data on employ- ment and incomes presented above, could reasonably be expected to generate pressure for land reform. For unemployed wage workers or sharecroppers rendered landless by increasing mechanization, land reform might have been seen as a source of food and income. Small- holders who had lost their land to creditors as a result of falling food prices might have seen land reform as a way to start over, with access to grants, infrastructure, and subsidized credit unavailable to them before. Although some poor rural families undoubtedly responded to poor economic conditions by leaving agricultural regions for urban areas, the urban sector was not in a very good position to absorb addi- tional labor during the mid-l990s, since unemployment was on the rise.l8 Actually, a good many families involved in MST occupations during the 1990s were attempting to move in the opposite direction, from city to countryside.
On the other hand, the regional distribution of the reduction in the agricultural labor force does not match the distribution of the increase in land 0ccupations.~9For example, comparing the data for 1992 and 1997, the South, which saw the second-largest reduction in its agricultural work force (13.4 percent), had the second-smallest increase in occupations (204 percent). In contrast, the Northeast, which experienced the smallest reduction in its labor force (3.7 percent), saw easily the largest increase in land occupations, a stunning 911 percent. Paradoxically,the situation
ONDElTI:BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	79
almost reverses itself if we compare 1995 to 1996, the year occupations surgedmost powerfully.The Southhad the second-smallestdecline in its labor force (5.3 percent) and the second-largest increase in land occu- pations (247 percent), while the Northeast saw the largest decline in its labor force (10.2 percent), but only the third-largest increase in land occupations (174 percent). Substituting the number of occupying fami- lies for the number of occupations does not help, because the regional patterns of change in the two variables are similar.*O
There are explanations for this lack of correspondence that do not involve abandoning the link between agricultural restructuring and protest entirely. In particular, the internal diversity of the major regions may hide the impact of agricultural change on protest for land in cer- tain areas.21One of these is undoubtedly the coastal sugarcane region of the Northeast. It is well established that sugarcane experienced a major restructuring as a result of the neoliberal reforms of the late 1980s and early 1990s, which sharply reduced federal subsidies to this crop (Carvalho 2000; Wolford 2004). The impact was particularly great on northeastern producers, who were highly dependent on government support. One of the consequences of this change was reduced demand for wage labor. It is certainly not coincidental that the bulk of land occu- pations in the Northeast during the second half of the 1990s was con- centrated in the coastal sugarcane regions of the major sugarcane-pro- ducing states, especially Pernambuco.
Even if we accept that agricultural change played some role in the movement's upsurge, however, we must keep in mind that the drop in the number of people employed in agriculture was rather mild relative to the explosive increase in grassroots protest for land during the mid- 1990s. Moreover, when the movement took off,urban unemployment was growing only gradually, and the economy was expanding. When land occupations declined sharply in 2000, in contrast, the overall employment situation was worse. Given the very mixed evidence, it would seem wise to offer the cautious conclusion that agricultural restructuring and the social problems it caused helped create a certain latent potential for a rapid increase in land occupations in the mid- 1990s, but did not play a decisive role in provoking this change.
Another factor in improving the context for movement growth was the shift toward less conservative and somewhat more urban-based national governments after the fall of President Collor in late 1992.. Although subsequent coalitions, especially under Cardoso, have also included the major conservative parties, they have been broader and have had a somewhat more democratic and socially oriented image to live u p to. Their ability to resist pressures for land reform was therefore arguably weaker than that of the civilian governments that immediately preceded them. Since the later Sarney years, Brazil had been governed
80	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
by frankly conservative coalitions. The protest movement that helped drive out Collor represented not only a reaction against corruption but a broader rejection of “traditional”clientelist politics, especially charac- teristic of the less developed and more conservative states. This brought a desire for cleaner and, to some extent, more socially responsive lead- ership. Itamar Franco responded to this demand by forging a more pro- gressive coalition. Later, Cardoso and his PSDB were able to appeal effectively to the climate of the period by combining control over infla- tion with a reputation for honesty and sensitivity to social issues.
Cardoso’scoalition included virtually all of the conservative sectors that had supported Collor and Sarney. In addition, Cardoso, perhaps more than any other postwar president, had a mandate for restricting state spending. The MST and other leftist groups therefore viewed his election as a defeat, and were pessimistic about the prospects for land reform. Tellingly, there was no significant increase in land occupations during the first several months of Cardoso’s presidency. Nevertheless, his government also had the backing of moderately progressive sectors. These valued the president’s progressive background and the PSDB’s tepid social reformism, and were uneasy about the alliance with the clientelistic PFL. Foreign observers believed even more strongly in Car- doso’s progressive, modernizing credentials. Thus, although the gov- ernment initially gave few signs of strong commitment to land reform, it was arguably somewhat more vulnerable to pressure for this policy than either Sarney or Collor.
As this discussion suggests, both the political and social conditions for the struggle for land appear to have been at least moderately more favorable by the mid-1990s than they had been in Brazil for a number of years. In this context, and with the MST working earnestly to expand the movement, it would have been logical to expect, under Cardoso, at least a continuation of the gradual rise in land occupations, and proba- bly some acceleration. That collective action actually grew explosively in late 1995 and especially 1996 was mainly the indirect result of the Corumbiara and Eldorado do Carajas massacres. By outraging domestic and international public opinion and focusing attention and concern o n the agrarian question, these incidents applied pressure on Cardoso to accelerate land reform. The clear signs that the government was being forced to redistribute more land incited the MST and other actors to intensify or initiate land occupations. The decline in repression on the part of state governments intimidated by the political fallout from Eldo- rado facilitated this growth.
Broad public support for land reform, as noted, existed well before the 1990s. However, the massacres served to increase sharply the per- ceived urgency of the land problem and, perhaps, to introduce it to a generation of Brazilians too young to remember earlier episodes of
ONDE’ITI:BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	81
agrarian conflict. A variety of the indicators already described would seem to support this view, including the dramatic increase in media cov- erageoftheissueafterthemassacresandthegreatsuccessof TheKing of Cattle.That the surge in coverage was sustained and appears to have generalized across much (if not all) of the major print news media sug- gests that editors were acting on what they perceived to be a demand for information on the subject from their readers. Publications like the Folha de Siio Paul0 and Veja at times seemed to be trying to temper public enthusiasm for land reform, but their critiques were usually rather carefully qualified, presumably out of deference to widespread public sympathy for the cause.
The massacres had this effect because their extreme violence and drama gave them tremendous news appeal. Their occurrence in the con- text of a struggle for land, furthermore, made it natural for them to be seen as symptomatic of a highly unequal landholding structure. Never- theless, the process was by no means altogether spontaneous. Progressive actors, including newspaper columnists, movement activists, religious leaders, and politicians, did much to underscore the gravity of these acts of violence and to frame them as symbols of the urgent need for land reform. These actors responded out of indignation, but also out of a desire to take advantage of the impact of the massacres to advance the cause of land reform. PT leaders probably also viewed the rise of the land reform issue as an opportunity to recover from the party’s 1994electoral defeat by attacking Cardoso’s claim to represent progressive change.
The broader political context helped to strengthen the reaction to the massacres. Cardoso’sappeal was tied not only to low inflation but to the promise of social reform and a general modernization of society. The massacres called attention not only to the seriousness of the land problem but to the lack of major new social initiatives. They pointed, in other words, to the expectations Cardoso’s election had created but failed to fulfill. At a deeper level, they contradicted an emerging con- ception of Brazil as a modern, urban, and democratic society-a	con- ception that the Cardoso government, with its enlightened, technocratic image, promised to bring to full fruition. The massacres were, as a result, deeply disturbing to sectors of the population, especially edu- cated urbanites, who embraced this optimistic vision.
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to reduce the impact of these events to a product of contextual circumstances. Eldorado, in particular, was highly unusual, both because it was so large and because, unlike so many otber instances of rural violence, it was caught on video, and its grisly product, a truck laden with corpses, became the subject of many powerful photographic images.
Society’sresponse to the massacres exerted pressure on Cardoso to speed up agrarian reform, because it posed the threat of undermining
82	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
his government’s popularity and electoral prospects. In the wake of Eldorado, for example, the president’s approval rating dropped by almost 20 percentage points (Veju 1997b). It is for this reason that the two main changes in control over land reform policy under Cardoso, the naming of Graziano as INCRA president in 1995 and the creation of a new land reform ministry in 1996, occurred. The causal connection between the impact of these events and the acceleration of land redis- tribution is widely accepted by analysts of the land question in Brazil (Teixeira 1999; Cadji 2000). High-level INCRA officials interviewed for this study, including a former president of the INCRA under Cardoso, also argued that the impact of the massacres on public opinion repre- sented a powerful impetus to intensify settlement efforts (Lins 2000).
Journalists often said that Cardoso’s response to Eldorado d o Cara- jiis was also motivated by a desire to limit the damage the incident might cause to Brazil’s international image, presumably a key to his outward- oriented economic policy. In support of this view, it was sometimes noted (not without some irony) that the tone of Cardoso’s public state- ments on Eldorado was initially rather dismissive-until	he found out that it was being reported internationally on CNN (De Freitas 1996). Although it is indeed quite plausible that Cardoso was worried about international opinion, domestic politics was probably the key factor influencing his reaction.
Unfortunately, from the authorities’ point of view, the clear evi- dence that the government was being forced to accelerate land distri- bution promoted an increase in land occupations. The sharp initial reac- tion of the media and civil society to each incident suggested that pressure for land reform was mounting rapidly, and the subsequent pledges by federal authorities to push reform more aggressively vali- dated this impression. The promise of greater land redistribution, when combined with the preference given by the INCRA to people already camped, sent a strong message: that those willing to occupy farmland would have a good chance of being rewarded with a plot of land instead of repression. It thus inspired activists to redouble their efforts to recruit landless families and made it easier for them to convince the landless that their efforts would be rewarded.
The MST, as the most organized and militant actor in the move- ment, was the first to react, in late 1995. The effect widened in 1996, particularly after Eldorado, as many other groups entered the move- ment or intensified their participation. These groups sought not only to capitalize on the 8tate’s anticipated largesse but to keep the MST from monopolizing the available land. If landowners’ complaints are to be believed, the reticence of some state governments to repress occupa- tions after Eldorado also contributed to the upsurge, reducing the risk of arrest or injury.
ONDElTI: BRAZIL’SLANDLESS MOVEMENT	83
MST documents and interview data support the link between the state’sactual or anticipated response to the massacres and rising protest. That the MST saw the impact of Corumbiara as an opportunity is reflected in the almost euphoric tone of the editorials in its newspaper in late 1995, one of which was quoted earlier. These clearly portrayed the period as one of political opening, which had to be exploited by intensifying pressure. When asked why occupations had grown in the mid-1990s, MST leaders followed the “party line,” stressing the impact of neoliberal reforms on popular welfare. When questioned directly about the effect of the massacres, they argued that these had contributed greatly to the movement’s growth by raising public consciousness about the land problem, but they did not elaborate on the exact causal con- nection (Mauro 2000).
Rural unionists were usually more willing to admit explicitly that the actual or anticipated changes in land reform policy had contributed to the growth of occupations. A rural union leader in southeastern Par& for example, explained that federal initiatives to speed up land reform in the region after Eldorado had directly provoked a sharp revival in land occupations (Da Costa 1999).
Just as the upsurge of land occupations was due partly to the polit- ical impact of the massacres, so their downswing, beginning in 2000, was related to the gradual fading of the effect these incidents pro- voked.22As the massacres receded into the past and media and public attention shifted to other issues, the government felt freer to implement policies opposed by proreform forces and to crack down on MST actions that it had once felt obliged to tolerate for fear of a political backlash. Cardoso’ssecond-term cuts in land reform spending and his offensive against the MST reflected this change. The slowdown in occu- pations responded to the perception that the government was growing increasingly resistant to grassroots pressure for land redistribution. Other factors also contributed to the harder line. The media’s growing emphasis on the MST’s tactical “radicalization”and the broad scope of its radical political goals helped the government to justify a tougher stance.23In addition, the acceleration of land reform and the publicity surrounding it arguably gave Cardoso greater political cover to confront both the MST and land occupations in general.24
THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS
State repression clearly played a major role in the acceleration of protest for land reform in Brazil in the mid-l990s, although it was by no means the only factor involved. The empirical account thus underscores the idea that repressive actions intended to quell protest activity can some- times provoke a backlash, giving rise to more protest rather than less.
84	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
However, the nature of the causal mechanism connecting the repressive actions of legal authorities to the intensification of protest differs from the ones identified by the existing literature on this question. This sug- gests a need to develop further our understanding of how repression can spur protest. In particular, the case of the Brazilian landless move- ment shows how instances of repression against a social movement may escalate protest by increasing support for the movement’s cause among politically influential third parties and forcing the state to adopt a more conciliatory policy.
In elucidating the causal links between repression and protest, this study follows the research program recently defined by McAdam et al. (2001).While this program has many facets, at its core is the idea that existing theories of “contentiouspolitics” have placed too much empha- sis on causal variables and have not devoted enough attention to the character of the mechanisms that link cause and effect. McAdam et al. propose a program of inquiry that focuses on identifying particular causal mechanisms and longer causal processes that recur across differ- ent types of contention and cultural contexts. Taken as a whole, this is an ambitious research agenda, which is beyond the modest theoretical pretensions of this article. However, this study follows McAdam et a1.k basic emphasis on “getting causal connections right” by identifying a particular causal link, which, although not in itself new to scholars of collective action, has not previously been seen as part of the causal process linking repression to greater protest action. In addition, this study offers some hypotheses about the conditions under which this causal link, rather than the others discussed in the literature, is likely to operate. These pertain to both the nature of the movement involved and the character of the state.
How well do the theories outlined in this article explain the causal connection between repression and protest in the case of the takeoff of the Brazilian landless movement?To be sure, the effects of repression predicted by the literature were not altogether absent. The massacres at Corumbiara and Eldorado d o CarajAs undoubtedly generated moral out- rage and anger among land reform activists. There is also some evi- dence that the Eldorado incident helped to strengthen the MST’s group identity, engendering a greater sense that the group was representing an oppressed social category. April 17, the date of the incident, for exam- ple, has been consecrated as a kind of internal holiday for the organi- zation, commemorated with demonstrations, ceremonies, and protest events. The massacres also outraged many people not directly involved in the movement, sullying the image of the Cardoso government and state authorities in RondGnia and Par&
These effects, however, were not the main reason the massacres contributed to intensifying protest for land reform. The nature of the
ONDETTI: BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	85
struggle for land in Brazil itself militates against this conclusion. Partici- pation in the movement is usually a long-term investment by individu- als and families seeking a better economic future. The core tactic, acumpur,often requires abandoning home and employment and living in a crude hut for months or years at a time. It is unlikely that tens of thousands of Brazilian families, many with several children in tow, would have undertaken such a venture to express their anger about the killings in RondBnia and Par& The accounts of activists also discourage such a conclusion. For example, movement leaders in southeastern Par5 said the initial reaction to the Eldorado killings among local landless people was fear and a desire to avoid conflict with the police. Only when it became clear that the federal government would intervene ener- getically to accelerate reform did land occupations begin to multiply.
The key causal link between repression and protest, rather, is more indirect, operating through its impact on what has been called the “structureof political opportunities”facing the movement. This concept, well established in the literature, is based on the idea that protest activ- ity rises and falls in response to the vulnerability or receptivity of gov- erning elites to pressure for change (Tilly 1978;McAdam 1982;Tarrow 1983, 1994; McAdam 1996). When people with a demand to make o n the state expect authorities to react to pressure with concessions, rather than repression or indifference, they become willing to invest heavily in protest, believing that it will pay dividends. When the opposite is true, protest tends to languish, because the expected costs are seen as out- weighing the probable benefits. Authorities’ disposition to respond to protest positively or negatively, in turn, is seen by political opportunity theorists as a function of a variety of political factors. Changes in the structure of political opportunities can be quite narrow, affecting a par- ticular group or movement; or very broad, in exceptional cases giving rise to revolutionarymobilization.
Political opportunity theory provides a more accurate depiction of the causal link between state repression and the expansion of the land- less movement in Brazil in the mid-1990s. At least for a time, the mas- sacres of 1995 and 1996 helped make Brazilians, along with foreign observers of the country, more acutely aware of the land problem in the countryside and the government’s failure to address it adequately. Rising concern about and interest in this issue pushed authorities to accelerate land redistribution, making it easier for landless families to obtain land by engaging in occupations and camps. In addition, at least in some states, the fear of triggering a new Eldorado seems to have made state governments more cautious about using their police forces to repress land occupations, thereby reducing, if only slightly,the risks involved in the struggle for land. With these changes in state behavior, the expected benefits of protesting for land rose and the prospective costs declined,
86	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
generating stronger incentives for potential land reform beneficiaries to pressure the state. Partly as a result, land occupations grew rapidly.
The case of the landless movement’s growth in the mid-1990s thus illustrates how repression can give rise to greater protest through its impact on the political opportunity structure facing a social movement. Under what circumstances is this particular causal mechanism, rather than the ones identified in extant theories, likely to operate? This is a difficult question to answer without identifying and reviewing a large number of episodes in which state repression provoked increased social protest activity, a task that is beyond the scope of this paper. However, based on the analysis of the landless movement here, four general con- ditions can be tentatively identified in which political opportunity is par- ticularly likely to be the link joining state repression to increased protest. The first two have to do with characteristics of the movement involved, the others with characteristics of the state.
The opportunity-driven connection is more likely to operate, first of all, when the movement involved seeks relatively limited reforms, rather than broader system change. One of the reasons the literature on the repression-protest nexus has ignored this causal link is that much of it focuses on cases in which a movement seeks a basic restructuring of the political system, such as revolution, secession, or decolonization. For example, some of the more frequently cited case studies examine the antiapartheid movement in South Africa (Olivier 19911, protest against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank (Khawaja 1993), or the Iranian revolution (Rasler 1996). In such cases, significant concessions to the movement may be extremely costly to authorities and are therefore less likely to occur simply from public disapproval of the overzealous use of repression. The political situation is simply too polarized to permit much flexibility.
The opportunity-driven link is also more likely to be significant when the movement does not itself employ violent tactics. The use of violence may well be seen as legitimate by the movement itself and the group whose interests it purports to represent, but, other things being equal, movements that employ violent forms of struggle are less likely to be viewed sympathetically by outside observers. The adage “live by the sword, die by the sword” will often be seen as a sufficient defense of the use of harsh official repression in such cases. Consequently, repression employed against overtly violent groups will tend not to create the kind of public backlash and political opening seen following the massacres at Corumbiara and Eldorado.
The third condition involves political systems in which responsibil- ity for concessions and repression lie in separate, relatively autonomous spheres of government. These systems would seem to favor the kind of opportunity-driven process outlined in this study. In this setting, it is
ONDETI?: BRAZIL’S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	87
more likely that acts of extreme repression against a movement will occur even though the state as a whole is not vehemently opposed to the movement’s objectives, and may thus be disposed to cede some ground under pressure. Of course, the need to compensate for an episode of politically damaging repression may result from a simple mis- calculation by a centralized authority. However, it would seem to be more likely to arise where responsibility for accommodation and repres- sion is institutionally separate, so that the two may more easily work at cross-purposes. This is the situation in Brazil with regard to conflicts over land because land reform policy is dominated by the federal gov- ernment, while responsibility for maintaining public order lies with the states. However, a separation between accommodative and repressive functions need not be based on federalism. At least hypothetically, it could also be rooted in a horizontal distribution of power, as, for exam- ple, in a parliamentary system with strong ministers.
The fourth condition in which the political opportunity link is more likely to arise is that of more democratic political systems. In authori- tarian regimes, the institutions and mechanisms needed to inform the public of a repressive event and to transmit the public’s disapproval to authorities are, by definition, less well developed. Freedom of the press, of speech, and of assembly are more limited, and the threat of removal from office through routine electoral processes may be absent. Arguably, the decentralization of responsibilities described above is also less likely to be present under authoritarianism.The predominant focus of most studies of the repression-protest nexus on nondemocratic poli- ties is therefore another factor that may help explain why this panicu- lar causal mechanism has not been highlighted in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS
Inthe mid-l990s, agrarian reform made a surprisingly abrupt and force- ful return to the Brazilian political stage, as collective action for land, public concern about the issue, and official land reform policies all underwent a substantial intensification. This study has focused on explaining the first of these changes while also trying to understand the relationship between it and the other two.It has also attempted to use this empirical case to enrich the theoretical debate on the relationship between state repression and protest.
The account of the intensified protest for land reform is broad-based. It has argued that two shifts that occurred in Brazil during the early and mid-l990s, the neoliberal restructuring of agriculture and the move toward less conservative national governments, provided a moderately favorable social and political context for the landless movement’s expan- sion. The explosive growth of collective action for land, however, did not
88	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
arise spontaneously from this context. Instead, it was stimulated by the potent political impact of the two major massacres of landless protesters that occurred during this period. Because they provoked outrage and raised concerns about the land issue both domestically and abroad, the massacres forced authorities to accelerate land redistribution and to exer- cise greater care in the repression of land occupiers. These shifts created a more favorable political context for pressure for land reform and, as a consequence, helped set off a major increase in land occupations.
The empirical analysis adds weight to the idea that state repression can backfire, giving rise to even greater pressure for change. However, this is not simply a case to confirm existing theory. It also illustrates a causal mechanism that has been absent from previous analyses. Repression can provoke greater movement activity not only by galvanizing actual and potential movement members into action but by transforming the broader political context in which the movement functions. Specifically, instances of excessive or ill-conceived repression can end up stimulating greater support for the movement from other sectors of society and, as a conse- quence, forcing state authorities to be more receptive to the movement’s demands. This change, in turn, may create incentives for activists to increase their pressure on the state. This study tentatively points to some conditions in which this causal process may be particularly likely to arise, but confirming them is clearly a question for further research.
I would like to thank the Social Science Research Council, the Fulbright- Hays program of the U.S. Department of Education, and the Institute for the Study of World Politics for supportingmy two-and-a-halfyears of field research in Brazil. I also thank Evelyne Huber, Indira Palacios, Anthony Pereira, Kurt Weyland, and three anonymousreviewers for their insightful comments. I ,would also like to express my deep gratitude to the countless people who aided my research efforts in Brazil.
1. According to the 1995-96 agricultural census, properties of more than one thousand hectares make up 1 percent of the total but cover 45 percent of thetotalagriculturalland(Malin2002,180).Thegovernmentof FernandoHen- rique Cardoso claimed to have brought about a significant reduction in land inequality between 1995 and 2002, but this claim is disputed (Sparovek 2003).
2. The name was derived from an earlier movement organization in the state of Rio Grande do Sul called the Movimento dos Agricultores Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Farmers, o r MASTER), which arose in the early 1960s and was extinguished by the military regime.
3. The president was selected in early 1985 by a special electoral college. Former president of the progovernment party during the dictatorship, Sarney had been vice president on the ticket headed by Tancredo Neves, a leader of the moderate opposition party. Ironically, Neves died before he could take office,and Sarney became the first postdictatorshippresident.
ONDE’ITI:BRAZIL‘S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	89
4. Constitutionally, only the federal government can expropriate rural land, and this is mainly limited to large properties not meeting minimum stan- dards of agricultural productivity. The 1988 Constitution failed to define a legal framework to regulate the expropriation process, leaving this task to Congress.
5. The data on settlements are from the federal government’s National Institute for Colonization and Reform, or INCRA. Their accuracy has been called into question, especially in recent years. See Teixeira 2002; Sparovek 2003.
6. The term invasion is used by opponents of the movement and much of the press. Landless movement activists and sympathizers prefer occupation because it has less connotation of illegitimacy or illegality.
7. The latter have become more numerous in recent years, as the MST has focused its recruiting in towns and smaller cities. This shift is rooted in a number of factors, especially the growing urbanizatiop of the population, the MST’s increasing presence in agricultural regions dominated by wage labor (since wageworkers often live in urban areas), and the organizational advantages of conducting recruitment in towns and cities, where workers are more demo- graphically concentrated and landowner vigilance is limited or nonexistent.
8. In addition to large private properties suspected to be unproductive, the movement also targets properties that belong to the state or federal government. In some cases, these are illegitimately occupied by private individuals or firms.
9. These data were compiled using a CD-ROM archive of the newspaper. Itwassearchedusingtheterms agrarianreform,MST, landless,andINCRA.The results indicate the total number of items containing at least one of these terms, including articles, editorials, letters to the editor, and photo captions.
10. The Pontal do Paranapanema is known for having many illegitimate large landholdings, fruit of a land-grabbing process dating back to the nine- teenth century (Fernandes 2000). This characteristic made it particularly vulner- able to land reform.
11. In the Folha de Sa‘o Paulo, for example, columnists Carlos Heitor Cony, Marcel0Beraba,andJaniodeFreitasallwroteinfavoroflandreform. Vejacon- tained fewer unambiguous endorsements of land reform, but for an exception, see the feature interview with renowned intellectual Celso Furtado ( V@a1997a).
12. For example, a study by the polling firm Vox Populi, conducted in May 1996 in eight major state capitals, showed that 59 percent of respondents approved of the MST, compared to only 24 percent who disapproved (lornal Sem Terra 19%).
13. The data on total occupations reported in figure 2 can be compared to the data on MST occupations reported in Petras 1998.
14 In contrast, agricultural employers, and particularly large employers, increased their incomes during this period. However, these changes were not statistically significant.
15. These data come from the federal government’s annual household survey, known as PNAD. Unfortunately, PNAD does not include the North region, which consists mainly of the Amazon basin. In terms of evaluating national trends in agricultural labor, this is not very problematic, since this region contains only a small percentage of the total workforce. The government’s agri- cultural census data cannot safely be used to measure the evolution of the agri- cultural labor force in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The census was not con-
90	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
ducted in 1990, and in 1995-96 it was done during a different time of year, making a comparison with earlier censuses risky (Helfand and Brunstein, n.d.1.
16. Therapidgrowthofruralnonfarmemploymentinsomeregionsinthe 1990s is often seen in relatively benign terms because, on average, these jobs yield higher incomes than agriculture (Graziano da Silva 1999). However, this trend is at least partly symptomatic of declining opportunities for lower-class people to make ends meet in agriculture.
17. A report in Veja (19991, for example, refers to polling data that show a decline in public approval of the MST from close to 80 percent in 1996 to 58 percent in 1998 and 28 percent in August 1999.
18. A comparison of the 1995-96 and 2000 censuses suggests that the rural population shrank by 6.3 percent during this period (Teixeira 2001, 2).
19. Of course, the lack of agricultural labor force data for the North com- promises this analysis somewhat.
20. With regard to 1995-96, the regional breakdown of the percentage change in families occupying can be seen in table 1. With regard to 1992-97, the percentages are: Center-West 542 percent, Northeast 424 percent, Southeast 262 percent, South 137 percent, and North 96 percent (CPT annual reports).
21. A statistical analysis using smaller geographical units (such as the munic@io)might help shed additional light on this question.
22. Occupations have intensified since the PTs Lula took over the presi- dency. Expectations of increased land redistribution, combined with the gov- ernment’s nonenforcement of Cardoso’s antioccupation decree, are behind the change (Mauro 2003).
23. Beginning in 1998, frequent references appeared in the media to the MST’s “radicalization.”Significanttactical shifts did occur, especially involvement in looting and increased use of occupations of federal office buildings. These responded to the leadership’s frustration with what it perceived as the inade- quacies of Cardoso’s land reform program. However, the increasingly negative coverage also resulted from the major media’s dismay that the increased distri- bution of land seemed only to fuel the movement’s growth.
24. This argument is tempered because opinion polls suggested that most people did not believe the government’s claim that it was engaged in a major restructuring of the landholding system. A poll taken by the firm Datafolha in early May 2000 in SPo Paulo, for example, showed that only 12 percent of respondents viewed the government’s land reform program as “goodor excel- lent”; 52 percent felt that it was “bad or terrible” (Folha de Sao Paul0 2000).
REFERENCES
Beraba, Marcelo. 1995.A batalha de Corumbiara. Folha deSa‘oPaulo,August 11: sec. 1, p. 2.
Branford, Sue, and Jan Rocha. 2002. Cutting the Wire: 7be Story of the Landless M o m e n t in Brazil. London: Latin America Bureau.
Brenneisen, Eliane Cardoso. 2001. Rela@ies de poder, dominaGa‘o e resistgncia: o MST e 0s assentamentos rurais. Cascavel: Edunioeste.
-. -.
1, p. 4. 1996~S.emterra. Specialsection.June 30. 1996d. Ruralistas ameacam parar reformas. May 5: sec. 1, p. 11.
. 2000. Paulistano ap6ia reforma agriria, mas rejeita invasio. May 13: sec.
ONDE'ITI: BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	91
Cadji,Anne-Laure. 2000. Brazil's Landless Find Their Voice. NACLA Report on the Amt?ricas33, 5: 30-35.
Campanhola, Clayton, and Jose Graziano Da Silva, eds. 2000. 0 nom rural brasileim: uma analise nacional e regional.Jaguariana: Embrapa.
Carneiro, Francis0 Galrio. 2000. Brazil: An Assessment of Rural Labor Markets in the 1990s. Unpublished mss. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Carvalho, Cicero Pericles de Oliveria. 2000. Anulise da reestructuraGa'oprodu- diva da agroindzistrja sucro-alcooleira alagoana. Macei6: Edufal.
Centro de Estudos de Opiniio Pdblica (CESOP). 1995. Reforma agr6ria no Brasil: 1962-1995. Opinia'o pliblica 4, 1: 5-17.
Coelho, Carlos Nayro. 2001. 70 anos de politica agricola no Brasil (1931-2001). Revtsta Politica Agn'cola 10, 3 (July-September): 3-58.
Commissio Pastoral da Terra (CPT). 1990. Conflitos no cam-Brasil.	Annual publication. Goiinia: CPT.
-.	1991. Conflitos no c a m p B r a s i 1 . Goiinia: CPT. [Land occupation data also from these annual reports 1991-2003.1
Da Costa, Francisco de Assis Soledade. 1999. Southeast Regional Coordinator, Rural Workers' Union Federation of the State of Par6 (FETAGRI). Author interview. Marabi, Pad, October 27.
De Freitas,Janio. 1996.A omissio confessada. Folha deSa'o Paulo, April 21: sec. 1, p. 7.
Del Grossi, Mauro Eduardo, and Jose Graziano Da Silva. 2000. Evolu~ioda renda das familias agricolas e rurais: Brasil, 1992-1997. In Campanhola and Graziano da Silva 2000. 79-100.
Dias, Guilherme Leite da Silva, and Cicely Moitinho Amaral. 2000. Mudancas estruturais na agricultura brasileira, 198Cb1998. In Brasil: uma decada em transiGao, ed. Renato Bauman. Rio de Janeiro: Campus. 223-53.
Doimo,AnaMaria.1995.A vezeamzdopopular:movimentossociaisepartic- @a@opolitica no Brasilpds- 70. Rio d e Janeiro: Relume-DumarB.
Fernandes, Bemardo Mancano. 1998. G&ese e desenmlvimento do MST. Sio Paulo: MST.
-.	2000. A fomza@o do MST no Brasil. Petrcipolis: Vozes. Folha de Sdo Paulo. 1996a. 0 outro lado da moeda. August 21: sec. 1, p. 1. . 1996b. TrCs poderes v i o tentar agilizar a reforma agrPria. August 21: sec.
1, p. 4. Francisco, Ronald A., and Mark Irving Lichbach. 2001. Choice or Chance? Micro-
rationality and Macrorandomness in Polish Conflict, 1980-1995. Paper pre- pared for presentation at the American Political Science Association annual meeting, San Francisco, August 30-September 2.
Goldstone, Jack A., and Charles Tilly. 2001, Threat (and Opportunity): Popular Action and State Response in the Dynamics of Contentious Action. In Silence and Voice in the Study of ContentiousPolitics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 179-94.
Graziano da Silva,Jose. 1%.	0 now rural brm'him.2nd ed. Campinas: Unicamp.
92	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
Graziano da Silva,Jose, and Mauro Eduardo Del Grossi. 2001. Rural Non-Farm Employment and Incomes in Brazil: Patterns and Evolution. World Lkvel- opment 29, 3: 443-53.
Gupta, Dipak K., Harinder Singh, and Tom Sprague. 1993. Government Coer- cion of Dissidents: Deterrence o r Provocation? Journal of Conjlict Resolu- tion 37, 2: 301-39.
Gurr, Ted. 1970. WhyMen Rebel. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Hammond, John L. 1999. Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmwork-
ers’ Movement. Bulletin of Latin American Research 18, 4: 469-89. Helfand, Steven, and Luis F. Brunstein. n.d. The Changing Structure of the Brazilian Agricultural Sector and the Limitations of the 1995/96 Agricultural
Census. Paper written as part of NEMESIS, a project on spatial economics
at the Instituto de Pesquisa EconBmica Aplicada (IPEA), Rio de Janeiro. Instituto Brasileiro de OpiniBo Pfiblica e Estatistica (IBOPE). 1998. Pesquisa de opiniPo pdblica sobre a reforma agriria. Summary of national poll con-
ducted March 5-8. Rio d e Janeiro: IBOPE. Instituto de ColonizagBo e Reforma Agraria (INCRA). 2002. Balun60 global de - gestcio: relatciriofinal. Brasilia: INCRA.
J-ornal Sem T m a (SPo Paulo). 1994. Uma eleiGBo histbrica. July: 2. - . 1995a. Vamos tirar a reforma agraria d o papel. October: 2. - . 1995b. A reforma agriria avanga. November: 2.
.1996.MST tem mais credibilidade do que politicos e policiais.July.
, 1997. MST e homenageado d o ano d o Instituto de Arquitetos. January. Jornal do DIM (Brasilia). 1995.Jose Serra diz nPo a reforma agrara de FHC. Sep-
temberactober: 1. Keck, Margaret E. 1992. The Workers’Pan‘yand Democratization in Brazil. New
Haven: Yale University Press. Khawaja, Marwan. 1993. Repression and Popular Collective Action: Evidence
from the West Bank. Sociological Forum 8, 1: 47-71. Laurenti, Antonio Carlos, and Mauro Eduardo Del Grossi. 2000. A evoluggo das
pessoas ocupadas nas atividades agricolas e nPo-agricolas nas areas rurais
do Brasil. In Campanhola and Graziano da Silva 2000. 15-66. Lichbach, Mark Irving. 1987. Deterrence or Escalation: The Puzzle of Aggregate Studies of Repression and Dissent. Journal of Conjlict Resolution 31, 2
(June): 266-97. Lichbach, Mark Irving, and Ted Gurr. 1981. The Conflict Process: A Formal
Model. Journal of Conjlict Resolution 25 (March): 3-29. Lins, Marcos. 2000. Former president, INCRA. Author interview. Brasilia, April 28. Malin, Mauro. 2002. Agricultura e reforma agraria. In A era FHC: um balanGo,
ed. Bolivar Lamounier and Rubens Figueiredo. SBo Paulo: Cultura. 179-214. M-auro, Gilmar. 2000. Member, MST National Directorate. Author interview. SPo
Paulo, May 11.
. 2003. Author interview. Cajamar, SBo Paulo, August 13. McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the DeYelopment of Black Insur-
gency, 1930-1970.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. -.	1996. Conceptual Origins, Current Problems, Future Directions. In Com- parative Perspectives on Social Movements, ed. McAdam, John McCarthy,
and Mayer Zald. New York: Cambridge University Press. 23-40,
ONDE3"I: BRAZIL'S LANDLESS MOVEMENT	93
- .2003. Beyond Structural Analysis:Toward a More Dynamic Understanding of Social Movements. In Social Movements and Networks: Relational Approaches to CollectiveAction, ed. Mario Diani and McAdam. New York: Oxford University Press. 281-98.
McAdam, Doug, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly. 2001. Ihe Dynamics of Con- tention. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Medeiros, Leonilde. 1989. Hist6ria dos movimentos sociais no campo. Rio d e Janeiro: Fase.
Medeiros, Leonilde, Maria Valeria Barbosa, Mariana Pantoja Franco, Neide Esterci, and Sergio Leite. 1994. Assentamentos rurais: uma d i i o multidis- cfplinar. Slo Paulo: Editora da UNESP.
Moises, Jose Alvaro. 1993. Elections, Political Parties and Political Culture in Brazil: Changes and Continuities. Journal of Latin American Studies 25, 3: 575-611.
Navarro, Zander, ed. 1996. Politica, protest0 e cidadania no campo. Port0 Alegre: Editora da UniversidadeAJfrgs.
Neri, Marcelo, Jose Mircio Camargo, and Mauricio Cortez Reis. 2000. Mercado de trabalho nos anos 90fatos estilizados e inte?preta@es. Rio de Janeiro: Ipea.
Olivier, Johan L. 1991. State Repression and Collective Action in South Africa, 1970-1984. South African Journal of Sociology 22: 109-17.
Ondetti, Gabriel A. 2002. Opportunities, Ideas, and Actions: The Brazilian Land- less Movement, 1979-2001. Ph.D diss., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Opp, Karl-Dieter, and Wolfgang Roehl. 1990. Repression, Micromobilization and Political Protest. Social Forces 69, 2: 521-47.
-Pereira, Anthony. 1997. Ihe End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast Brazil, 1961-1988.Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. . 2003. Brazil's Agrarian Reform: Democratic Innovation or Oligarchic Exclusion Redux? Latin American Politics and Society 45, 2: 41-65. Petras,James. 1998.The Political and Social Bases of Regional Variation in Land Occupations in Brazil. Journal of Peasant Studies 25 (July): 124-33.
Rasler, Karen. 1996. Concessions, Repression, and Political Protest in the Iranian Revolution. American Sociological Review 61 (February): 132-52.
Sader, Eder. 1988. Quando noms personagens entraram em cena. Slo Paulo: Paz e Terra.
Sparovek, Gerd. 2003. A qualidade dos assentamentos ah reforma agraria brasileira.Slo Paulo: Piginas & Letras.
Stedile, Jolo Pedro. 2000. Member, MST National Directorate. Author interview. Slo Paulo, December 15.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1983. Social Protest and Policy Response During Cycles of - Protest. Western Societies Paper no. 15. Ithaca: Center for International
Studies, Cornell University.
. 1994. Power In Movement: Social Movements, CollectiveAction and Poli-
tics. New York: Cambridge University Press. Teixeira, Gerson. 1999. Primeiro governo FHC: dossi& reforma agriria e agri-
cultura. Partido dos Trabalhadores. Lideranca da bancada na Cdmara Fed- eral. Unpublished mss.
94	LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY	48: 2
- . 2001. 0 Oxodo rural no Brasil durante o period0 FHC. assessoria tCcnica da liderangd da bancada do PT na CPmara dos Deputados. Unpublished mss.
-,	2002. Por u,m projeto democritico, popular e soberano para o agririo brasileiro. Partido dos Trabalhadores. Lideranga da bancada na CBmara Federal-Nbcleo Agririo. Secretaria Agr5ria Nacional. Unpublished m s .
Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Englewood Cliffs: Pren- - tice-Hall.
Veja (Siio Paulo). 1996. A sombra violento do MST. August 28.
. 1997a. Mundo d e Amanhii. January 8. 1997b. A voz ronca da ordem. May 28. 1998. Caso d e policia. April 8. 1999. Marchando para tris. October 20.
-. -. -. Wagner, Carlos. 1988. A saga doJoco Sem Terra. Petropolis: Vozes. Wolford, Wendy. 2004. Of Land and Labor: Agrarian Reform on the Sugarcane
Plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 32, 2: 147-70. Wright, Angus, and Wendy Wolford. 2003. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless
Movement and the Strugglefor a New Brazil. San Francisco: Food First. Xavier, Carlos. 1999. President, Agricultural Federation of the State of Pari
(FAEPA). Author interview. BelCm, Pari, November 7.
