2008
Geograpny
Journal of Agrarian Change
‘Late Mobilization’: Transnational Peasant Networks and Grassroots Organizing in Brazil and South Africa
BRENDA BALETTI, TAMARA M. JOHNSON AND WENDY WOLFORD

In this paper, we analyze the political dynamics of the contemporary ‘trans- national peasant network’ through a comparison of two movements: the Brazilian Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) and the South African Landless People’s Movement (LPM). We argue that transnational visions of ‘peasants’ often obscure relations between or within rural movements. One tangible benefit of the transnational peasant network is the exchange of ideas, experiences and information, but this exchange does not happen in a vacuum, rather it happens in the historically-situated, power-laden context of an uneven world system. Organized in 1984, MST activists from Brazil helped to train, educate and inspire South African activists after the LPM formed in 2001, but key elements of the MST’s success were inappropriate or unworkable in the South African context. Ultimately, the transfer of movement knowledge from the MST to the LPM may have worked against the long-term success of the latter.
Keywords: transnational networks, social movements, movement of landless workers, movement of landless peoples
INTRODUCTION
One of the most surprising developments of late twentieth-century globalization has been the increasing presence and visibility of landless peasant movements around the world. Even as small farming decreases in importance as a global economic sector and as people increasingly move out of the rural areas and into urban centres, landless workers and small farmers have come together to demand access to land and new economic development policies that prioritize sustainable local communities and food sovereignty. From Brazil to Mexico to South Africa and the Philippines, grassroots social movements and non-governmental organizations
Brenda Baletti, Tamara M. Johnson and Wendy Wolford, Department of Geography at the Univer- sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Saunders Hall CB 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 2759, USA. e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu. The authors would like to thank five anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments as well as Jun Borras for his review and encouragement. Any errors in the paper are the responsibility of the authors.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
concerned with this broad range of issues have articulated their efforts through transnational meetings and organizations, such that there is now an easily identifiable ‘Transnational Peasant Network’ (hereafter the TPN) organizing the global struggle for rural peoples and their ‘right to have rights’ (Desmarais 2007; Edelman 1998).
This is a historic moment for transnational activism more broadly: global-scale movement networks have generated considerable excitement in scholarly and political arenas because of their potential for circumventing local or national-level politics in the name of universalistic goods such as human rights, access to land, environmental conservation, women’s rights, etc. Such universals are deployed in part to counter the universal(izing) logics of orthodox globalization. Because we are only beginning to see and understand these networks, much of the early work on them focused on the empowering ability of place-based movements to ‘scale up’ (Smith 1993), largely taking the ‘transnational’ potential of social move- ments for granted. It is only recently that the diverse relationships and localized contexts in which these transnational networks are situated are being analyzed (see Edelman 2005a, 2005b; Featherstone 2003; Routledge et al. 2007). This is an important direction because transnational social networks are attempts to create something new – as David Featherstone says, they are ‘generative’ of a new form of politics – at the same time as they are a compilation of historical relationships and characteristics (Featherstone 2003). Although this may appear to be an obvious point, we think that it has considerable implications for the study of the TPN.
In this paper, we analyze the political dynamics of the contemporary TPN through a comparison of two movements: the Brazilian Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST) and the South African Landless People’s Movement (LPM). Organized in 1984, the MST has the largest domestic following of any social movement in the transnational network and this has placed it at the forefront of the broader international struggle. For a brief period following its formation in 2001, the LPM also garnered considerable international attention for its potential to mobilize grassroots interests for agrarian reform in South Africa. We argue that both the localized and transnational contexts are important for an analysis of the two movements – neither the MST nor the LPM can be properly understood outside of the transnational context (specifically, the context of the TPN), and the way in which both movements have engaged with transnationalism can only be properly understood within the context of localized political, social and economic conditions in Brazil and South Africa respectively – but we go a step further to develop a theory of ‘late mobilization’ (after Alexander Gerschenkron’s 1952 arguments about ‘late development’). Our theory of late mobilization is an attempt to bring geography and history together in our study of transnational movements. Place and scale matter, but so does timing: within an inter-connected world system, what one country/region/group does at one time affects all of those that follow, often in very deliberate ways (also see McMichael 1990).
Within a transnational network, one of the most tangible benefits is the exchange of ideas, experiences and information (Keck and Sikkink 1998), but this exchange does not happen in a vacuum, rather it happens in the historically-situated,
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	291
292	Brenda Baletti et al.
power-laden context of an uneven world system. In our comparison of the MST and the LPM, therefore, we argue that the latter is the ‘late mobilizer’, and as such it has experienced both advantages and disadvantages of engaging with the TPN. Organized in 1984, MST activists from Brazil helped to train, educate and inspire South African activists after the LPM formed in 2001, but key elements of the MST’s success were inappropriate or unworkable in the South African context. On the one hand, the MST’s experiences and advice helped the LPM to develop strategies and gain visibility; on the other hand, the LPM had difficulty translating its spectacular international success into an organic grassroots cam- paign. Ultimately, the transfer of movement knowledge from the MST to the LPM may have worked against the long-term success of the latter.
We argue that the MST owed its success in Brazil to three main elements: first, the MST developed through the leadership of young sons and daughters of small farmers – ‘organic’ leaders who maintained a strong ideological coherence as they struggled for a collective peasant future; second, the movement has persisted in using direct-action land occupations as the primary strategy for pressuring the government to expropriate land – these occupations provide the movement with a coherent public face as well as an opportunity for movement members to build solidarity; third, since its inception, the movement has insisted on maintaining its autonomy from the Brazilian state, ensuring that the leader- ship was not co-opted by the ‘feckless’ politics of Brazil’s electoral system (Mainwaring 1995). The MST then successfully translated its national success into a new peasant internationalism. The movement broadened its message and widened its support base throughout the 1990s.
As the MST became an important transnational actor, movement activists travelled to places like South Africa to support and advise rural activists there. Unfortunately, the MST’s main strategy for mobilization – the land occupation – backfired in the South African context. The nearby example of racial tension in Zimbabwe made occupying land politically explosive in South Africa. Occu- pations were also difficult for the LPM to organize because the movement was unable to draw on the MST’s other two elements of success: a leadership devel- oped through grassroots experience and autonomy from civil society organiza- tions and the state.
These difficulties of translation are not a necessary effect of late mobilization, of course. And they are certainly not responsible for the success or failure of land reform in the two countries. Our argument specifically concerns social mobilization, and here we argue that transnational organizing cannot be seen as an unqualified good. Instead, researchers and movement activists need to try and understand under what conditions transnationalism offers advantages or disadvantages. Just as early development practitioners did not always examine the specificities of the context in which development was to take place (Ferguson 1994), we argue that the rush to embrace transnational organizing may lead to the neglect of geographical and historical specificities.
In the rest of the paper, we describe the political and economic context of land distribution in Brazil and draw upon interviews conducted with MST activists
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
in order to outline the three factors that contributed most to the movement’s success. After outlining the MST’s transformation and importance, we then describe the LPM from its origins and location within a bitter debate over land restitution and reform in the wake of the 1994 end to apartheid in South Africa. We analyze two interviews with critical movement leaders in order to develop and situate our analysis.
FROM SQUATTERS TO SEM TERRA: THE RISE OF THE MST IN THE 1990s
Brazil has one of the most unequal distributions of land ownership in the world. This inequality is a legacy of Portuguese colonization and plantation society, which introduced and embedded racialized social hierarchies into land ownership and labour relations (Schwartz 1985). Sugarcane production provided the economic engine of growth in the early colonial years, and land tenure patterns reflected the Portuguese crown’s preference for large landholdings. Alongside the planta- tions, however, a small-holding peasantry was allowed to develop. In the early 1800s, small-holders fleeing the ravages of population growth and agricultural depression made their way to Brazil, cultivating and settling the country’s south- ern frontiers. Although plantation owners tried to keep the new immigrants from acquiring their own land so that they would have labour for their crops (Viotti da Costa 2000), a peasant class developed in the south of Brazil as well as along the new settlement frontiers (in the north and centre-west). As late as the 1950s, the Brazilian population was predominantly rural (75 per cent), although 85 per cent of that population lived and worked on only 10 per cent of the land.
This inequality in land ownership generated ongoing rural discontent that erupted in the 1960s when popular mobilization for access to land spread throughout Brazil and Latin America. At this time, peasants and rural workers grew increas- ingly radical, organized by the rural trade unions, various factions of Brazilian Communist groups, and the Catholic Church (Forman 1975; Maybury-Lewis 1994; Pereira 1997; Santos and Costa 1998). Many governments in Latin America began to implement agrarian reforms at this time (de Janvry 1981; de Janvry et al. 2001; Grindle 1986), but in Brazil, timid attempts at reform threatened the powerful landed elite, and in 1964, a military coup installed an authoritarian dictatorship that would hold power for 21 years (Hall 1990; Reis 1990). Once in power, the military government developed a two-pronged strategy to address rural unrest: on the one hand, the rural poor (or, peasant agitators) were re-located to new frontiers of colonization, such as the Amazon rainforest region, and on the other hand, large-scale farms were targeted for state-led modernization in an effort to increase efficiency and reduce Brazil’s reliance on small farmers.
By the late 1970s, the authoritarian state began to weaken. As the military gradually withdrew from power, landless peasants and rural workers began to form squatter settlements throughout the country, concentrated in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paraná (Fernandes 1999). With the restoration of democracy in Brazil in 1985, widespread demands for access
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	293
294	Brenda Baletti et al.
to land returned with renewed force, becoming part of the ‘national political culture’ largely because of the formation of new social movements such as the MST (Gohn 1997; Novaes 1998). Activists with the MST mobilized rural workers to occupy unproductive plantations, using Article 186 of the Brazilian Constitution to argue for the right to ‘unproductive’ property that was not being used in a way that benefited the ‘social good’ (see Branford and Rocha 2002; Fernandes 1999; Wright and Wolford 2003). Over time, the MST developed a sophisticated ‘repertoire of contention’ (Tilly 1978) that included the symbolic appropriation of spaces such as landed property, government buildings and public thoroughfares.
In the late 1990s, the political will for agrarian reform in Brazil increased because of national and international outcry over two violent massacres. In 1995, ten landless squatters were killed in Corumbiara, Rondônia, and just one year later, 19 landless squatters were killed as they marched to the capital city of the state of Pará along the state highway. These two incidents – the second one captured on video-tape – were partly responsible for the increased visibility of rural poverty, violence and the MST (Ondetti 2001; Pereira 2003). In 1997, president Cardoso settled 80,000 families, almost twice as many as were settled in his first year in office (Cardoso 1997), and from 1994 to 1998 the annual budget for agrarian reform was more than quintupled (Seligmann 1998). Luis Inacio ‘Lula’ da Silva, who won executive office in 2002, promised to continue agrarian reform efforts, although the experience under this administration has been mixed (Deere and Medeiros 2007).
During the mid-1990s, as the MST gained national visibility, the movement also gained international visibility. Partly as a result of the international outcry over the massacres, the MST’s organizational efforts and influence skyrocketed. Over the course of the 1990s, the MST went from being considered a small, marginalized movement of ‘vagabonds’ and squatters to one of the ‘most powerful and well-organized social movement[s] in Brazil’s history’ (Petras 1997, 18). Today the movement has approximately two million members (although these numbers are contested, and some estimates are significantly lower) who are settled in government-funded land reform settlements or living in temporary ‘encampments’ awaiting final resolution of their claim to land. Over 17,000 people attended the MST’s Fifth National Congress in 2007.
In internationalizing its struggle for land, the MST sees itself as representing all of those who have been marginalized by the global project of modern industrial capitalism. And through an extraordinary expansion of its base, the movement has become a significant actor in the social movement world system, engaging as part of the anti-neoliberal, anti-globalization movement. It has also been one of the most influential, active groups organizing Vía Campesina (Peasant Way), the international peasant umbrella movement.
THE METHODS TO THE RISE: LEADERSHIP, OCCUPATIONS AND AUTONOMY
There were many reasons for the MST’s success in Brazil and internationally, but three stand out. First the MST developed very strong circuits of leadership
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘professionalization’, where new leaders move around the country, studying at MST formational centres and building new ties with local activists and move- ment members; second, the MST has continued to emphasize land occupations as its primary strategy, these occupations serve as sources of new leadership, movement solidarity and political presence; and third, the MST has insisted on maintaining its autonomy from both the state and established elements, such as the Catholic Church or non-governmental organizations, in ways that allowed it to develop apart from the personalistic and unreliable politics of official power.
Strategies for Success #1: Leadership
Many academics and observers have attributed the MST’s rapid rise to its dedi- cated leadership (Petras 1997; Wright and Wolford 2003). Most MST leaders are recruited out of left-leaning institutions – such as organized religion, rural trade unions or the Worker’s Party – or out of the land occupations themselves. Many of the earliest leaders were the sons and daughters of small farmers who were introduced to the movement through the Catholic and Lutheran Churches (Houtzager and Kurtz 2000).
Once the movement began organizing occupations, young men and women who participated learned of the movement’s goals and ideology. They were some of the most committed members, and they were also – perhaps ironically – the ones least likely to win access to land when the government expropriated a property (Rosa 2007). The government was legally bound to prioritize families over single adults or youth, and so young men and women without partners or children were passed from occupation to occupation, radicalizing their political views as they went. Once recruited, MST leaders were expected to travel anywhere, anytime for the good of the movement and the struggle. This political mobility helped the movement to expand its membership from the south to the rest of the country by the mid-1990s.
As the MST grew, development of such young leaders remained a movement priority. This can be seen in the pages of the MST’s own newspaper, published every month since the late 1980s. A monthly column in the Jornal Sem Terra (Landless Newspaper) highlights the grassroots organizing of its homegrown activists (militantes) in an interview with a different one each month from across the country. All of the activists tell similar stories of their initial contact with the movement through participation in occupations or demonstrations, falling in love with the movement, rising to leadership through formal training by the movement and then working as organizers. It is through the work of these leaders that direct action remains a primary movement strategy because, although the movement is strategically scaling up, these leaders continue to work locally in the struggle for land, mobilizing people for occupations, organizing in the set- tlements, and recruiting and training new leaders who then move to new places to carry out these same activities.
In June of 2007, we interviewed Julia (not her real name), an MST leader in the state of Paraíba who was an excellent example of the MST’s dedicated leadership.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	295
296	Brenda Baletti et al.
We interviewed Julia in her office in João Pessoa, the capital of the state. The city sits in the humid tropical coast, surrounded by sugarcane and, increasingly, settlements. Julia was clearly exhausted. She had been up since 4:00 am arranging regional affairs for the transnational social movement, Vía Campesina. She had recently been appointed the MST representative for Vía Campesina in the state, and because it was just getting started there was a lot of work. Julia was also coordinating a visiting charitable group from Italy: nine young Italian men and women who had donated money to the MST had come to Paraíba to see the work their money had done. Reluctantly, Julia sat down for the interview, shak- ing out a cigarette and crossing her arms tightly in front of her.
Julia grew up far from João Pessoa in the southern state of Santa Catarina. Raised in a small village without electricity, she grew up working on her family’s farm. Her family did not have much, she said, but she always worked hard and never missed a day of school. When she was old enough, she began to study religion with plans to become a nun, but exposure within the church to Liberation Theology inspired her to activism and she became a militant in the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra, hereafter CPT), a church movement that (among other things) works as a facilitator for the landless in their struggle for land. Two years later, however, Julia left the CPT simply because, as she said, ‘the MST was born’.
Julia heard about the MST through her religious work, and in 1989 the move- ment sent her – along with 19 other activists from the south (including Jaime Amorim, the well-known state leader in Pernambuco who grew up across the street from Julia) – to the northeast to help to establish the first settlements in the region. At the time, the MST was a young, small movement, and this was appealing to Julia because it was, in her words ‘a movement of the people not for them’ (although Julia, like many of the most visible movement leaders, had not herself acquired land through the movement). During the 1990s, Julia lived and worked in Bahia, Pernambuco, Maranhão and Paraíba, educating the movement’s grassroots base and training its leaders. Even after 18 years of living in the northeast, far from her family, Julia is still willing to go wherever the movement needs her. It is through this model of moving leaders from place to place to educate and train other militants that the movement has attained – as she says, ‘hegemony in all of Brazil’.
Recruiting and training new young leaders is a key strategy of the movement, and a primary responsibility for many leaders. Another northeastern leader that Brenda and Wendy interviewed explained the importance of passing leadership responsibilities on to the younger generation: ‘it is a question of adaptation, if [we don’t get new leaders], we will be getting old and the settlements will get old too, because they will start to do things that are based in the heads of the old people, you know. . . . The idea is to be preparing the [young people], for them to go ahead and assume the responsibilities’.
Strategy of Success #2: Land Occupations
The MST has developed a broad set of strategies to promote its agenda, but land occupations continue to be the movement’s primary political weapon (Fernandes
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
2007). Occupations are well-planned events that generally follow a standard script. Activists hold meetings and organize among the ‘base’ for months before choosing an area for occupation. Usually the property chosen is one that is not fulfilling its social (Constitutional) function to be productive or one with uncer- tain title. Then activists prepare as the selected day arrives. They notify all of the participants, telling them to be ready at a moment’s notice, to keep their bag by the door, ready for when the bus or van or truck rolls by. The occupation itself usually happens at night when there is less chance of detection. Once on the property, activists organize the construction of small black plastic tents where each family will be living until negotiations with the government (or with the landlord’s private guns) begin. Occupations are often coordinated throughout a broader region – the state or even the country – in an attempt to scale up all of the localized demands for land. As one regional leader in the northeast said:
We aren’t the ones who decide how everything [in an occupation] goes. There are state guidelines too, you know. For example, when we occupied here [in Paraíba], we didn’t only occupy the one property here. This is the capacity that we have: we occupied here and occupied other properties in other regions of the state simultaneously. They are planned actions, planned with other regions of the state so that we can have more power.
Occupations provide the space for movement production and reproduction: it is here that many (though certainly not all; see Wolford 2006) movement members realize what the movement is really about (Fernandes 2007). They may have joined the occupation because their friends or church organizers encouraged them to, or because they were desperate to do anything that might win them land, but once there, people are often caught up in the intensity of the political moment. Movement leaders hold meetings regularly during occupations in order to keep people busy and prepare for the possibility of eventually winning access to the land. During occupations young leaders are recruited. Both in our interviews and in our experience, leaders tell similar stories of first encountering the movement through an occupation that ended with their parents winning a plot of land and them beginning to work to organize the movement base.
Strategy of Success #3: Autonomy
When the MST held its first National Congress in 1985, there was discussion as to whether the movement should work from within the Catholic Church or strike out on its own. Prominent leaders later recalled church organizers them- selves arguing for the movement’s independence: the MST needed to develop its own struggle, one that was not tied to traditional alliances or old ways of ‘doing politics’ (Branford and Rocha 2002, 21). As the movement grew stronger, and as democracy in the country consolidated, there were more calls for the move- ment to work more closely with the government: two prominent rural sociolo- gists argued that the MST was missing a historic opportunity to entwine rural workers’ interests with the federal state (de Souza Martins 2003; Navarro 2002).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	297
298	Brenda Baletti et al.
To every suggestion of political affiliation, the MST has remained resolute. As the movement’s most prominent leader, João Pedro Stedile, said, ‘our analysis of the farmers’ movements of Latin America and Brazil taught us that whenever a mass movement was subordinated to a party, it was weakened by the effects of inner-party splits and factional battles. . . . The movement had to be free from external political direction’ (2002, 80).
The movement’s project to build hegemony has involved building alliances with other organizations such as different religious organizations, rural and urban trade unions, and politicians. These alliances, however, generally function as goal-specific partnerships not integration or even affiliation. Support from other well-known organizations such as the Central Workers’ Union (CUT), the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT), or well-known academics and politicians from the Workers Party demonstrates popular support for the movement, but the movement’s autonomy has never yet compromised its autonomy.
The MST’s commitment to autonomy can be seen in discursive claim of a lack of dependence on both civil society and the state. The MST claims autonomy from the state, but this does not mean that they do not negotiate with the state, or that the MST’s occupations and settlements are not dependent on the state for resources. They receive food baskets in the occupations, land in settlements, credit for settlers, and political strength and support from the state, but they claim these things as rights rather than as aid or as favours. By negotiating with the state from an external rather than dependent position, the MST maintains its claim to autonomy.
Julia also talked about the movement’s position with respect to the federal government. The movement’s three biggest enemies, she said, ‘are the execu- tive, the legislature, and the judiciary’; in other words, the government itself. She also critiqued the inefficiency of the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA), the main governmental agency charged with exe- cuting agrarian reform. Julia argued that INCRA was incompetent in terms of getting land expropriated and providing the settlers with agricultural assistance, largely because she believed that a majority of INCRA employees were against the project of distributive land reform.
Another activist in the northeast explained his distrust of the federal govern- ment in this way:
1
Legally, INCRA could come [to the settlement] more, but we don’t allow it. This is how it is: I could allow an INCRA employee to come here and say that this man who lives next door should stay in the settlement [note: this was in reference to an ongoing dispute on the settlement]. But we are the ones who should decide, because after this government employee comes here and says . . . that this other guy has rights, then the employee gets back in his car and goes away, and those of us who live here still have the problem. . . . And so the community has certain autonomy, and INCRA goes and paints and embroiders [or whatever it does].1
Interview, July 2008.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
LAND FOR THOSE WHO WORK IT TOO: THE SOUTH AFRICAN CASE
As in the Brazilian case, the control of land was the backbone of colonial policies in South Africa. In South Africa, however, racialized policies of dispossession carried over into the independent state and made it difficult for a significant or coherent land-owning peasantry to develop. As a result, the contemporary demand for land in South Africa is less organized around a return to farming per se than around a broader struggle for citizenship, political rights, labour reform and social welfare policies. This difference between the Brazilian and South African experi- ences made it difficult for LPM activists to copy the MST’s strategies for success.
Although Europeans had been settling in southern Africa since the 1600s, the process of alienating natives from their land only began in earnest when diamonds were discovered in Kimberley in 1867 and gold was discovered in what is now Johannesburg in 1886. The discovery of mineral wealth in South Africa piqued British imperial interest in the region, and as a result, land in the surrounding region became more valuable. Three years after the formation of the Union of South Africa, the Natives’ Land Act of 1913 was passed in order to control Black activity on and possession of land. This legislation restricted the area for lawful African occupation: unless special permits were acquired, native Africans were forced to live on reserves (Bantustans) that comprised a mere 7 per cent of the land area. The Land Act, followed by new legislation in 1936, also eliminated sharecropping and rent tenancy, replacing them with labour tenancy (Sihlongo- nyane 2005; Thwala 2006). Many scholars point to the Land Acts as decisive moments in the proletarianization of the South African peasantry. Proletarianiza- tion was critical for the development of capitalist agriculture, as dispossessed peasants often became wageworkers on White farms or mine workers (Ntsebeza 2007). Dispossession also reduced competition among White farmers and created a class of wage labourers to work on White-owned farms and in mines. Although the Land Acts may not have successfully dispossessed all Africans or stopped them from acquiring land, it did have the effect of further differentiating the African peasantry into a class of landowners and evicted peasants who moved into the freehold lands, many of whom became migrant labourers (Hart 2002). Unequal access to land was therefore an essential component of the political economy of South Africa (Thwala 2006).
Black migration to urban areas was also highly regulated and, for the most part, discouraged. The Bantu Consolidation Act of 1946, which identified Africans who were allowed to remain in urban areas for over 72 hours, created passbooks to record and monitor the movement of Black South Africans into the cities. This segregation was solidified in 1948 when the National Party gained power and created the Homeland System. The Homeland System was comprised of ten territories that separated the Black population by ethnicity in the hopes that the territories could serve as potential African nations. A new Native Laws Amend- ment Act of 1957 tightly controlled the recruitment and movement of Black workers from reserves in rural areas to urban employers in ‘white South Africa’.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	299
300	Brenda Baletti et al.
Cousins (2006) argues that ‘de-peasantization’ in South Africa was intentional and an integral part of segregationist and Apartheid policies throughout the twentieth century. Whether or not it was intentional, subsistence farming among rural people became less common as a primary source of livelihood and people in the reserves were increasingly forced to rely on non-agricultural work. Between the 1960s and 1980s, the situation worsened as approximately 1.75 million rural people were displaced, removed primarily from White-owned farms (65 per cent) and African freehold land (35 per cent), effectively eliminating even labour tenancy and squatting (Hart 2002, 89). Although 70 per cent of people in the rural homelands had access to land, more than 50 per cent of those people had access to less than one hectare, which discouraged subsistence farming, and encouraged livelihood strategies in rural labour and mining (Ntsebeza 2007).2
The rural population in South Africa today continues to be economically dif- ferentiated with localized groups exploiting different bundles of livelihood strat- egies including: agriculture, migration, agricultural labour, remittances, formal employment, pensions and micro-enterprises (Cousins 2006). Because of this, several researchers have argued that the agrarian question in South Africa should be ‘delinked’ from agriculture and connected to a broader range of demands (Hart 1996, 269; Cousins 2006). People do not fit easily into the category of worker or peasant – or even a hybrid of the two – but, as Henry Bernstein has pointed out for the Global South more generally, are forced to make their living ‘across different sites of the social division of labour: urban and rural, agricultural and non-agricultural, wage employment and self-employment’ (Bernstein 2004, 205).
Today, 13 years after the fall of Apartheid, the land question in South Africa is still a critical one, and the reality of land ownership and control is still divided along racial lines. Land reform legislation has been seen as one method of bal- ancing out the inequalities of Apartheid and including previously marginalized communities in the new ‘Rainbow Nation’ of South Africa. After the first democratic elections in 1994, the Mandela administration proposed a land reform programme centring on three elements: restitution (land returned to claimants who could prove that they were dispossessed of their land after the Native Lands Act of 1913), redistribution (land the government purchases at market value and redistributes to landless claimants), and tenure security (assurance that people living on White farms will not be arbitrarily evicted). The goal was to redistribute 30 per cent of agricultural land in the first five years following a ‘willing-seller, willing-buyer’ system; however, land reform in South Africa has been painfully slow, with only 3 per cent of the land having been redistributed by 2001 (Adams and Howell 2001).
During Apartheid, the struggle for land was incorporated into (and secondary to) the broader struggle against Apartheid, such that the ‘land demand was not articulated in and of itself, but rather as a symbol of the lack of political
2	In the 1980s, the average population density for the homelands was 151 people per square kilo- metre, as compared to 19 people per square kilometre in the rest of South Africa. Where White South African areas had housing surpluses, Black areas had housing deficits (Thwala 2006).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
democracy and the racism of the apartheid regime’ (Greenberg 2004b, 15; Greenstein 2003). While the majority of the South African population is landless, most of them identify politically in other ways because of the way in which resistance was constructed under Apartheid. The fact that the struggle for land took a backseat to the broader liberation struggle has made organizing a landless struggle in the post-Apartheid context difficult. To a certain extent, building a landless movement would require re-contextualizing longstanding demands – for political participation, access to resources etc. – around the land issue (Greenberg 2004b).
In a 2001 article, Lahiff and Cousins suggested that the government’s relative inattention to rural land reform is due, in part, to the absence of a grassroots landless voice to place pressure on the government in order to force this issue. That same year, however, the Landless Peoples’ Movement (LPM) formed to challenge the South African government’s land reform policies and approach, and to force land distribution into the national and international spotlight. In 2004, the LPM recorded a membership (loosely defined) of approximately 100,000 people, 90 per cent of whom were located in rural areas (Alexander 2004). These membership numbers are difficult to verify and may be inaccurate, but the claim to such numerical strength was an important strategy for the LPM to gain visibility. By the time we began talking to activists and scholars about the LPM in September of 2006, there was a general consensus that the LPM was in decline, with some going so far as to declare the movement dead.
In what follows, we analyze the rise and decline of the LPM as read through the experiences of two figures involved in the movement from its inception: Mangaliso Khubeka, a founder and national organizer of the LPM, and Ricado Jacobs, staff member at the Surplus People’s Project in Cape Town, a non- governmental organization that formed in the 1980s to help communities organize against the ongoing state-led relocations of Black South Africans, and member of the advisory committee for the formation of the LPM. Mangaliso’s interview illustrates the LPM’s approach to the three central concepts that we argued above were key to the success of the MST: political autonomy, land occupations and organic leadership. Ricado’s interview illustrates how these factors are shaped by the South African context. While we recognize that the opinions of these figures are not universally shared by all actors with the movement, we believe these interviews not only highlight the mentalities of key figures within the LPM at the current conjuncture, but their words also reflect the trajectory the movement has taken in its short history.
THE RISE OF THE LANDLESS PEOPLE’S MOVEMENT
We interviewed Mangaliso in November of 2006 at the Surplus People’s Project office in the Western Cape. He was travelling with other LPM members based in KwaZulu-Natal as well as with several MST visitors from Brazil. Their tasks were to network with LPM chapters in the Western Cape while trying to recruit other landless communities into the movement. Mangaliso was a founding
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	301
302	Brenda Baletti et al.
member of the LPM: he became involved with landless mobilization while resisting eviction from his home on a farm outside of Newcastle in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. He and several others formed a small local committee that became a province-wide organization called the Tenure Security Coordinating Committee (TSCC) after meeting with the Association for Rural Advancement (AFRA). Mangaliso and other members of the TSCC felt as though their com- plaints had gone unheeded by local and provincial government officials. There was a need, they felt, for the formation of an organization ‘to be the mouthpiece of the people’.
In August of 2001, South Africa hosted the United Nations World Conference Against Racism and Discrimination, an event that focused international eyes on both global and South African social movements. Special interest groups met in Durban for weeks leading up to the event. This conference ‘provided space and opportunity for resource mobilization for the first joint national action of new independent community movements’, and it was then that the Landless People’s Movement was formed out of disparate local landless groups (Greenberg 2004b, 18). During this period the LPM, along with a number of established organizations joined under the banner of the Durban Social Forum to promote a ‘Landlessness=Racism’ campaign and foreground the plight of the landless (Ntsebeza 2007).
In 2005, Mangaliso described the LPM as being comprised of ‘the poorest of the poor, people not having their own land’,3 many of whom, like Mangaliso, were evicted Black farm workers. In another article (n.d.) Mangaliso articulated the desires of LPM members: ‘they asked me what it is I want. I want to plough. . . . We don’t have land. We see no sustainable development; people are hungry We have no land or jobs’ (Martorell 2007). The World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg in 2002 provided another opportunity for NGOs to bring together landless members from all over the country to form the second Landless People’s Assembly. Five thousand delegates from the LPM joined 25,000 members from the Social Movements Indaba (an umbrella organ- ization for South African social movements created to foster solidarity among grassroots campaigns working on similar issues) to march against neoliberal policy trends in the South African government. Mangaliso’s comments reflect senti- ments that range from general disillusionment with the South African govern- ment and the slow pace of land reform: ‘there is nothing good about land reform in South Africa’, to outright indignation, ‘black people, they don’t have rights in South Africa. They don’t have rights. It’s only on paper that they are saying we have rights’.
On 11 June 2007, we interviewed Ricado Jacobs, a staff member at the Surplus People’s Project (SPP). Currently, the SPP advocates for rural mobilization and agrarian reform. Ricado has been with the SPP for many years and was a member of the National Land Committee (NLC), the organization instrumental in the
3	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
establishment of the Landless People’s Movement. A self-proclaimed activist, Ricado states that even after the dissolution of the NLC many former members were still active within the Landless People’s Movement and served as an advi- sory committee, organizing political education for LPM constituencies. When asked about the LPM’s current situation, he responded that because of the slow pace of land reform, the political situation was still ripe for a landless movement and that since 1994 the demands of the poor had not been met, particularly in rural areas. He attributed this to neoliberal agricultural restructuring and the South African government’s subsequent preference for a Market-Led Agrarian Reform (MLAR) over the grassroots-led alternative (see Borras 2003 for back- ground discussion).
THE LPM IN INTERNATIONAL NETWORKS
Shortly after the formation of the LPM in 2001, the movement began forging ties with international peasant movements like Vía Campesina and successful landless movements in other countries such as the MST in Brazil. Unlike the MST, the LPM was an international movement from its inception because of the support and advice it received from international peasant and landless organiza- tions. As the national organizer of the LPM, Mangaliso travelled to Brazil five times between 2001 and 2006. He also travelled to Mexico and the United States, proclaiming that ‘everywhere, there are problems about land. So we are con- nected to the world as LPM’.4 The MST is particularly significant to the South African landless movement because of the similarities between the two countries in agrarian structure, such as a dual agricultural economy, concentrated land ownership with racial overtones, and vast inequality. Such similarities may have worked to obscure some of the differences between the two places. For instance, Brazil’s movement was founded by peasants who articulated their struggle for land in terms of the right to land and labour. In South Africa, the right to land was identified more with a right to equal rights. While the two movements had similar goals – land redistribution – the historical foundations for unequal distribution and the philosophical justification for redistribution were profoundly different.
According to Mangaliso, members of the MST visited South Africa every year between 2003 and 2006. They came to meet with LPM members, share their experiences with land reform in the Brazilian context, and offer insights on how to strengthen landless mobilization. In 2005, two MST activists spent three months in South Africa ‘to teach the activists of the LPM how mobilizations were performed in Brazil’ (Rosa 2007, 4). According to Ricado, the MST’s primary objective while visiting South Africa is to ‘support the LPM and share experiences . . . Part of the traveling around is to assess and look at the state of the movement, and have debriefing sessions so that the [LPM] can improve’.
4	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	303
304	Brenda Baletti et al.
When funds are available, the LPM sends its members abroad to meet with the MST to learn ‘how they do things in Brazil’ (how to work with the soil, for example). By becoming members of Vía Campesina, Mangaliso felt that the LPM was connected to a global movement of ‘people who are on the side of agriculture’ and who could ‘speak with one voice’ against the injustices of global capitalism. Many South African scholars were equally optimistic: ‘it is in organ- izations like these [the Landless People’s Movement] that our nation has come alive and it is here that the real fight to defend and deepen our democracy is being fought’ (Desai and Pithouse 2003).
Ricado also recognized the benefits of forming ties with peasant movements across the globe, but he argued that when the LPM was founded, rural social movements like the MST were so strong that there was an attempt to ‘build primarily a Latin American-ist myth’ in a South African context. This, he argues, was a fundamental weakness within the movement: while the Brazilians built their movement around Brazilian history and heroes, the philosophy and practices of the LPM were not rooted in the history of South African peasant mobilization. Ricado also suggested that South African NGOs had been heavily influenced by what he called the ‘celebrities of the anti-globalization movement’, and, in fostering the LPM, tried to apply Western theories to a South African context.
In what follows we argue that the LPM attempted to mimic the MST’s success in mobilizing the rural poor by carrying out land occupations. The strategy was difficult to reproduce, however, both because of the particular political- economic context in South Africa and also because the LPM did not have the other two elements that were so crucial to the MST’s success: organic leadership with a grassroots connection and political or financial autonomy.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Land Occupations
Shortly after its formation, the LPM began to develop increasingly radical tactics in its attempts to challenge the South African government. According to Amanda Alexander, a visiting scholar at the Centre for Civil Society at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, LPM members first approached the government bureaucrati- cally, by requesting to meet with government officials, sending letters and marching to government offices. However, after continued frustration with governmental inaction, movement leaders began to threaten to occupy land ‘as one method of redistributing land through the self-activity of the landless, [identifying] unpro- ductive, unused or underused land and land belonging to abusive farmers as the focus for initial redistribution’ (Greenberg 2004b, 2). Actually, in the Landless People’s Charter of 2001, the LPM calls for the redistribution of ‘all unproduc- tive, unused, vacant or indebted private land’. If their demands are not met, the movement’s charter states that the LPM will ‘launch a campaign to occupy vacant land and state land, and return to our land’.
In South Africa, however, land occupations are politically explosive because of the disastrous economic and social results of land occupations in neighbouring Zimbabwe. Since 2000, the land reform policies of Zimbabwean president,
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
Robert Mugabe, have had a profound impact on the debates surrounding South Africa’s approach to land reform. In the run-up to the presidential elections of February 2000, war veterans of Zimbabwe’s struggle for independence, fed-up with the slow pace of land reform there, decided to take matters into their own hands by invading farms owned by White farmers. When White farmers appealed to the government, their requests were ignored. Mugabe, who was at risk of losing his presidency, condoned the invasions, eventually glorifying them as a blow to former colonial oppressors.
These actions led to the displacement of White commercial farmers and Black farm workers that resulted in a food crisis and famine in the region. In five years, Zimbabwe, once the region’s breadbasket, is now commonly referred to as the region’s basket case. The international community turned to South Africa, as the region’s economic and political leader, to speak out against Mugabe’s actions on land reform; however, because of South Africa’s political ‘obligations’ to Mugabe (stemming from assistance Mugabe’s government provided during the struggle against Apartheid in the 1980s), Mbeki did not strongly criticize Mugabe’s actions. South Africa’s unwillingness to criticize Mugabe early on has affected its economic situation.
Many members of the LPM vocally supported Mugabe’s land expropriation programme and tried to use the Zimbabwe situation to give weight to their own threats to occupy land (Greenberg 2004b, 30). The South African Communist Party supported the LPM, writing on their website that:
The LPM seeks a Land Summit that broadens our thinking as a society about land reform to include the lessons of other countries and continents. In particular, the LPM would like to place on the agenda the highly- successful land occupations model employed by the MST and other organisations in Brazil, as well as the Constitutional ‘social obligations clause’ that makes this possible in many Latin American countries. Essentially a ‘use it or lose it’ principle of land ownership and access, a social obligations clause could empower the landless to identify, occupy and use land that is currently unused or unproductive. The LPM also considers the land of abusive farmers, and the land of absentee owners to be socially unproduc- tive, and calls for this land to be made available for redistribution and use by the landless. (AIDC 2004)
Mangaliso seconded this statement when he argued that ‘we want our people who are staying on farms to start cultivating the land now. [We don’t care] that the farmers are saying “stop cultivating on our land”. Those who are not afraid of farmers must start cultivating the land’.5 The LPM tried to leverage the Zim- babwe situation by threatening to occupy land, but the strategy backfired on them. In response to the economic downturn associated with support for Zim- babwe, the South African government, worried that foreign investor confidence
5	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	305
306	Brenda Baletti et al.
would falter at any signs of Zimbabwe-style land grabs, came down hard on early attempts at occupation implementing a zero-tolerance policy and cutting off a major potential strategy of the LPM. In a press statement released in March 2004, the ANC declared: ‘South Africans will not tolerate hooliganism that is only aimed at misleading people and creating chaos and discord. Those with designs to deliberately flout the law and occupy land will be met with the full might of the law. . . . If the LPM has legitimate concerns regarding the land restitution process, these can and should be dealt with through the appropriate government departments’ (cited in Alexander 2004).
Of course, land occupations in South Africa are nothing new. At the height of the anti-Apartheid struggle, land occupations were staged throughout the country as part of a tactic to render it ungovernable. Most often these occupa- tions were symbolic and temporary (Mngxitama 2005, 17–18). Greenberg (2004a) describes land occupations in the Apartheid era as ‘weapons of the weak’. However, in this current conjuncture, according to Ricado, land occupation strategies that have been effective in Brazil are not politically viable in South Africa.
So now we want to adopt the [strategies of the] MST and you hear people threaten about land occupations. People are always making these silly state- ments in the media . . . But it’s not going to happen, you know, because there is no political process that could accompany [land occupations]. Even though the Constitution of Brazil allows for the ‘social function of land’ . . . it was a result of peasant resistance that they made the [1946] constitu- tional amendment.6
Ultimately, Ricado argued that there were different understandings of how one could (legitimately) claim land in South Africa and Brazil.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Local Leadership
As demonstrated in the MST section of the paper, movement leadership in Brazil is carefully cultivated at the grassroots level in the encampments. In one recent examination of leadership within the MST, Marcelo Rosa argues that for MST activists, the ‘conduct of life obtains meaning from the social experience of landlessness’ (2007, 7). In contrast, Rosa argues that leaders of the LPM con- duct their lives outside of the sphere of landlessness. They tend to be older activists who have had previous experiences working within political parties and/or NGOs. They often have outside commitments that include other occu- pations and family obligations (unlike the MST, the LPM cannot provide its leaders remuneration to sustain their families). Greenberg’s assessment of the LPM in 2004 found that, on paper, the LPM is structured ‘at the top’ with a national council, provincial councils and branch structures on paper. Most
6	Interview.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
council members have no secure access to land. At the grassroots level; however, the LPM is ‘mainly unstructured’ (Greenberg 2004b, 21). Greenberg speculates that the attempt on the part of activists and development workers to create ‘a tightly defined structure’ for the LPM as a social movement was premature (2004b, 21).
Ricado argued that the objectives and actions of the LPM ‘should be rooted in the everyday struggles of the people’, but this is complicated because the base of the movement is ‘from 40s upwards’ and the leadership of the movement is ageing. ‘This is a tough process requiring time and energy. Therefore the move- ment should focus on re-politicizing South African youth.’ Ricado deliberately compared the LPM and the MST: the MST, he noted, had ‘effectively resolved’ this issue of young, energetic leaders by grooming young people into the movement at a young age and giving them major responsibilities within the encampments. He argued that the LPM leadership had to span national, local and international networks, and incorporate people who could organize and arti- culate the aspirations of members. A key problem for the LPM, according to Ricado, is that leadership is seen as part of the middle-class intelligentsia because NGO staff members have been so influential in the direction the LPM has taken. According to Ricado, even the South African state criticized the landless move- ment for not having a leadership that was connected to the grassroots base: ‘the State essentially . . . says . . . “on whose behalf are you talking? Where are these people that you are representing?”’.
Unsuccessful Strategies: Political Autonomy
Perhaps the most important difference between the MST and the LPM is the ability for each movement to maintain its autonomy from both the state and organized elements of civil society. In Brazil, the MST adamantly cultivated its independence, using resources from the Brazilian government and the Catholic Church but never ceding its independence in exchange for funding. In South Africa, however, the LPM was heavily dependent on civil society organizations from the beginning. When the movement’s relationship with these organizations began to sour and funding became more difficult, the LPM had few resources of its own to draw upon.
In the early post-Apartheid era, civil society organizations like the NLC were key political organizations. The relationship between state and civil society – mediated through these organizations – went from one of ‘opposition and conflict’ to ‘partnership and cooperation’ (Greenberg 2004a; Alexander 2004; Greenstein 2003). The new government funded NGOs to implement develop- ments projects that were compatible with the government’s vision for a new South Africa. This partnership often made it difficult for NGOs to openly criticize or oppose the government (Alexander 2004): many organizations were compelled to professionalize their staff members in order to actively pursue those projects and activities prioritized by donor organizations and the govern- ment (Greenberg 2004a, 25).
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	307
308	Brenda Baletti et al.
These processes of politicization and professionalization alienated civil society organizations from the constituencies they were responsible for serving and shifted priority away from grassroots organizations. A racialized division of labour also developed within the NGOs. For example, NLC fieldworkers were mostly Black activists from the local communities, while programme coordina- tors and researchers were mostly White. This racial segmentation exacerbated internal tensions (Mngxitama 2005).
Paradoxically, these processes of depoliticization, professionalization and alienation provided the political space for new social movements to develop (Barchiesi 2004, 4). President Mbeki’s first term in office ‘coincided with a resumption of social movement politics and activism which articulates a common rejection of the ANC’s conservative turn in macroeconomic policy’ (Barchiesi 2004, 23; Greenstein 2003). This upsurge of new social movements, however, built upon the legacy of strong civil society organizations. Some scholars argued that the social movements continued to be too closely linked to civil society institutions that held the purse strings and ultimately this encouraged ‘gradualism over radical courses of action’ (Alexander 2004, 49–50; Mngxitama 2004).
This changing relationship between the state, civil society and social move- ments lays the foundation from which to examine the national, regional and inter- national circumstances and support that led to the rise of the LPM. As previously mentioned, ‘the LPM was a creation of these NGOs from top to bottom, inspired by the MST, seeking to encourage a response from the families of Black rural labourers that were being expelled from rural areas’ (Sihlongonyane 2005, cited in Rosa 2007, 4). The LPM relied on the NLC in particular for organiza- tional and financial support. Andile Mngxitama of the NLC argues that implicit in these relationships was the idea that ‘without donor funding there can be no possibility of struggle’ (2005, 41). Likewise, middle-class intellectuals working with the movement through civil society connections shape ‘the image of the movement’ through their national and international resources and connections (Greenberg 2004b, 25).
Ricado argued that the NLC was a conflicted institutional host for the LPM. The NLC leadership disagreed over how best to approach the government’s political and economic stance after 1994. Greenberg (2004b) describes this conflict as a split between what he calls the antagonistic faction within the NLC, those who saw redistribution through mass occupations as the best method to gain access to land and the faction that supported critical engagement with the government. Andile Mngxitama (2005), who served with Ricado in the NLC, describes this debate as a struggle between the welfarist-reformist tendencies within the committee, and the mass action tendency, especially around the issue of land occupations and the attitude toward new government. These internal tensions within the NLC were transmitted to the LPM, and Ricado attributed the break-up of the NLC to this clash of ideas and ideologies and disputes over the nature of dissent and relationship with the government.
As factions within the LPM proposed increasingly radical strategies (such as land occupation) that opposed the government rather than operating within the
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
legal framework (established bureaucracy) for negotiation, NLC members and affiliates who preferred a less radical approach began to separate themselves from the movement. Because the LPM relied heavily on the NLC for funding and financial management, office space, and media and legal assistance (Alexander 2004), when the NLC dissolved the movement lost its primary source of organ- izational and financial support. In an interview, Ricado suggested that the NLC had been partly responsible in allowing financial dependency to develop: ‘But I think as NGOs, we have to really look at ourselves and how we create certain dependencies and orientations among people and communities, because this is the difficulty that [the LPM] are sitting with to organize and mobilize. . . . And so we have to look at the role of the NGOs in that.’ Ricado argued that the LPM needed to be able to define itself better as a movement by developing a ‘program of action, a philosophy, and an outlook . . . that will inspire rural peasants or the landless to stand up and start engaging in [open] struggles’ by speaking to the everyday realities of landless South Africans.
CONCLUSION: LATE MOBILIZATION IN A TRANSNATIONAL WORLD
In the end, what do we gain from this comparison of the MST and the LPM? They are clearly two very different movements, despite their common partici- pation in the transnational peasant network. And yet, it is only in hindsight that their differences stand out. When the LPM first formed in 2001, the movement bore many similarities to the MST: the LPM drew on a long history of agrarian repression, and the movement also articulated a popular anti-state sentiment that allowed its activists to win support from a broad range of people throughout the South African countryside and cities. Upon forming, the LPM became an immediate – and seemingly natural – partner with the MST. Brazilian activists sympathized with the long history of landlessness and dispossession in Brazil, and they supported the LPM’s work by sending activists to South Africa and hosting the LPM’s leaders in return. It seemed self-evident that the LPM would be an important part of the transnational peasant network along with the MST. Only five years later, however, the LPM had essentially disbanded and key scholars and activists no longer regarded it as a potential actor in the South African debate over land inequality and poverty. How can we understand this transition?
We do not attempt to provide a comprehensive explanation for the LPM’s failure in this article. Rather, we explore the relationship between the LPM and the MST in an attempt to better understand the dynamics of the transnational peasant networks – and how these dynamics may have shaped the LPM’s trajec- tory. A side-by-side comparison of the movements (Matrix 1) suggests that key differences between the two made it difficult for knowledge to be passed among them through network connections. This presents a potential problem for pro- gressive politics because the transfer of knowledge is considered to be one of the main benefits of such networks.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	309
310	Brenda Baletti et al. Matrix 1: A Comparison of the MST and the LPM
International participation and representation
Demand for redistribution
Relationship to NGOs
Basis of leadership
Sources of funding
The MST
Became internationalized over the course of its development
Based on the right to property for those who work it (labour theory of property); land for small farmers to work
NGOs provided institutional support but the MST always kept its distance from NGO authority and developed diverse sources of funding
Organic leadership from the grassroots; cultivated in occupations and through prior political activism
Settlements (internal funding), sale of MST products, NGOs – particularly international NGOs, state assistance
The LPM
International visibility from its inception
Based on demand for racial equality; land for residence, citizenship, housing and rights
Founded by NGO leaders and maintained close ties, especially for funding
Most visible leaders are NGO transplants, although there is grassroots participation
Primarily NGO funding, both national and international
In conclusion, there are three key arguments in this article. Our first and most basic argument is simply that transnational networks – no matter how progres- sive or how alternative – are not flat. They, like the world system more gener- ally, are riddled with inequalities and power differences. At the same time, actors within transnational networks or movements are located within quite distinct historical trajectories, no matter the universal calls for ‘peasant’, ‘landless’ or ‘worker’ solidarity. Our second argument is that as a result of historical specifi- cities, the study of transnational networks needs to be located at multiple scales, both the ‘globalized’ and the ‘localized’. At both scales, we argue that moral economies of production and social reproduction are important, as is the very nature of the places where transnational networks meet up and touch down. Third, and finally, we argue that this sort of critical transnational analysis requires a fairly specific method. The study of histories in the present at multiple scales requires both critical ethnography (Hart 2003, 2004) that is sensitive to the intimate nature of social relationships and what Philip McMichael (1990) calls ‘incorporated comparison’, where cases are compared both for their differences/ similarities and for their inter-connecting relationships. Such methods operation- alize Gerschenkron’s theory of late development, or in the case of peasant social movements, late mobilization. Understanding the precise mechanisms by which transnational networks come to favour ‘early mobilizers’ versus ‘late mobilizers’
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
requires more ethnographic attention to the networks themselves than we have done in our own research. Again, we would like to stress that the disadvantages of late mobilization are not pre-determined or automatic. The influence of the transnational networks on particular movements is always situated within the concrete histories and contingent workings of the world system.
REFERENCES
Adams, M. and J. Howell, 2001. ‘Redistributive Land Reform in Southern Africa’. Natural Resource Perspectives, 64.
AIDC (Alternative Information and Development Centre), 2004. ‘Landless People’s Movement (Gauteng): Discussion Document on Forging a United Front with the SACP’. http://www.aidc.org.za/?q=book/view/363, Accessed 8 January 2008.
Alexander, A.S., 2004. ‘ “Not the Democracy We Struggled For’: The Landless People’s Movement and the Politicization of Urban-Rural Division in South Africa’. Unpub- lished BA Honours Thesis. Boston, MA: Harvard University.
Barchiesi, F., 2004. ‘Classes, Multitudes and the Politics of Community Movements in Post-Apartheid South Africa’. Centre for Civil Society, Research Report 20: 1–41. Bernstein, H., 2004. ‘“Changing Before our Very Eyes”: Agrarian Questions and
the Politics of Land in Capitalism Today’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 4 (1/2): 190–
225. Borras, S. Jr, 2003. ‘Questioning Market-Led Agrarian Reform: Experiences from Brazil,
Colombia and South Africa’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 3 (3): 367–94. Branford, S. and J. Rocha, 2002. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in
Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau. Cardoso, F.H., 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brazil: Presidencia da
Republica and Secretaria de Comunicacao Social. Cousins, B., 2006. ‘Agrarian Reform and the “Two Economies”: Transforming South
Africa’s Countryside’. In The Land Question in South Africa, eds L. Ntsebeza and R.
Hall, 220–45. Capetown: HSRC Press. De Janvry, A., 1981. The Agrarian Question and Reformism in Latin America. Baltimore,
MD: John Hopkins University Press. De Janvry, A., E. Sadoulet and W. Wolford, 2001. ‘The Changing Role of the State in
Latin American Land Reforms’. In Access to Land, Rural Poverty, and Public Action, eds A. de Janvry, G. Gordillo, J. Platteau and E. Sadoulet. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Souza Martins, J., 2003. ‘Representing the Peasantry? Struggles for/about Land in Brazil’. In Latin American Peasants, ed. T. Brass, 300–35. London: Frank Cass Publications.
Deere, C.D. and L.S. de Madeiros, 2007. ‘Agrarian Reform and Poverty Reduction: Lessons from Brazil’. In Land, Poverty and Livelihoods in an Era of Globalization: Perspectives from Developing and Transition Countries, eds A.H. Akram-Lodhi, S. Borras Jr and C. Kay, 80–119. London: Routledge.
Desai, A. and R. Pithouse, 2003. ‘ “But We Were Thousands”. Dispossession: Resistance, Repossession and Repression in Mandela Park’. Journal of Asian and African Studies, 39 (4): 239–69.
Desmarais, A.A., 2007. La Vía Campesina: Globalization and the Power of Peasants. London: Pluto Press.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	311
312	Brenda Baletti et al.
Edelman, M., 1998. ‘Transnational Peasant Politics in Central America’. Latin American Research Review, 33 (3): 49–86.
Edelman, M., 2005a. ‘When Networks Don’t Work: The Rise and Fall and Rise of Civil Society Initiatives in Central America’. In Social Movements: An Anthropological Reader, ed. J. Nash, 29–45. London: Blackwell.
Edelman, M., 2005b. ‘Bringing the Moral Economy Back in...to the Study of Twenty-first Century Transnational Peasant Movements’. American Anthropologist, 107 (3): 331–45.
Featherstone, D., 2003. ‘Spatialities of Transnational Resistance to Globalization: The Maps of Grievance of the Inter-Continental Caravan’. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 28: 404–21.
Ferguson, J., 1994. The Anti-Politics Machine: ‘Development’, Depoliticization, and Bureau- cratic Power in Lesotho. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Fernandes, B.M., 1999. MST, Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
Fernandes, B.M., 2007. ‘The Occupation as a Form of Access to Land in Brazil: A Theoretical and Methodological Contribution’. In Reclaiming the Land: the Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia and Latin America, eds S. Moyo and P. Yeros, 317– 41. New York: Zed.
Forman, S., 1975. The Brazilian Peasantry. New York: Columbia University Press. Gerschenkron, A., 1952. ‘Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective’. In The Progress of Underdeveloped Areas, ed. B. Hoselitz, 3–29. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. Gohn, M.d.G., 1997. Os Sem Terra, ONGs e Cidadania. São Paulo: Cortez. Greenberg, S., 2004a. ‘The Landless People’s Movement and the Failure of Postapartheid
Land Reform’. Centre for Civil Society Research Report, 26: 1–40. Greenberg, S., 2004b. ‘Post-Apartheid Development, Landlessness and the Reproduction
of Exclusion in South Africa’. Centre for Civil Society Research Report, 17: 1–42. Greenstein, R., 2003. ‘Civil Society, Social Movements and Power in South Africa’.
RAU Sociology Seminar Series, Fourth term, 12 September: 1–40. Grindle, M., 1986. State and Countryside: Development Policy and Agrarian Politics in Latin
America. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Hall, A.L., 1990. ‘Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil’. In Agrarian Reform and
Grassroots Development: Ten Case Studies, eds R. Prosterman, M. Temple and T.
Hanstad, 205–35. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers. Hart, G., 1996. ‘The Agrarian Question and Industrial Dispersal in South Africa:
Agro-industrial Linkages through Asian Lenses’. In The Agrarian Question in South
Africa, ed. H. Bernstein. London: Frank Cass. Hart, G., 2002. Disabling Globalization: Places of Power in Post-Apartheid South Africa.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Hart, G., 2003. ‘Denaturalizing Dispossession: Critical Ethnography in the Age of Resur-
gent Imperialism’. Paper prepared for Creative Destruction: Area Knowledge & the New Geographies of Empire conference, Center for Place, Culture & Politics CUNY Graduate Center New York, 15–17 April 2004.
Hart, G., 2004. ‘Geography and Development: Critical Ethnographies’. Progress in Human Geography, 281 (1): 91–100.
Houtzager, P.P. and M. Kurtz, 2000. ‘The Institutional Roots of Popular Mobilization: State Transformation and Rural Politics in Brazil and Chile’. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 42 (2): 394–424.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
Keck, M. and K. Sikkink, 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Lahiff, E. and B. Cousins, 2001. ‘The Land Crisis in Zimbabwe Viewed from South of the Limpopo’. Journal of Agrarian Change, 1 (4): 652–66.
Mainwaring, S., 1995. ‘Brazil: Weak Parties, Feckless Democracy’. In Building Democratic Institutions: Party Systems in Latin America, eds S. Mainwaring and T. Scully, 354–98. Stanford, CT: Stanford University Press.
Martorell, J., 2007. ‘World Summit for Sustainable Development in Johannesburg: ANC Government Tries to Silence its Critics with Apartheid-Style Repression’. http://www.marxist.com/Africa/wssd_repression.html, Accessed 15 November 2007.
Maybury-Lewis, B., 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
McMichael, P., 1990. ‘Incorporating Comparison within a World-Historical Perspec- tive: An Alternative Comparative Method’. American Sociological Review, 55 (3): 385 – 97.
Mngxitama, A., 2005. ‘The National Land Committee, 1994–2004: A Critical Insider’s Perspective’. Centre for Civil Society, Research Report, 34 (2): 1–48.
Navarro, Z., 2002. ‘Mobilização sem emancipação – as lutas sociais dos sem-terra no Brasil’. In Produzir para Viver, ed. B. de Sousa Santos, 189–232. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Civilização Brasileira.
Novaes, R.C.R., 1998. ‘A Trajetória de uma bandeira de luta’. In Política e Reforma Agrária, eds R. Nonato and L.F. Carvalho Costa, 169–80. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Mauad. Ntsebeza, L., 2007. ‘Land-Reform Politics in South Africa’s Countryside’. Peace Review:
A Journal of Social Justice, 19 (1): 33–41. Ondetti, G., 2001. ‘When Repression Backfires: The Rise of the Brazilian Landless Move-
ment in the Mid-1990s’. Paper presented at Latin American Studies Association meet-
ings, Washington DC, 6–8 September. Pereira, A.W., 1997. The End of the Peasantry: The Rural Labor Movement in Northeast
Brazil, 1961–1988. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. Pereira, A.W., 2003. ‘Brazil’s Agrarian Reform: Democratic Innovation or Oligarchic
Exclusion Redux?’. Latin American Politics and Society, 45 (2): 41–65. Petras, J., 1997. ‘Latin America: The Resurgence of the Left’. New Left Review, 223: 17–
47. Reis, E.P., 1990. ‘Brazil: 100 Years of the Agrarian Question’. International Social Science
Journal, 50 (157): 419–32. Rosa, M., 2007. ‘Landless Experiences: Youth and Social Movements in Brazil and South
Africa’. Unpublished Manuscript. Brazil: Federal University of Fluminese. Routledge, P., 2003. ‘Convergence Space: Process Geographies of Grassroots Globalisa-
tion Networks’. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 28 (3): 333–49. Routledge, P., A. Cumbers and C. Nativel, 2007. ‘Grassrooting Network Imaginaries: Relationality, Power, and Mutual Solidarity in Global Justice Networks’. Environment
and Planning A, 39 (11): 2575–92. Santos, R. and L.F.C. Costa, 1998. ‘Camponeses e Política no Pré-64’. In Política e
Reforma Agrária, eds L.F.C. Costa and R. Santos, 13–41. Rio de Janeiro: Mauad. Schwartz, S., 1985. Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society: Bahia, 1550–
1835. New York: Cambridge University Press. Seligmann, R., 1998. PROCERA: Programa Especial de Credito Para Reforma Agrária.
Brasilia, DF: Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
‘Late Mobilization’	313
314	Brenda Baletti et al.
Sihlongonyane, M.F., 2005. ‘Land Occupations in South Africa’. In Reclaiming the Land: the Resurgence of Rural Movements in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, eds S. Moyo and P. Yeros, 142–64. London: Zed Books.
Smith, N., 1993. ‘Homeless/Global: Scaling Places’. In Mapping the Futures. Local Cul- tures, Global Change, eds J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson and L. Tickner, 87–119. London: Routledge.
Stedile, J.P., 2002. ‘Landless Battalions: The Sem Terra Movement of Brazil’. New Left Review, 15: 77–104.
Thwala, W.D., 2006. ‘Land and Agrarian Reform in South Africa’. In Promised Land: Competing Visions of Agrarian Reform, eds P. Rosset, R. Patel and M. Courville, 57–72. Oakland, CA: Food First.
Tilly, C., 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Viotti Da Costa, E., 2000. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press. Wolford, W., 2006. ‘The Difference Ethnography Can Make: Understanding Social
Mobilization and Development in the Brazilian Northeast’. Qualitative Sociology,
29 (3): 335–52. Wright, A. and W. Wolford, 2003. To Inherit the Earth: The Landless Movement and the
Struggle for a New Brazil. Oakland, CA: Food First Publications.
© 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 8 Nos. 2 and 3, April and July 2008, pp. 290–314.
