2010
Sociology
Critical Criminology
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
Erin C. Heil


Published online: 18 November 2009 Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009
Abstract Throughout Brazil, landless resisters are being violently victimized at the discretion of large landowners. The main goals of this article are to (1) Explain the historical and current conditions that have facilitated the violent oppression experienced by the landless movement, (2) illustrate the mass violence experienced by the landless pop- ulation, (3) provide a review of the existing research regarding the relationship between land reform, violence, and state strength, (4) introduce a new explanation of decentralized state power in relationship to the persistence of violence against the landless movement. I explore the Brazilian landless movement through content analyses, fieldwork, and a review of existing data. The approach used to study and understand the powers associated with the landless movement is unique to the existing literature of the Brazilian landless move- ment in that it moves beyond advocacy towards a criminological and political analysis.
Introduction
The use of violence as a tool of oppression against landless resistance groups has been a permanent feature of rural Brazil since the country was first colonized by the Portuguese in the 1500s. In the last 30 years, thousands of landless peasants have been victims of individual bloodshed and property destruction. This project is an analysis of the current Brazilian landless movement and the external violence used as a tool to hamper the movement. Based on an ongoing content analysis of Brazilian newspaper articles, as well as a secondary data analysis and fieldwork, this article demonstrates that the violence experienced by the current landless movement is not a modern phenomenon, but rather is systematic oppression fostered by historical circumstances and the power of the landed elite.
In this article, it is theorized that the powers associated with opposition to the landless movement are evidence of decentralized state power, and that social control is
E. C. Heil (&) Department of Criminal Justice Studies, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Peck Hall, Box 1455, Edwardsville, IL 62026, USA e-mail: erconle@siue.edu
123
78	E. C. Heil
predominantly managed by large landowners and transnational corporations. Because power is concentrated in the hands of the dominant land owning class, social injustices against the landless population flourish with relative impunity for the instigators and enforcers of violence. The theory of decentralization follows the pattern of integration often found in critical criminology. As many critical criminologists have already expres- sed, social injustices perpetuated by state actors are best understood in the ‘‘selection of a strategy resulting in a viable model of conceptual integration’’ (Arrigo 2000, p. 8). For example, in Quinny’s ‘‘Class, State, and Crime’’ (1980), the domination and accommo- dation of capitalists and their workers was discussed in terms of integrating theories of political economy and social control. Kauzlarich and Kramer (1998) discussed under- standing state criminality in terms of motivation, control, and opportunity. More recently, Mullins and Rothe (2008) have extended the integrated approach to understanding state crime in their discussion of control at the macro-level over militia movements. Throughout the field of critical criminology, theories are integrated conceptualizations to understand wider social injustices. As Barak argues, ‘‘the diversification of models is liberating to the extent that they allow for a creative plurality of knowledge based frameworks’’ (www.greggbarak.com, accessed September, 2009). Not surprisingly, the theory developed in this article will follow the method of critical criminologists who are integrated in their approach to understanding social injustices perpetuated by the state. However, the theory developed in this article is best understood through the lens of criminology, political science, and Latin American studies. Therefore, the theory in this article moves beyond integrating current criminological and sociological theories towards an understanding and explaining of social injustice through competing social sciences.
The article is divided into three sections. The first section provides a brief historical backdrop to the current landless movement, O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (The Landless Worker’s Movement, or the MST) (www.mst.org.br), who began to organize during the last days of the military regime and are active today. This section develops an understanding of the land conflict prominent in Brazil, and how the revolu- tionary movement that has evolved over the past 25 years is still victimized by state oppression. The second section discusses the most current instances of violence against landless resisters. The examples and statistics in this section provide evidence of the extreme violence that the landless peasants face, and more importantly, the impunity experienced by the perpetrators and managers of violence. The article concludes with a discussion of decentralized state power as an element conducive to the current violence experienced by the landless population. The three sections in this article build upon one another to address the political and social environment of the Brazilian countryside, and how the overt violation of peasant rights associated with the land conflict should be understood.
Building the MST
The modern landless movement active throughout Brazil is known as the MST. The MST was created during the ending years of the military dictatorship. Prior to the dictatorship, other landless movements emerged, but were quickly dismantled. However, during the 1970s, the military government began to show signs of weakness as internal splits and public opposition began to mount, as the once clandestine acts of violent repression became widely publicized. Suddenly, students were seen taking to the streets and pro- testing the government and its tactics. Business men began to hold conferences to discuss
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	79
democracy and the restoration of civil liberties. Workers who had assisted in the economic growth of Brazil began to strike. Because the acts of repression could no longer justify economic stability, the government, under former general, President Ernesto Geisel, pro- posed a political opening that would allow for organizing and protest, acts that would have been crushed under the previous political rule. This political opening not only affected the cities, but it also had a tremendous impact on the rural poor.
In the 1970s, the rural poor were living in a different Brazil than their urban counter- parts. Many rural workers were being replaced by agricultural machinery and sought a new life in the cities, while other workers and peasants continued to exist in a cycle of migration and land eviction fostered by the military takeover. Many of these families migrated from one piece of land to the next only to be evicted by the large landowners. As the peasants demanded land, the government proved to be indecisive. With this, the landless, backed by the power of the sympathetic Catholic Church,1 formed a movement with revolutionary potential. The Catholic Church assisted in land expropriation to the landless and became an integral component to the longevity of the new movement in its early years (See Diario de Pernambuco, September 9, 1981).
By 1984, the movement had begun to organize at a national level, and movement leaders felt it was time to convene with other revolutionary organizers and leaders and discuss the potentials of the new landless movement. Landless organizers, lower ranking priests sympathetic to the plight of the landless, and union leaders met in Cascavel, Parana ́ to debate and discuss the future of the movement. Four issues were of prevalent concern to the organizers: (1) Whether the landless should maintain their dependent relationship with the Catholic Church, (2) Whether the group should develop ties with the rural trade unions, (3) The characteristics of the new organization, and (4) The aims of the new movement.
Because the Catholic Church had provided assistance to the movement’s previous actions, there was a major debate as to whether or not the group should maintain its dependence on the Church. However, the group realized that there had been past efforts by the Church to control other movements in a direction contrary to the movement’s goals. In the end, the new organization took the stance of ‘‘if the movement learns to walk on its own feet, it would go much further’’ (Quoted in Branford and Rocha 2002, p. 22).2 With this, the movement made the following decision in terms of it’s organizational charac- teristics: ‘‘It would be run by the landless workers themselves, independent of the Church, the trade unions, and the political parties; it would be open to the entire family; and it was to be a mass movement’’ (p. 23). The goals of the movement were: ‘‘To fight for agrarian reform; to fight for a just, fraternal society and for an end to capitalism; to include rural workers, tenant farmers, share croppers, small holders, and so on, in the category of landless worker; and to ensure that the land be used for those who work and live from it’’ (p. 23). The new independent organization developed its name through the press who referred to the group as the Sem Terra (Landless). Thus, the group eventually came to call itself O Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (The Landless Workers Move- ment, or the MST) (Stedile 2002).
1 The Comissa ̃o Pastoral da Terra (CPT) (www.cptnac.com.br) is a Catholic organization which used its political power during the military dictatorship to protect peasants and their rights, and continues to fight for the land and human rights in the Brazilian countryside.
2	The CPT, led by lower ranking priests and a liberal theology, openly acknowledges and supports the MST, but has no power in the actual movement. The CPT is currently active with indigenous movements and landless not affiliated to the MST. Because of this separation from the Church, the MST only receives social support from the Church and other movements. However, the actors that support the movement are influ- enced with a strong understanding of the problems associated with poverty and landlessness.
123
80	E. C. Heil
Today, the MST is considered the largest social movement in all of Latin America with approximately 1.5 million members. According to Geraldo Fontes (2004), there are approximately 5,000–6,000 MST settlements in the country and according to the official MST website (accessed 2007), approximately 350,000 families are legally settled,3 while another 80,000 families are living on encampments.4 The goals of the movement have not drastically changed from its founding: The redistribution of land, income and social equality, and sovereignty. The MST has also added two new goals, which are to eliminate fields of genetically modified crops and to destroy the neo-economic liberal model (mst.org.br, accessed 2007). The actions utilized to achieve the objectives are land occupations, road blocks, hunger strikes, theatrics, and a National Conference organized every 5 years.
From its founding days in 1984, the MST has developed into an institutionalized organization focusing its mass efforts on the redistribution of land and social equality. Despite the efforts of the MST, the struggle for land continues to increase throughout the Brazilian countryside, as approximately 4 million families struggle to exist in extreme poverty with no land to call home. As the MST organizes and enlists more members, many other peasant families are increasingly being displaced by transnational corporations and the increased reliance on machinery. Every day, members of the landless community are being arrested, threatened, tortured, or murdered by hired gunmen.
Violence Against the Landless
Landless violence is divided into two categories: Violence against the person and violence against occupied families. The types of violence that individuals experience are: murder, attempted murder, death threats, torture, physical attacks, and imprisonment. The types of violence that occupied families experience are: judicial eviction, threat of eviction, and the destruction of homes. Violence against the individual and violence against occupied families are not mutually exclusive. Evictions are rarely peaceful events, many times ending with a number of arrests, injuries, or deaths. Nearly all of the violence in rural Brazil is carried out by off-duty police, ill-trained private security hired by large land- owners or jagunc ̧os, or hired gunmen.
All of the data regarding violence against the landless and landless communities has been derived from the CPT website (cptnac.com.br), which has a data archive on violence against the landless between the years 1997 and 2003. Between the years 1997 and 2003, the following information in Table 1 was obtained regarding the total numbers of violence against the person.
As Table 1 illustrates, landless individuals are most likely to be arrested or physically attacked. Members of the landless community are also more likely to be threatened rather than murdered. Therefore, the violence experienced by the landless may not necessarily be physical, but rather mental, as the landless community live in a constant state of fear of death or assault.
According to the CPT, between 2005 and 2006, threats of murder decreased by 22.18% (266 in 2005 and 207 in 2006). Torture also decreased by 9.09% (33 in 2005 and 30 in
3	A settlement is land that has been expropriated to the landless community for housing, sustainable living, and education. Land may be expropriated at the local, state, or federal level.
4 Encampments are ‘‘spaces of struggle and ... collective action, located in the countryside ... where landless families demand settlements’’ (CPT 2005, p. 14).
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
81
Table 1 Number of individual victims of violence
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Year Murder Threatof Attempted murder	murder	attacked
Torture
5 35 62 27 15 20 16
Table 2 Violence against occu- pied families
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Year	Families evicted
1997	17,070 1998	19,119 1999	21,468 2000	16,020 2001	13,455 2002	9,715 2003	25,292
Threat
23,515 7,937 5,009
22,304 16,142 25,876 35,352
of eviction
Homes destroyed
2,624 2,825 3,483 2,108 2,041 1,459 6,877
1997 30 1998 47 1999 27 2000 21 2001 29 2002 43 2003 39
37	92 46	89 52	96 82	58
132	37 244	36 266	64
640	381 247	449 445	611
95	365 33	254 26	158
405	380
2006). Interestingly, attempted murder of the landless increased by 176.92% (26 in 2005 and 72 in 2006) (cptnac.com.br, accessed 2008). According to the Human Rights Watch World Report (2009), ‘‘28 people were killed and 428 arrested in total conflicts throughout the country in 2007’’ (p. 162), and another 28 were killed in 2008 (cpt.org.br, accessed September, 2009).
Those guilty of contracting the murders of rural sympathizers or landless peasants are relatively immune from prosecution. The CPT found that ‘‘from 1985 to 2006, there were 1,104 incidents of conflict of which the murders of 1,464 workers were registered’’ (cptnac. com.br, accessed 2007). During the same period, 71 of the actual gunmen were convicted for the murders, and 19 of the individuals who had ordered the murders were also con- victed. What this data illustrates that it is highly unlikely for the gunman, let alone the landowner who ordered the murder, to be convicted for the assassination of a landless individual.
In terms of violence against occupied families, the following events occurred (Table 2).
As with Table 1, threats of judicial eviction are more common than actual evictions, thereby accentuating the constant fear of not only physical attacks, but also the loss of home.
One of the more disturbing phenomenons that have occurred in 2008 was the federal criminalization of the landless movement. Based on a decision at a governmental meeting in 2007, the Supreme Counsel of the Public Ministry of Rio Grande do Sul approved the ‘dissolution’ of the MST. According to Betto (2008), it was revealed that the government approved to ‘‘outlaw any mobilizations of the landless workers, including marches and walks, to intervene in settlement schools, to criminalize leaders and members, and to deactivate all encampments in Rio Grande do Sul’’ (accessed 2008). Mass police violence, death threats, forced evictions, arbitrary arrests increased rapidly throughout the country.
Physically Arrested
123
82	E. C. Heil
Landless resisters were being associated with the revolutionary armed forces in Colombia and were charged with the aim to change state law (ibid, 2008). With this new govern- mental approach to dismantle the landless movement, it is predicted that the numbers of violence perpetuated against landless resisters and their occupations will continue to increase.
Theorizing Decentralized State Power to Understand Social Injustices Against the Landless
The theoretical framework utilized in developing an understanding of decentralized state power is drawn from Mullins and Rothe’s (2008) discussion of state control at the macro- level over militia movements. According to Mullins and Rothe, ‘‘when laws are present and able to be enforced, regimes are in positions to ignore, or at best use symbolic means to appease, countering pressures’’ (p. 208). In other words, the Brazilian state is in a unique position in that it tolerates the violence against the landless until civil society (and possibly international society) speaks out against mass atrocities. Only when the civil society pressures the government will the media present images of arrests of the hired gunmen. On the other hand, as illustrated earlier, only a handful of instigators and perpetrators are ever prosecuted for the crimes against the landless. Therefore, the civil society is appeased with the image of justice while the unreported mass violence persists.
Aside from appeasing the civil society through minimal arrests, Mullins and Rothe offer a second aspect to their explanation of state control.
...[T]he ability of the state to bring enough force to bear to enforce the existing laws and reassert a monopoly on the use of force is indeed a crucial control. How- ever...the government is often unwilling or unable to do so. Governmental forces are too few and too scattered across the landscape to effectively bring militias under control (p. 208).
Whereas Mullins and Rothe were analyzing militias throughout Africa, this same philosophy may be applied to the power of the landowners. The landowners have historically structured a system of control amongst the Brazilian countryside that even if the state were to reassert its power and truly enforce laws that would benefit the landless, to overcome the landowners at this stage is practically impossible. Violence has become an accessible and acceptable tool in oppressing the landless movement because power is concentrated amongst the large landowners. Although a political democracy, the Brazilian state is relatively weak due to the historical circumstances that fuel the modern epoch of land reform. In other words, regarding issues of land reform and violence against the landless, the power of the landowners surpasses that of the governing and legal powers, and therefore, the Brazilian state has limited interest in controlling the actions of the landowners and their hired gunmen to protect the rights of the landless.
To understand the system of decentralized state power, there needs to be a discussion of the major players of Brazilian land reform. Each of these actors plays a role in the landless movement, as well as directly or indirectly facilitates the violence against the peasant resisters. The groups central in the battle for land are: The Instituto Nacional de Colon- izac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (The National Institute of Colonization and Land Reform, or Incra) (www.incra.gov.br), the Brazilian government (Federal level, state level, and municipal level), large landowners, and the transnational corporations.
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
83
Table 3 Families legally settled
Data derived from
www.incra.gov.br
Year
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Total
Families settled
63,477 43,486 36,301 81,254
127,506 136,358 488,382
Instituto Nacional de Colonizac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (Incra)
The Instituto Nacional de Colonizac ̧a ̃o e Reforma Agraria (Incra) is an institution federally created in 1970 with the overall purpose to prioritize land reform. More recently, Incra has focused its priorities on the development of landless settlements. According to its website (incra.gov.br, accessed 2007), its mission is: ‘‘to implement land reform... and to con- tribute to a sustainable rural development.’’ Its vision of the future is to be the international reference for those looking for a solution that will give way to social inclusion (ibid).
Active in the 27 Brazilian states as state level institutions, the role of Incra is to investigate land disputes. If the area in question is deemed unproductive, Incra initiates plans to expropriate the land for the purpose of landless settlements. Between the years 2001 and 2006, Incra has settled 488,382 families within the Brazilian countryside (See Table 3).
The State
The Brazilian state consists of major actors in the battle for the right to land, as some of the members have proven to be supportive players in landless rights. In its ideal form, land power for these state bodies comes from their ability to regulate land and to create and implement laws.
The current leader of Brazil is President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva (President Lula) who was first elected on January 1, 2003 as a member of PT (Worker’s Party). Lula was designated as the people’s president, for he was a former union president now rallying for land reform and workers’ rights in his electoral campaign. He received 60% of the popular vote in 2002, and there was an overwhelming ‘‘collective sense of relief on the part of many rural and worker’s rights movements, who felt that their grassroots call for social justice through agrarian reform would finally be realized (Whittman 2005, p. 1). Although not officially endorsing Lula through his first election, the MST publicly endorsed Lula during his second electoral campaign. Despite Lula not entirely fulfilling his campaign promises of 2002, the MST argued that the Brazilian society must vote for Lula to avoid ‘‘a return of US hegemony in Latin America’’ (Ste ́dile, quoted in Marques and Nakatani 2007, p. 2). In other words, Lula had strong support not only from the working class, but also the Brazilian landless who had previously rallied against unsympathetic governments.
A major land component of Lula’s presidency was the development of II National Plan for Agrarian Reform (II PNRA). Branching off of the failed PNRA established in 1985, II PNRA had the plan to settle 1,000,000 families in an 8 year period ‘‘in addition to
123
84	E. C. Heil
restructuring Brazil’s agricultural policy to provide more support for family farmers’’ (Whittman 2005, p. 1). By 2005, II PNRA still had not been implemented, yet landless movements continue to advocate for the plan’s full realization in the rural countryside.
Apart from the federal legislation is the local level government active in each state and municipality. Each state has a governor and vice-governor who are elected to office for a term of 4 years. To uphold the constitutionality of land reform, the governor works with the state level Incra offices active in each state. Although the state level legislation has a direct contact with the state organized offices of Incra, the municipal governments have first contact with those disputing over land.
The judicial branch is comprised the Supreme Federal Tribunal, the Higher Tribunal of Justice, and the Regional Federal Tribunals. Although the Supreme Federal Tribunal practices legal proceedings that are effective throughout the entire Brazilian union, the courts that are more prominent in the process of land expropriation are the individual state courts. According to Articles 125 and 126 of the Brazilian Constitution (1988): ‘‘The states shall organize their judicial system observing the principles established in the Constitu- tion’’ (Article 125) and ‘‘For the settlement of conflicts relating to the land property, the court shall designate special level judges with exclusive competence for agrarian matters’’ (Article 126). In other words, the agrarian disputes that are being analyzed are most likely to be solved within the state courts rather than the Supreme Federal Tribunal. Ideally, the role of the state courts should be that of the mediator and regulator of land policy. It is expected that the state courts enact the constitutional right to land, as well as to invoke judicial power over those guilty of criminal actions impeding land rights.
Large Landholders
The large landowners are the prominent actors in the fight against land reform. To them, land reform violates the constitutionality of privacy rights. In 1985, the large landholders developed an organization known as the Unia ̃o Democra ́tica Ruralista (UDR) (www.udr.org.br). ‘‘The UDR supporters represent a conglomeration of rural elites opposed to land reform, the progressive Church, and Communism. They are in favor of hands-off capitalism and the unregulated arming of all landowners’’ (Rose 2005, pp. 204– 205). According to the UDR’s official website (udr.org.br), ‘‘The Unia ̃o Democra ́tica Ruralista is a group determined to bring together the landowners under the rule of property rights, the maintenance of order, and the respect for the laws of the country’’ (Accessed 2008). The UDR claims to ‘‘provide judicial services to their [landholding] associates in cases of landless invasions. The type of judicial aid prohibits the reintegration of the landless groups, provides an inquiry of the land which has been invaded, as well as hold those who committed the crime [of land invasion] criminally responsible’’ (ibid). The group retains two permanent lawyers on staff to legally dispute the claims made by the landless. The UDR claims to have 2000 associates in their headquarter location (Presidente Prudente-SP), as well as the membership and support of all landowners throughout Brazil.
The membership base of the UDR remains anonymous, yet there exists information regarding the president is agricultural businessman Luiz Antonio Nathan Garza. Garza is the spokesperson and ambassador of the movement. He prominently negotiates with the Ministry of Agriculture and Incra, defending the constitutional right to maintain productive land. Although the membership is anonymous, some names of prominent landowners are available from media sources either through landless disputes or a public position against
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	85
land reform. Overall, however, it must be mentioned that the identity of the majority of landowners is highly secretive.
Transnational Corporations
The actors associated with transnational corporations are not as vocal as the landowners in their defense of land rights. Rather, the actors remain quiet unless they are countering an accusation made by the MST. Being so, this section will discuss the MST’s claims against the transnational organizations, and how these organizations obstruct true land reform and social equality throughout Brazil.
The leaders of the MST argue that what was once a battle against the large landholders has today become a struggle against transnational corporations. In an urgent action pub- lished on the MST website, the group argues:
...Latin America is the object of the great of the ‘neoliberal global colonizers,’ via the action of dozens of transnational corporations...who are shamelessly engaged in bio piracy... [Today] it is the race to monopolize genetic and pharmacological resources and the traditional and local knowledge that accompanies them, which have become strategic resources for the future of business in the global market (MST, Informa #114, accessed 2007).
According to the MST, transnational entities partake in attacks ‘‘against agriculture in order to control land, seeds, water, and soil’’ (MST, Informa #147, accessed December, 2007). The main ‘‘destructive’’ activities of the transnational corporations include: genetic modification (GM), monoculture, and environmental degradation. One of the main concerns of the landless movement is the increase of bio-fuels (which are commonly referred to as agro-fuels). According to the Transnational Institute Report (2004), ‘‘as the [agro-fuel] industry expands, it is ... providing a new promotional vehicle for GM crops, and posing a serious threat to food sovereignty’’ (p. 6). Thus, the MST sees their battle for land rights and social justice as a battle against global businesses that are monopolizing the Brazilian agriculture to advance the emergence of alternative fuels and an emerging agro-economy.
The top twenty companies that participate in the Brazilian agriculture are displayed in Table 4.
Many of these companies are openly acknowledged as enemies of the MST and the landless movements. Some other transnational organizations the MST battles are: Mons- anto, Syngenta Seeds, Bayer, and Aracruz. As stated by MST leader Joa ̃o Stedile, ‘‘[t]en transnational companies—Monsanto, Bunge (agribusiness and food), Cargill, ADM, BASF (chemicals),	Bayer,	Syngenta,	Norvartis,	Nestle ́ ,	and	Danone—control	virtually	all agrarian production, pesticides, transgenic seeds, and foreign commodities trading’’ (Ste- dile 2002, p. 51). In other words, members of the MST believe that the actors associated with the transnational corporations are attempting to control Brazilian agriculture in its entirety as they continue to explore Brazil’s workforce, food, water, seeds, and soil.
In this analysis, transnational corporations and landowners are regarded as a single power source. According to the MST, the obstacle to land reform has changed from the hands of the landowners to the owners of transnational corporations. The main reason for this comes to the point of land expropriation. Once an area of land is deemed unproductive by Incra, the land has to be bought, either by the federal government or some other body. The Constitution only states that unproductive land shall be sold for a productive manner, and the business created by transnational corporations is considered a productive manner.
123
86
E. C. Heil
Table 4	Top twenty agricultural companies in Brazil
Data derived from Anua ́rio Exame. Agronego ́cio, June, 2007
Company
1	Cargill 2	Bunge Alimentos 3	Souza Cruz 4	Wal-Mart 5	Sadia 6	Copersucar 7	Nestle ́ 8	Perdiga ̃ o 9	JBS 10 Sonae 11 Makro 12	Bunge Fertiliantes 13 ADM 14	Kraft Foods 15 Klabin 16 Suzano 17 VCP 18	LDC Brasil 19	Groupo Martins 20	Atacada ̃ o
Country of origination
USA Holland England USA Brazil Brazil Switzerland Combination Brazil
USA Holland Holland USA USA Brazil Brazil Brazil France Brazil Brazil
Annual Brazilian sales (millions of US dollars)
6,604 6,538 5,309 4,946 4,703 3,404 3,300 3,256 2,672 2,666 2,607 2,600 2,402 2,118 1,995 1,924 1,829 1,790 1,767 1,761
Agroindustrial
Thus, when transnational corporations place a higher bid than the federal government can afford for the said piece of land, the landowner will sell to the transnational. In the end, the landless are still without land, and a new corporation has created a role of productivity on what was previously deemed unproductive land. Because there are no Constitutional limitations to this process of buying and selling, and because the landowner has the right to sell the land to the highest bidder, this practice of transnational corporations buying out unproductive land is becoming increasingly more popular. Therefore, the landowners and transnational corporations, for the purposes of this analysis, become a single source of power. Although their power differentiates between global and national markets, because this analysis is focused on national power, the global differential will not be discussed.
Decentralized Power
Brazil has been identified as ‘‘an ‘autonomous institutional state’ [that] exercises a sig- nificant measure of autonomy from the dominant class and other societal forces’’ (Mid- larsky and Roberts 1985, p. 182). This type of state pursues ‘‘state interest that are distinguishable from those of the dominant class,’’ but in other instances, ‘‘class biases are implicit in its actions and policies’’ (ibid, 183). Although this type of state authority may be relevant in political and social realms where the dominant class does not feel threa- tened, I argue that a dual political world exists in which the land revolution threatens the dominant class’ capital accumulation and political interests. In the system of land conflict evident in rural Brazil, the state is weakened and decentralized as it primarily serves the
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	87
interest of the dominant class and controls the resisting masses through immense violence and arbitrary law. Accordingly, the state system evident in rural Brazil would be more akin to Midlarsky and Roberts’ ‘‘instrumentalist state’’ that is characterized by ruling ‘‘in the interests, and often through the persons, of the dominant class’’ (ibid, pp. 181–182). This type of system, which I argue as decentralized, rules ‘‘by proxy, though...coercive power’’ (ibid, p. 182).
In the decentralized system, the groups that exhibit the most strength in the battle for land are not members of the federal government, but rather the large landowners and the transnational capitalists. For this reason, to understand the power structure of those who are capable of controlling land reform, the structure must be understood as a web of dominant class power exerting control in all realms of land reform.
Figure 1 illustrates the immense power sharing, as well as the decentralization of state power. The first main element to understand in the power model of oppositional powers is to notice the power lines that attach the organizations together. Each power source is attached to each other with one of the two types of power levels. However, there is limited ‘strong’ power amongst the power systems. Strong power exists between: Landowner power over the federal government, the state government, the municipal government, and Incra; the power between Incra and the state government and municipal government, and; Federal government power over Incra. The weak systems of power stem from all forms of government over the landowners, from Incra to the landowners, and between the federal and state government. What this system implies is that each system has power over the other systems, but it is the landowners that demonstrate the most power over all other systems of power.
How, in a democratic state, is it possible that a small proportion of the overall popu- lation is able to generate such great oppositional strength and utilize illegal measures to control the population? The reasons are fourfold. One, in terms of politics, we will see that a number of the large landowners are either political figures themselves or have relatives who are political officers. Also, the landowners have the ability to raise the consciousness of small landowners who may not realize that they too are at ‘risk’ of having their land expropriated for the landless. Second, legally, as with the political power, a number of large landowners have special connections with legal powers. These connections may either be through being members of the judicial agencies themselves, friendship or support from the judicial bodies, or economically. In line with the first and second reasons,
Land Owners
-- Minimal Power — Strong Power
Federal Gov
State Gov
Incra
Municipal Gov
Fig. 1 Decentralized state power
123
88	E. C. Heil
landowners, as well as transnational corporations, have the means to pay political and legal elites to favor their fight against land reform. Finally, because of their anonymity in media sources, they are publicly absolved from any criminal wrongdoings on their land. The landowners who choose to use the media as an outlet have ability to criminalize the landless movement by speaking out against the actions of the landless, and how they, the landowners, are the true victims in the struggle for land.
As mentioned earlier, to know the names of all of the landowners is an almost impossible task. However, through the newspaper articles collected over a 6 month period, I was able to identify some of the landowners (See Table 5).
Although the names (or lack of names) of the landowners illustrates the notion of secrecy and irresponsibility, what is more powerful is the relationship of some of the landowners to the other power systems. Consider Table 6 which follows Table 5.
Of the 22 landowners identified, 41% were either political figures or related to political figures. One was a contact for a transnational corporation, one was the president of the UDR, one was a founder for a global Church, one was the mother of a famous artist, while the others were elite ranchers. Only one of the 22 landowners was acknowledged as a criminal in the sense that he was a Colombian drug dealer. It is inferred from this data is that a high percentage number of landowners have either a political connection or have high power associated with being a member of the dominant land owning class.
It must be reiterated that not all landowners are politicians, nor are all landowners so vehemently against the landless movement. However, those landowners that are against the movement are in a position to not only speak out against the movement, but also destroy the movement in its effort for true land and social reform. Consider the following quotes from landowning advocates/political figures against the movement:
•	‘‘Brazil is being victimized by a stealthy movement that is contesting the basic rights of out constitution, the right to property...We are going to fight for the right to have peace in the countryside, with guaranteed agricultural rights, without [land] invasions’’ (Valdir Colatto, Federal Deputy, June 22, 2007).
•	‘‘His first mandate, if re-elected...is to ‘destroy the MST’ and other groups that act on the margin of the law’’ (Jornal O Estado, referring to Federal Deputy Abelardo Lupion, September 18, 2006).
Table 5 Names of landowners
Names of landowners
Valdir Colatto
Luiz Antonio Nabhan Garcia
Guido Pellicciari Neto
Reverend Moon
Dr. Marmeleiro Nelso Rosalino Sandini
Eloy Bezerra da Silve Ad ́ılio Augusto Valada ̃o Miranda
Gustavo Duran Celso Biancardini Renan Calheiros Olavo Calheiros
123
Cleide Bergamaschi Pelicciara An ́ısop Loureiro An ́ısio Loureiro Neto Renato Festugato Neto
Maria Arau ́jo
Oscar Erm ́ıro
Carlos Frenderico Machado Dias
Alan de Silva e Silva Abelado Lupion Stael Fernanda Vitalmiro Bastos de Moura
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
89
Table 6 Vocation of large landowners
Names of landowners
Valdir Colatto
Luiz Antonio Nabhan Garcia
Guido Pellicciari Neto
Reverend Moon
Dr. Marmeleiro Nelso Rosalino Sandini
Eloy Bezerra da Silve
Ad ́ılio Augusto Valada ̃o Miranda
Gustavo Duran
Celso Biancardini
Renan Calheiros
Olavo Calheiros
Cleide Bergamaschi Pelicciara
An ́ısop Loureiro
An ́ısio Loureiro Neto
Renato Festugato Neto
Maria Arau ́jo
Oscar Erm ́ıro
Carlos Frenderico Machado Dias
Alan de Silva e Silva Abelado Lupion Stael Fernanda Vitalmiro Bastos de Moura
Vocation
Federal Deputy President of UDR
Cattle-dealer Founder of the Unification Church Medical Doctor
N/A Coordinator of the national park
Colombian drug dealer Legislative seat (1996) Senator Brother of Renan Calheiros N/A
Mayor Brother in law of ex-governor Contact for Monsanto Seeds Cascavel Mother of artist Eduardo Arau ́jo Owner of 40 ranches N/A
N/A
Federal Deputy
Mother of Licensed deputy Jose ́ Janene
Rancher accused of assassinating American nun
•
‘‘Invasion is a crime, and as he threatened to fulfill [this crime], we are asking for the suspension of the benefits that permit his liberty’’ (Nabhan in reference to MST leader Jose ́ Rainha, June 26, 2007).
Landowner opposition to the landless movement is far from publicized, and given the political position of many of the landowners, the actions of opposition have proven to be successful.
Because of the landowners’ level of political, economic, legal, power, as well as media persuasion, they have the ability to dictate intervention with limited legal repercussions. This is done either by dominating the local courts or enlisting the help of local and state police to remove the landless from their camps. If either of these mechanisms fails, the landowners are known to recruit hired gunmen to eliminate rural leaders, as well as rural sympathizers. According to Rose (2005), by 2000, rural killings were on a steady increase, as was the cost to kill a judge, sheriff, mayor, or bishop (A rural union official could be murdered for $329–$987, whereas the murder of a rural judge, sheriff, mayor or bishop costs approximately $19,737). The majority of the payment has to be made in advance by the person who is hiring the killing. Interestingly, there is no price for the killing of a
123
90	E. C. Heil
landless community member. The importance of their life or death is not economically quantifiable, and their murder can easily be accomplished by the landowner’s jagunc ̧o.
Aside from relative impunity from violent acts (discussed earlier), the landowners have also utilized their privileged (i.e., politically, economically, and legally powerful) position to hamper land reform. For example, the UDR quickly learned that in order to protect their land from government expropriation, they had to defend the land themselves. According to Rose (2005), in the 1980s, ‘‘[e]very affiliate of the UDR was rumored ‘to have an executive committee that overlaps with the death squad in the State Department of Public Safety.’ Thus, the UDR regularly employed hit men to knock off troublesome individuals in the interior of the country’’ (p. 206). The UDR, because of their political ties, clearly under- stood their impunity for they understood that ‘‘the fix was...in so well that a mandate (the hirer of an assassin) did not have to worry about going to jail’’ (Rose 2005, p. 206). As the earlier CPT data has already illustrated, only a handful of the mandates actually serve any sort of jail time.
Aside from the landed elite, there also exists a power overruling the state’s control that results in illegal coercion of the landless resisters facilitated by the transnational class. The government has obligations to fulfill for the various economic factions that have pressured the political body, and because of this, leaders of the MST argue that the absence of land reform is caused by the relationship between transnational capital and the federal state.
A key reason for the relationship between the federal state and transnational corpora- tions is due to Brazil’s external debt. According to the World Bank’s World Development Report (2006), the external debt of Brazil is 235,432 millions of US dollars. 54% of the Gross National Income5 is spent of debt relief. The origination of the debt crisis facing Brazil today dates to the 1970s when North American companies offered cheap loans to finance investments in South American countries. According to Marcos Arruda (1994):
The main component of the adjustment process prescribed by [the lending institu- tions] for Brazil...involves restructuring [the] economy so as to drive all savings to investments in exports. The logic was: exports are the main source of foreign cur- rency; sell your products abroad and you will have currency to pay the debt. So everywhere in [Brazil] there has been a massive effort to produce enough goods for export at the expense of the internal economy (p. 46).
Thus, what has occurred in Brazil has been a process of filtering the internal economy towards the external market.
Even more appealing to the Brazilian state is the investment of transnational corpora- tions in the Brazilian system, especially the agricultural sector. The end result of the export service and debt relief is that ‘‘the countryside is transformed into a territory of material production for exportation; this productions is fundamentally of monoculture on a great scale, [plus] the intensive use of machines and agro-toxins- which expels workers- and banked by international capitalists’’ (www.biodiversidadla.org, June 21, 2007). In other words, due to the economic priorities of the state, the possibility of land reform has been overshadowed by the investment of transnational corporations.
The transnational class incorporates coercive measures against landless resistance groups by affecting the right to property and work. The agribusiness does not cater to the state or to landowners, but rather to transnational capital. In order to establish the most efficient practices in combination with profit, many private agribusinesses have incorpo- rated a system of modern day slavery. Slave laborers are from the most impoverished class,
5	The GNI of Brazil is 552.1 billion of US dollars (World Development Report 2006). 123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence
91
Table 7 Slave labor in Brazil
Data derived from
www.cptnac.com.br
Slave freed
2001	2,416 2002	5,559 2003	5,010 2004	3,221 2005	4,585
laborers
Slave laborers revealed
N/A N/A 8,385 6,075 7,707
most of who have been displaced by agricultural machinery. The slave laborers work in the harshest conditions, face immense violence, and are indebted to their contractors. In 2001, the CPT reported 2,4166 recognized slave laborers. In 2005, 4,585 slave laborers were freed, while 7,707 incidents of slave labor were reported.7 The following data, derived from the CPT 2006 report, represents the numbers of slave laborers exposed as well as freed slaves from 2001 to 2005 (Table 7).
According to Human Rights Watch (2009), in 2007, 8,653 people were in conditions of slave labor. Although some transnational corporations have hired private security to forcefully remove landless resisters from their property,8 the majority of the violence associated with the transnational class is related to the system of labor.
As the web of decentralized power becomes more complex, Incra, the governmental body enlisted as the land reform agent, becomes relatively invisible. Incra is in a precarious position in that it has the responsibility to bend to the demands of the landless, the state, and landowners. Although it is the body that has the power to define productivity of land and expropriate the unproductive areas, a review of media stories revealed that Incra as a land institution has limited power.
In some instances, Incra has the ability to negotiate with landless organizations and meet the needs of land expropriation. Most of the negotiations end with the landless putting an end to their protest activity, which demonstrates Incra’s political hold over the landless movements. In other words, the landless have some faith in Incra’s ability, in that the movements will halt their protest activities under the auspices that Incra will negotiate land reform. On the other hand, Incra also works under the power of landowners, and in many cases, is unable to fulfill its obligation of settling land that had been deemed unproductive. Of these lands, some have been in the process of appeals or negotiations for over 2 years, yet Incra is unable to expropriate the land for settlement. Much of the land expropriation barrier is due to the landowners, with the assistance of the UDR, obstructing the expro- priation process.
The political power of Incra is mainly held in the ability to expropriate lands for settlement, as well as to pick which lands will be settled and how many landless may register for the settlements. In the larger Brazilian society, Incra still yields to the pressure of the state and the large landowners. Thus, whereas Incra may display an element of political power, it is not that of the state or the large landowners. Therefore the role of Incra in the web of power is best understood as Incra actors bending to demands from external
6 7 8
61 of these cases individuals were minors.
Slave labor is reported to the CPT by victims, families of victims, and rural syndicates.
For example, On October 21, 2007, Valmir Mota de Oliveira (Known as ‘‘Keno’’), an activist and landless leader, was shot two times point-blank range by security guards hired by the transnational Swiss corporation Syngenta.
123
92	E. C. Heil
sources. Incra does not have autonomy, and is at most times, overtaken by appealing landowners or protesting landless. Thus, because Incra sways between fulfilling the demands of the resistance groups and the demands of the oppositional groups, their own power is limited.
Thus far, the different players have been identified in terms of their ability to accom- modate or criminalize resistance organizations. What has yet to be discussed is the role of corruption as a key factor in the decentralization of the state. In order for the system of decentralized state authority evident in the rural countryside, it is crucial to understand that many of the actors who appear to be weak under the power of the large landowners are actually corrupted through legitimate desires of capital accumulation and occupational protection. Numerous examples of political and legal corruption in Brazil have been documented (Geddes and Neto 1992; Prillaman 2000; Weyland 1998; Fleisher 1996...) and these elements of corruption are an underlying factor regarding the weakened state in the Brazilian countryside. Landowners and transnational corporations have the ability to pay off state agents or buy political or judicial seats. Because their power is so intimately tied to land rights and capital growth, landowners and transnational corporations have historically blocked attempts at land reform either through threats to withhold political support (i.e., votes), payoffs, or incestuous political and judicial relationships resulting in decisions that represent and facilitate the interests of the dominant class. Because of the historical system of political and judicial corruption evident in rural Brazil, the state’s authority is illegitimate and decentralized amongst the dominant land holders and trans- national class.
Corruption also plays into the relative impunity experienced by the instigators and perpetrators of violence. The landed elite and transnational class has the ability to pay off or threaten the job security of judicial agents if the investigation of a violent act draws near to a landowner. More importantly, landowners and members of the transnational class have the resources to pay security officers, off-duty police officers, or jagunc ̧os to conduct the violent acts against the landless resisters. With money and occupational threats, the per- petrators of violence will uphold their silence and maintain autonomy from the actual managers of violence. With this, it is evident that corruption is both intimately tied to land reform and coercive control, and is a key element in the decentralized state structure.
Discussion
This case study has shown that the Brazilian landless live in a constant state of fear for life and home. Relatively unheard of, the Brazilian landless lives in a constant state of fear for life and home. Brazil has been deemed by the international community as becoming a powerful player in the global economy, but the reality is that the Brazilian state is rela- tively weak and unable to exert control over the actions of the powerful landowners. More importantly, the Brazilian state and society has come to tolerate the violence against the landless for they are deemed as a disposable population.
In this article, I have presented a theoretical framework to add to the existing integrated critical criminological theories that explaining the historical circumstances of land tenure and rural violence that have led to the current system of decentralization, corruption, and the political and legal subordination to the dominant landholding and transnational classes. Power in the Brazilian countryside has historically rested in the hands of the landowners. The end result is a democratic system based on ideals, but a reality of control by pow- erfully anonymous entities. Because of the concentrated power exhibited by the
123
The Brazilian Landless Movement, Resistance, and Violence	93
landowners, there exists limited control on their activities, and therefore, these agents opposed to the landless movement have the opportunity to utilize illegal means of control and oppression. The effect of decentralized power, the criminalization of the movement and the relative impunity to those guilty of crimes against humanity, fosters a system favorable to violence and the expulsion of a marginal class. Thus, the landowners continue their hold of power throughout Brazil, thereby invoking the strength to socially control the landless movement with criminalization and violence.
References
Arrigo, B. (2000). Social justice and critical criminology: On integrating knowledge. Contemporary Justice Review, 3(1), 7–37.
Arruda, M. (1994). Brazil: Drowning in Debt. In 50 Years is enough: The case against the World Bank and the international monetary fund. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Betto, F. (2008). Abolish the MST, or the unproductive latifundos? Grassroots International from www.biodiversidadela.org.
Branford, S., & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil. London: Latin American Bureau.
Comissa ̃o Pastoral da Terra. www.cptnac.com.br. Commisa ̃o Pastoral da Terra. (2006). Conflitos no Campo Brasil 2005 CPT, Goiaˆna- GO. Federal Constitution of Brazil. (1988). From planalto.gov.br. Fleisher, D. (1996). Political corruption in Brazil. Crime, Law, and Social Change, 25(4), 297–321. Fontes, G. (2004). Interview with Geraldo Fontes of the MST. In Motion magazine, September 2,
inmotionmagazine.com. Geddes, B., & Neto, A. R. (1992). Institutional sources of corruption in Brazil. Third World Quarterly,
13(4), 641–651. Human Rights Watch. (2009). World report from http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2009. Kauzlarich, D., & Kramer, R. C. (1998). Crimes of the American nuclear state: At home and abroad.
Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press. Marques, R. M., & Nakatani, P. (2007). The state and economy in Brazil. Monthly Review, 58(8).
www.monthlyreview.org. Midlarsky, M., & Roberts, K. (1985). Class, state, and revolution in central America: Nicaragua and El
Salvador compared. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 29(2), 163–193. Mullins, C. W., & Rothe, D. L. (2008). Blood, power, and bedlam: Violations of international criminal law
in post-colonial Africa. New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing. Prillaman, W. (2000). The judiciary and democratic decay in Latin America: Declining confidence in the
rule of law. Westport, CT: Praeger. Quinny, R. (1980). Class, state, and crime. United Kingdom: Longman Group. Rose, R. S. (2005). The unpast: Elite violence and social control in Brazil, 1954–2000. Athens, OH: Ohio
University Press. Stedile, J. P. (2002). Landless battalions: The Sem Terra movement of Brazil. New Left Review, Trans-
national Institute Agrofuels: Towards a Reality Check in Nine Key Areas June, 2007, tni.org/reports/
ctw/agrofuels.pdf. Unknown Author. (1981). Comissa ̃o de Justic ̧a defende Religiosos. Diario de Pernambuco September 9,
p. 3d. Weyland, K. (1998). The politics of corruption in Latin America. Journal of Democracy, 9(2), 108–121. Whittman, H. (2005). Agrarian reform under lula- marching to a historic crossroads. Mstbrazil.org, February
26, 2005. World Bank. (2006). World development report.
123
