2003
Economics
Journal of Agrarian Change,
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements in the Brazilian Agrarian Reform
CARMEN DIANA DEERE

This article examines the evolution of the demand for women’s land rights in the Brazilian agrarian reform through the prism of the three main rural social movements: the landless movement, the rural unions and the autonomous rural women’s movement. Most of the credit for raising the issue of women’s land rights rests with women within the rural unions. That women’s formal land rights were attained in the constitutional reform of 1988 was largely a by- product of the effort to end discrimination against women in all it dimensions. The achievement of formal equality in land rights, nonetheless, did not lead to increases in the share of female beneficiaries of the reform, which remained low in the mid-1990s. This was largely because securing women’s land rights in practice was not a top priority of any of the rural social movements. Moreover, the main social movement determining the pace of the agrarian reform, the land- less movement, considered class and gender issues to be incompatible. By the late 1990s, nonetheless, there was growing awareness that failure to recognize women’s land rights was prejudicial to the development and consolidation of the agrarian reform settlements and thus the movement. The growing consensus among all the rural social movements of the importance of securing women’s land rights, coupled with effective lobbying, encouraged the State in 2001 to adopt specific mechanisms for the inclusion of women in the agrarian reform.
Keywords: agrarian reform, social movements, women’s land rights, Brazil
INTRODUCTION
From a gender perspective, the Brazilian agrarian reform stands out in terms of its relatively low share of female beneficiaries as compared with other Latin
Carmen Diana Deere, Professor of Economics and Director of the Center for Latin American, Caribbean and Latino Studies at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. e-mail: Deere@econs.umass.edu
Most of the research for this paper was undertaken while the author was a Fulbright-Hays Scholar during 2000 at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. I am grateful to Paola Cappellin, Maria José Carneiro, and Anita Brumer for facilitating my research in Brazil, to Merrilee Mardon for research assistance, and to all the above for insightful comments on earlier versions of this article. I am also indebted to Magdalena León, with whom I conducted initial research in Brazil in 1998, for permis- sion to use material in an earlier co-authored working paper.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Henry Bernstein and Terence J. Byres 2003.
258	Carmen Diana Deere
American countries. This is curious since Brazil in 1988 was among the first to stipulate explicitly that women could be potential beneficiaries and, along with Colombia, to introduce the possibility of joint adjudication and titling to couples of land distributed through the agrarian reform. Yet, in the mid-1990s, women constituted only 12.6 per cent of the beneficiaries in Brazil compared with 45 per cent in recent land distributions in Colombia. Further, a comparative analysis with Latin American countries that introduced gender-progressive agrarian legis- lation in the 1990s shows that these measures were least implemented in Brazil (Deere and León 2001). This raises the question of why it has been such a laggard in securing women’s land rights.
One reason is that whereas in Brazil joint adjudication and titling to couples is an option, in most other countries it is now mandatory that lands distributed by the State be jointly titled. Given deep-seated cultural practices, supported by legal norms until recently,1 that only husbands represent the household and man- age its assets, it is not surprising that joint titling must be mandatory for this measure to be implemented in practice. Moreover, in most countries the attain- ment and implementation of gender-progressive legislation has depended on the existence of strong rural women’s organizations and their persistence in demand- ing recognition of women’s land rights (Deere and León 2001, chapter 6).
What is also curious about the Brazilian case is that rural women, beginning in the 1980s, began to participate in growing numbers in rural unions and in the nascent landless movement, as well as to form their own autonomous organiza- tions (Deere and León 1999). Their demands for land rights were formally at- tained in the 1988 Federal Constitution, which established that in land to be distributed through the agrarian reform, ‘land titles or use rights be given to men, to women, or to both, independent of their civil status’ (Article 189, in da Luz 1996, 177). But, after 1988, there was relatively little follow-up with respect to implementing women’s land rights.
It took 12 years until some of the rural social movements successfully cham- pioned women’s land rights at the national level. In August 2000, the demand for the joint adjudication and titling of land to couples under the agrarian reform finally figured prominently in the largest national demonstration yet to be held of rural women. This march on the capital city of Brasilia, known as the Marcha das Margaridas, was coordinated by the Women’s Commission of the national agricultural workers’ union, CONTAG (Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura), in coalition with one of the regional organiza- tions of autonomous rural women, the MMTR-NE (Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Noreste) and other groups. As in other Latin American countries, once organized rural women began to demand land rights and consist- ently confront the State on this issue, the institute of agrarian reform, INCRA
1	The 1988 Federal Constitution of Brazil established that ‘the rights and obligations of the marital society are to be jointly exercised by the man and the woman’ (Article 226, in CFEMEA 1996, 49). Most Latin American countries established the dual headed household through constitutional or civil code reform in the 1970s and 1980s (Deere and León 2001, Table 2.1).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	259
(Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agraria) was forced to revise its regulations.
The main question addressed in this article is why it took so long for organ- ized rural women to demand effective recognition of their land rights. I argue that this is related to the multiple and often competing venues for participation which opened up to rural women in the 1980s and 1990s and the many priorities of these rural social movements. Moreover, it was not until the exclusion of women began to have real practical consequences for the consolidation of the agrarian reform settlements (the assentamentos) that women’s land rights became an issue within the main social movement leading the agrarian reform, the MST (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra), and for the State.
Recognition of the importance of women’s land rights generally takes place for two reasons, what we have called elsewhere the ‘productionist’ and the ‘em- powerment’ arguments (Deere and León 1998, 2001).2 The productionist argu- ment refers to the recognition that women’s land rights are associated with an increase in the well-being of women and their children, as well as an enhance- ment of their productivity and, hence, the well-being of their community and society. The empowerment argument recognizes that women’s land rights are critical to enhancing their bargaining power within the household and commun- ity, to ending their subordination to men and, hence, to achieving real equality between men and women. In Brazil, women gained formal land rights as a by- product of the process to achieve equality between men and women in all of its legal dimensions, through the expansion of women’s rights in the 1988 Consti- tution. But the attainment of specific mechanisms of inclusion of women in the agrarian reform – to increase the share of women with effective land rights – was not achieved until the productionist arguments were better understood and inter- nalized both by the State and all of the rural social movements.
Agrarian reform was once again on the Brazilian national agenda in the 1980s largely as a result of the actions of the landless movement, the MST. The move- ment was born in southern Brazil in the late 1970s around a series of land occu- pations. By the early 1980s – the period of transition to democracy from military rule – these occupations had spread nationally (Fernandes 1996, 66–7). The ori- gins of the movement are found in the Christian-base communities that prolifer- ated in rural areas and shantytowns, beginning in the 1960s, in concert with liberation theology. The land invasions which grew out of this consciousness- raising process were supported by the Pastoral Land Commission, the CPT (Comissão Pastoral da Terra), which was organized by the National Council of Catholic Bishops in 1975, and which increasingly publicized and gave coherence to these land struggles. The CPT also played a crucial role in bringing together landless workers from different states. After a series of regional meetings, the
2	These are a synthesis of Bina Agarwal’s (1994) detailed development of the four principle argu- ments for women’s land rights: to enhance their welfare, efficiency, equality and empowerment. For a summary of how women’s land rights have evolved in the thinking of international institutions, the international women’s movement and among governments, see Deere and León (2001, chapter 4).
260	Carmen Diana Deere
first national meeting in 1984 resulted in the founding of the MST (Fernandes 1996, 70–8; Stedile and Fernandes 1999). The MST today is organized in 22 states and is the leading force in the struggle for agrarian reform (Hammond 1999).
The other main force behind agrarian reform has been the rural unions. These have quite a heterogenous membership, being composed of agricultural wage workers and tenants, as well as family farmers. They were consolidated on a national scale under the federated union structure of CONTAG during the period of military dictatorship (1964–84). In this period they were the main vehicle of State control as well as of assistance in rural areas, primarily through their provision of social services such as health care.3 In the period of transition to democratic rule, local and state federations became main foci of contestation by the forces of the new unionism, led by the leftist oppositional national union, the Central Workers’ Union, the CUT (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores) (Maybury-Lewis 1996). In the mid-1990s, CONTAG affiliated with the CUT. By then, both organizations were militant participants in the struggle for agrar- ian reform, often acting in concert with the MST, but also competing with it at times at the local, state and/or national level. The autonomous rural women’s movement, today linked in the National Articulation of Rural Women Workers, ANMTR (Articulação Nacional das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Agricolas), has its roots in the activities of the Christian-base committees in the 1960s and 1970s as well as in the rise of the new unionism in the 1980s.
In the next section, I briefly summarize agrarian reform efforts up to the mid- 1990s. I then trace the development of the rural women’s movement and show how the demand for women’s land rights within the unions and autonomous rural women’s movement led to its inclusion in the 1988 Constitution. The next section considers the mechanisms of exclusion of women in the meagre agrarian reform efforts during the period of military rule, and how these were not ameli- orated in the renewed reform efforts of the 1985–96 period. The subsequent section considers why none of the rural social movements, but particularly the MST, were very effective advocates for women’s land rights in this period. The sixth section turns to developments since 1996, when all of the rural social move- ments began to internalize gender concerns and, specifically, women’s land rights, to a much greater degree than in the past, resulting in the adoption in 2001 of specific mechanisms of inclusion of women in the agrarian reform. The main findings are summarized in the conclusion.
BACKGROUND
The struggle for agrarian reform in Brazil dates from the early 1960s. In this period, the labour and peasant movements were gaining strength, the latter organizing against the injustices of the traditional landholding system, the fazenda,
3	The rural health care system is financed by a 1 per cent tax on farm sales. On the growth of union membership during the period of military rule, see Maybury-Lewis (1996).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	261
or large estate with a dependent labour force working under non-capitalist labour relations. Under the regime of President João Goulart, the first labour legislation was passed, which extended to rural workers many of the rights and privileges of urban workers, including the right to organize into unions. In addition, an agrarian reform institute was created and legislation was introduced defining which lands could be expropriated for the purpose of agrarian reform. These measures were sufficient to provoke a military coup in March 1964, one which ushered in 21 years of military rule (Cardoso 1997, 18–19).
Given the high degree of mobilization around agrarian reform at the time, as well as pressure from the United States Government, which was championing agrarian reform under the Alliance for Progress,4 the military government of General Castelo Branco was forced to adopt a mild land reform law in 1964, the Estatuto da Terra. This law provided for large landholdings (latifundia) to be expropriated with compensation when it was considered to be in the social interest.5 However, farms considered to be ‘rural enterprises’, vaguely defined as those that ‘exploit the land economically and rationally’, were exempt from the reform (Hall 1990, 216–17). Among the intended beneficiaries of the reform were those who worked on the expropriated estate, including squatters, wage workers, sharecroppers and renters (Minc 1985, 90).
Little was accomplished with respect to land redistribution under military rule, since the military was beholden to the traditional landlord class, and its primary interest was in supporting the modernization of agriculture. Govern- ment policy in the 1970s centred on the modernization of the fazendas through the provision of abundant, subsidized credit. The larger the estate, the more credit it was eligible for, encouraging the growing concentration of land (Cardoso 1997, 19). Particularly favoured were the growing of soya for export and agribusiness interests in lumber and cattle ranching. The modernization policy also provoked a change in labour relations, with the resident labour force of tenants on the fazendas replaced by a temporary wage labour force. The military government’s priority in terms of solving the problems of landlessness and rural conflict was focused on planned and spontaneous colonization of the Amazonian frontier, which coincided in purpose with the evolving doctrine of Brazilian national security.6 For the millions dispossessed by the modernization policy, the main option was migration to urban areas and Brazil’s major cities mushroomed in size.
4	Under the Alliance for Progress, promulgated in 1961, shortly after the Cuban revolution, United States development assistance was made conditional on Latin American countries pursuing agrarian reform. 5	Latifundia were defined as those 600 times larger than the regionally defined farm module. The size of these farm modules was determined by a combination of criteria, including the population density of the region, land quality, type of activities pursued, etc., and ranged from 2 to 12 hectares. 6	In order to secure its borders, the military embarked on a very ambitious road-building project throughout the Amazon region. Spontaneous settlement of the North, West-central and Northwest of Brazil ended up being a much more important phenomenon than planned settlement (Hall 1990, 208–9; Cardoso 1997, 21). But through the 1980s, rural–urban migration significantly exceeded rural–rural migration.
262	Carmen Diana Deere Table 1. Distribution of farmland in Brazil, 1985
Farm size (ha)
Total number of farms (%)
less than 10 10 –100 100 –1000 1000+ 0.9
100.0 (5,793,004)
Source: Brasil (1990, 2–3).
During the whole period of military rule, 1964–84, only 185 estates were expropriated (Cardoso 1997, 22). Thus at the beginning of the democratic tran- sition, land continued to be extremely concentrated, as shown in Table 1. One per cent of the farms, those larger than 1000 ha, held 44 per cent of the land. The Gini coefficient of land concentration had increased from 0.825 in 1940, to 0.853 in 1980, being among the highest in Latin America (Thiesenhusen and Melmed- Sanjak 1990, 396). In the mid-1980s, the number of landless and near-landless families was estimated to be of the order of between 6 and 11 million (Maybury- Lewis 1996, 28–9; Hall 1990, 207).
Upon the return of civilian rule in 1985, President Jose Sarney introduced a proposal for a National Agrarian Reform Plan of the New Republic (PNRA- NR) and created a new Ministry for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (MIRAD). With the goal of stemming rural–urban migration and encouraging small-scale production, his administration set the goal of expropriating 43 mil- lion hectares of land and settling 1.4 million households over a period of four years (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 110). The landed oligarchy quickly organized themself in opposition, creating the União Democratica Ruralista (UDR), which became a very effective anti-reform lobbying group in the national congress. The PNRA-NR was redrafted 12 times before it became law in October 1985. In the final version, many more properties were ineligible for expropriation than under the original legislation. The debates over the PNRA-NR overlapped with the drafting of Brazil’s new constitution. The landlord’s lobby, the UDR, was successful in making sure that the constitutional provisions for agrarian reform were left quite vague. For example, while land that does not serve a social function could still be expropriated, ‘productive’ farms, irrespective of size, were made exempt from expropriation (Hall 1990, 219–20).7 Given this context, little progress was made in the late 1980s on agrarian reform. Under the Sarney Government, only 89,950 families were settled on 4.5 million hectares of land
7	A productive farm was defined as one on which 80 per cent of the surface is effectively utilized, where ecological and labour standards are respected, and where ‘the use is considered to be of common benefit to land owners and workers’.
52.9 37.3 8.9
Total area of farmland (%)
2.7 18.6 35.0 43.7 100.0
(374.9 million ha)
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	263
(Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 110). Many of the expropriated estates were ones that had been occupied by peasant groups in land occupations, particularly in the South. The main innovation of this period was that beneficiaries were provided with credit at subsidized terms through a programme known as PROCERA (Hall 1990, 225). But, by 1989, the reform effort was weakening and during the next administration came to a virtual standstill (Cardoso 1997, 23). All told, between 1964 and 1994 only 850 agrarian reform settlements were created, bene- fiting 143,514 families (Cardoso 1997, 23). The total amount of land incorpor- ated in these settlements (8.1 million hectares) represented only around 2 per cent of the total land reported in farms in the 1985 agricultural census.
PLACING WOMEN’S LAND RIGHTS ON THE AGENDA
The genesis of the rural women’s movement is found in the context of the democratic opening of the 1980s and the consolidation of the feminist and women’s movement in Brazil (Alvarez 1990). In rural areas, the Christian base communities and women’s groups organized by the CPT in the previous decade often provided the formative experience that led rural women to question social injustice, often linked to health or education issues (Cappellin 1997, 646). But, given that the main organizational structures in rural areas were the unions, in the decade of the 1980s the rural women’s movement developed around two central demands: the incorporation of women into the unions and the extension of social security benefits, including paid maternity leave and retirement, to rural women workers (Siqueira 1991, 58). These demands reflected the growing par- ticipation of rural women in the agricultural labour force and the discrimination that women faced both as wage workers and within the rural unions.
Through the mid-1980s, in the unions affiliated with CONTAG, it was gen- erally assumed that only one person per household could be a union member, generally the male household head. Moreover, women were rarely considered to work in agriculture, their work being ‘invisible’, whether as unpaid family workers or temporary wage workers. In the north-eastern state of Paraíba, for example, union leaders argued that women were not rural workers; that since they were a dependent of their husbands they had no need to join the unions because they had guaranteed benefits; and they even claimed that the unionization of wives was prohibited by law, although this was not the case (MMTR-NE 1987; Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 328).
Since the unions were the main source of health care in rural areas, the exclu- sion of women from union membership meant that female household heads were at a severe disadvantage. Women were also at a disadvantage in terms of retirement benefits, since only one person per family was eligible for retirement benefits, the household head. Moreover, whereas workers received 50 per cent of the minimum wage upon retirement, their widows received a survivor’s pen- sion equivalent to only 30 per cent (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 122–3). But it was not until 1985, at the Fourth Congress of CONTAG, that rural women’s issues were seriously addressed in a national forum of the labour movement.
264	Carmen Diana Deere
The impetus came from the first official gathering of the Movement of Rural Women Workers (MMTR, Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais) of the Sertão Central in the north-eastern state of Pernambuco. The roots of the MMTR in the Northeast can be traced to meetings held in Brejo, Paraíba and Serra Tablada in the Sertão Central of Pernambuco during 1982 and 1983, largely focused on the emergency situation provoked by a prolonged drought. But by 1984, when the MMTR-Sertão Central was officially founded, the main concern was how to increase the participation of rural women workers within the union movement (Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de Pernambuco: FETAPE 1986). At this meeting a proposal was formulated to present to the CONTAG Congress in Brasilia that a priority of the organization should be the unionization of rural women workers and consideration of their concerns (Cappellin 1989, 256). The women’s demands were backed by the male leaders of FETAPE, who accompanied the women to Brasilia.
Rural women union members in the South were also meeting regularly in the early 1980s, concerned principally with how to increase their numbers within the local and state union structure. In Rio Grande do Sul, for example, the first of what were to become annual meetings of women in the leadership of FETAG- RS (Federação dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura no Rio Grande do Sul), took place in 1981 (Prá and Britto 1988, 29). The First State Meeting of Rural Women Workers organized by FETAG-RS and the CPT in October 1985 was attended by some 10,000 rural women (Stephen 1997, 214). FETAG-RS’s State Commis- sion of Rural Women Workers grew out of this meeting, which also selected 48 women to attend the Fourth CONTAG Congress (FETAG-RS 1998, 6–7).
Although women represented only 1 per cent of the participants at this national congress (Portella and Camurça no date), CONTAG adopted the goal of incorporating women into the union structure and recognized that women experienced specific problems of discrimination, particularly wage discrimination. Local-level unions were instructed to begin encouraging women’s participation and to train women to occupy leadership positions. They were also encouraged to elect women as delegates to departmental and national congresses (Siqueira 1991, 69–70). The need for rural women, particularly those in the family farming regime, to declare that their profession was that of rural women workers was also discussed, both as a means of raising their consciousness as well as facilitat- ing their incorporation into unions and access to social security benefits (MMTR- NE 1987, Appendix; CONTAG 1988).
One of the factors which explains the opening of CONTAG to women mem- bers at this point in time was the growth of what is known as ‘the new unionism’ and the competition between CONTAG and the recently formed and more radical CUT (Central Única dos Trabalhadores) for new members. For the first time in many years, contested elections were taking place at the local and state level,8 and
8	On the heterogeneity within the union structure affiliated with CONTAG, see Maybury-Lewis (1996). By the end of the military dictatorship, the local syndicates and state federations were differ- entiated by either being assistencialist (concerned primarily with the delivery of social services), corrupt (pelayo) or combative. It was the latter who affiliated to the CUT.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	265
women were coming to be viewed as a potential positive force for change within the traditional union structure.9 By 1987 women represented approximately 29 per cent of the membership of the unions affiliated with CONTAG.10
During this same period the CUT, at its Second National Congress in 1986, organized the National Commission on the Question of the Working Woman, to address the concerns of both urban and rural women. The impulse for this latter development also came from the Northeast, from the state of Paraíba, where the first state-level Women’s Secretariat had been created at the First State CUT Congress in 1985 (Cappellin 1989, 260). The Women’s Secretariat had been a demand of the MMTR of Brejo, along with the demand for recogni- tion of women’s land rights, specifically, that land under the agrarian reform be jointly titled to couples (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 324–5).
The demand for women’s land rights was also raised in the South in this period. In the text drafted in preparation for a rural women worker’s congress in Rio Grande do Sul in 1986, organized by the group known as ‘the Margaridas’11 (after the slain Northeastern union leader, Margarida Alves), it was proposed ‘that the property title distributed in the agrarian reform be made out in name of the couple irrespective of their legal marital status’. Moreover, ‘if the family is the basis for selection of the beneficiaries, that the rights of female household heads (widows, separated women, single mothers) to the property and benefits of the agrarian reform be recognized’ (MEMTR 1986, section 2.4).
During the term of President José Sarney, in 1985, the National Council on Women’s Rights, the CNDM (Conselho Nacional de Direitos da Mulher), had been created under the Ministry of Justice, which included representatives of civil society, including many feminists. The CNDM, working in tandem with the growing rural women’s movement, was largely responsible for the enhanced State attention to rural women’s issues in the mid-1980s (Siqueira 1991, 63; Barsted 1994). EMBRATER, the rural extension service of the Ministry of Agriculture, organized the first National Congress of Rural Women in 1986, a congress building on a series of previous State and municipal-level meetings of rural women throughout the country.12 At this congress, the demand for the
9	Interview with researcher Paola Cappellin, of the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, and former advisor to the CUT on gender issues, 1 March 1999, Amherst, MA. 10	This figure is based on a sample of 1398 local syndicates (with 4.1 million members) out of the 2913 syndicates affiliated with CONTAG. Its total membership at that time was estimated as approximately 9 million (FETAPE 1988).
11	There were three different organizations of rural women in this state in this period, the Margaridas; the women affiliated with the dominant union structure, FETAG-RS; and the Organization of Farm Women (Organização das Mulheres da Roça) which eventually would become the MMTR-RS (Carneiro 1994; Brumer 2000). Some of the members of the Margaridas eventually joined one of the two latter groups. E-mail communications to the author from Loiva Rubenich, ANMTR, 14 De- cember 2000, and Sonilda Pereira, FETAG-RS, 18 December 2000.
12	My perusal of the available reports of these meetings suggests that they were held between 1984 and 1986 and that the initial themes were quite vague, focusing on ‘the situation of women workers’ and their recognition as agriculturalists. Land rights were only addressed immediately preceding the 1986 National Congress, when the theme ‘women and the property question’ was introduced at some of the state-level meetings. Files of Maria José Carneiro, researcher at CPDA, Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro.
266	Carmen Diana Deere
distribution of agrarian reform land to female household heads and for the joint titling of agrarian reform land to couples was put forth by almost all of the regional working groups, but most forcefully by the women from the North- east region. It recommended ‘That there be equality in the right of access and ownership of land. When the agrarian reform comes that land be distributed without discrimination, to the men and women who want to work it, and that female households heads – separated and single mothers – not be excluded’ (in EMBRATER 1986, 16).
Alongside the growth of the participation of women in the rural union move- ment, the 1980s were characterized by the growth of the autonomous rural women’s movement, the MMTRs, in many states. The state-level MMTRs emerged in the mid- to late 1980s in both the South and the Northeast at ap- proximately the same time. For example, founding meetings of the autonomous rural women worker associations were held in the following years: in 1984 in Santa Catarina; in 1985 in Paraná; in 1986 in Paraíba; in 1987 in Pernambuco and Espirito Santo; and in 1989 in Rio Grande do Sul (MMTR 1994, 16, 20–1; ANMTR 1997, 5–15). These meetings were usually preceded by municipal and regional-level meetings within a given state, sometimes these having taken place over a number of years, beginning in the early 1980s.
The state-level MMTRs were often formed by women who were members of unions affiliated to CONTAG or the CUT and who felt the need to create their own space to deal with gender issues and women’s concerns. Although some women rose to leadership positions within the rural unions and in other movements, such as the MST, they often became frustrated when their gender- specific demands were considered irrelevant or less important than the class- based, economic demands which motivated these organizations.
The first national meeting of autonomous rural women was held in 1986 in Barueri, São Paulo, supported by the CUT and the MST, with the objective of creating a national organization of rural women workers. At the meeting, which was attended by women from 16 states, it was decided that such a national organization was premature, and that efforts should concentrate on creating re- gional networks (MMTR-NE 1987; MMTR 1994, 47; ANMTR 1997, 10). This meeting was a catalyst to the organization of both the MMTR-NE and the AIMTR-Sul (Articulação das Instancias das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais dos 5 Estados do Sul). A history of the founding of the MMTR-NE gives credit to the 1986 São Paulo national meeting (which six women from the Northeast at- tended) as providing the impetus for the First Meeting of the MMTR-NE at João Pessoa in 1987 (MMTR-NE 1987). This latter meeting was attended by women from eight Northeastern states and, in each of these, the MMTRs were closely tied to the rural unions at the municipal level.13 Two themes dominated
13	The close and over-lapping ties between members of the MMTR-NE and the rural unions are illustrated by the fact that of the 22 rural women workers attending the 1987 founding meeting, 20 belonged to a union; the other 14 women attending were advisors. A survey of the MMTR-NE membership carried out in that year (with 181 members responding from six states) revealed that 52 per cent were union members (MMTR-NE 1987, 9, 21–2).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	267
the discussion: the need to increase women’s participation in the unions and the demand for agrarian reform.
In the South, the AIMTR-Sul was created in 1988, formally linking women from the five Southern states.14 Its objective was to provide a forum for the discussion of what were considered women’s issues, among them, health, sexu- ality, recognition of the profession of rural women workers, and gender, and ‘to give visibility to the problematic of rural women workers (their condition, work, lack of citizenship . . . )’ (ANMTR 1997, 10). The AIMTR-Sul and its constitu- ent organizations were the ones to take the lead in national campaigns focusing on obtaining rural women’s social security rights and the recognition of the profession of rural women workers. The Movement of Women Farmers (MMA- SC) of Santa Catarina, for example, led the 1986 campaign for 100,000 signatures of rural women workers to place their rights on the constitutional agenda, deliv- ering these to Brasilia in a major caravan (ANMTR 1997, 5).15
Before the adoption of the 1988 Federal Constitution, the issue of women’s land rights had been raised in municipal-level meetings. For example, in the 25 municipal meetings held in Santa Catarina in 1986 one of the themes had been ‘the struggle for land titles in women’s names in the agrarian reform settlement projects’ (ANMTR 1997, 5). Subsequently, land rights seemed to disappear as an issue and were not taken up by the state-level association. According to Lucy Choinaski, one of the founders of the MMA-SC and the first rural woman to be elected a congressional deputy, this was because the organization was largely made up of women who were in the regime of family agriculture and their primary concerns were other ones, such as health care, social security benefits, participation in the unions, etc. In the regime of family agriculture ‘land is in men’s name . . . it is the exception for daughters to inherit a land parcel . . . There was never a debate on this issue although women have been concerned and raise the question of women’s ownership of land.’16
The demand for women’s land rights was most persistently articulated by the women in CONTAG, where it was a major issue at the First National Seminar of Rural Women Workers in Brasilia in 1988. Moreover, the fact that women were being dispossessed from their land when they were widowed – whether as tenants, wage workers or in the agrarian reform settlements – was denounced in
14	The AIMTR included the following organizations: Movimento de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Rio Grande do Sul (MMTR-RS), Movimento de Mulheres Agricultoras de Santa Catarina (MMA- SC), Comissão Estadual da Questão da Mulher Trabalhadora Rural do DETR-Paraná, Movimento Popular de Mulheres do Paraná (MPMP), Movimento de Mulheres Agricultoras de Mato Grosso do Sul, and the Movimento de Mulheres Assentadas de São Paulo.
15	Interview with Jaci Kuhn Sckeeren, member of the National Commission of the ANMTR, 23 June 1998, Brasilia. 16	Unpublished transcript made available to the author of interview by Maria Ignez Paulilo, re- searcher at the Federal University of Santa Catarina, 26 July 2000, Florianopolis, SC. The reference cited earlier to women’s land rights as a demand of rural women in this state may be due to the fact that EMBRATER explicitly introduced this theme at the seminars held here preceding the 1986 First National Congress of Rural Women. See ‘A mulher rural e suas reinvidicações’, EMBRATER-SC (no date) files of Maria José Carneiro.
268	Carmen Diana Deere
no uncertain terms (CONTAG 1988, 7). The constitutional convention was meeting at the time, and participants at the seminar lobbied vigorously for the constitutional article that would explicitly establish women’s land rights in the agrarian reform (CONTAG 1988, 24). This constitutional article, as well as a number of others dealing with women’s rights, was the result of a popular amendment to the Constitution, one resulting from a nation-wide signature campaign. It was the initiative of feminist activists and scholars who worked in tandem with the CNDM. Beginning in 1986, under the slogan ‘for the constitu- tional process to be valid it must include women’s rights’, meetings and seminars on women’s rights were held throughout the country. It was as a result of the interaction between the CNDM and the female leadership of the unions, as well as the growing movement of rural women, that women’s land rights, specific- ally, were included on the constitutional agenda as part of the general expansion of women’s rights in the 1988 Constitution.17
Besides the inclusion of women in the agrarian reform, other gains for rural women in the 1988 Constitution included the establishment of equal rights for urban and rural men and women with respect to labour legislation and social security benefits. It was stipulated that these benefits applied to permanent and temporary wage workers as well as family farmers, including unpaid family workers. These benefits include, besides the right to unemployment and disabil- ity insurance, 120 days of paid maternity leave for women. In addition, the age of retirement for rural women was set at 55 years and for rural men, at 60 years, or after 30 years of service for women and 35 years for men, conditions more favorable than for urban workers. Women who were unpaid family workers in peasant production would be eligible for retirement benefits directly and no longer only as a dependent of the male household head (CUT 1991, 10; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 124–5).
The new constitutional rights acquired by rural women in 1988 required enabling legislation to be implemented. But with the election of President Collor in 1989, the CNDM went into a period of decline (Barsted 1994, 42). Moreover, he vetoed in 1991 the implementing legislation for paid maternity leave for women in family agriculture, arguing that in the case of ‘special producers’ there was no correlation between their payment of quotas and potential benefits (Cappellin 1992, 59). Since attaining effective social security rights was an issue that united most rural women (whether temporary or permanent wage workers, landless or in the family farming regime), it is not surprising that these rights would constitute the most important arena of struggle for the rural women’s movement in subsequent years, to the detriment of the struggle for women’s land rights (Deere and León 1999).
17	Particularly important in terms of rural women’s land rights was the lobbying effort which resulted from the 1987 seminar ‘Rural Women: Their Identities in Research and in the Political Struggle’ held at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (Lavinas 1987). Interview by the author and Magdalena León with reseacher Heleithe Saffioti, 28 June 1998, São Paulo.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	269 Table 2. Beneficiaries of the agrarian reform by sex and region, 1996 (per centages)
Men	Women	No info.	Total
North	85.0	12.7	0.3	100 Northeast85.313.41.3100
Southeast Centre-west South Total
83.2 86.8 91.1 85.6 (n = 135,011)
13.8 11.5 7.9 12.6
(n = 19,905)
2.9 1.7 1.0 1.8 (n = 2841)
100 100 100 100 (n = 157,757)
Source: INCRA/CRUB/UnB (1998, 26). WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN THE AGRARIAN REFORM
According to the First Agrarian Reform Census, as of 1996 only 19,905 women were direct beneficiaries of the reform, representing 12.6 per cent of the national total of 157,757. As Table 2 also shows, given the size of Brazil, there was considerable variation in women’s participation by region, with the share of female beneficiaries being highest in the Southeast (13.8 per cent) and Northeast (13.4 per cent), and lowest in the South (7.9 per cent).
The relatively low share of female beneficiaries reflects the discrimination against women that prevailed prior to the 1988 constitutional reform and the fact that it was not eliminated by measures to establish women’s formal equality with men. The 1964 Land Statute, the governing legislation on agrarian reform until 1985, gave priority to household heads with the largest families who wanted to dedicate themselves to agricultural activities (da Luz 1996, 123). These criteria discriminated against women since, following cultural norms, if a man resides in the household he is always considered its head, a norm supported by the 1916 civil code until also modified by the 1988 constitutional reform (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987, 324–5). The family size criterion was biased against female- headed households since, by definition, these are smaller than male-headed house- holds given the absence of an adult male in the former. Moreover, in selecting beneficiaries, INCRA applied a point system whereby men between the ages of 18 and 60 were awarded one point, whereas women in this age group were awarded only 0.75 points, with the discrimination by sex maintained for chil- dren. This norm obviously discriminated against female-headed households as well as those households with large numbers of female children. The criteria regarding the length of experience in agricultural work discriminated against all women, since women’s agricultural work – whether as unpaid family labour or temporary wage workers – has largely been invisible and undervalued, and it has been difficult for women to prove their agricultural experience (Albuquerque and Rufino 1987; Siqueira 1991, 63; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 118–19).
The discrimination against women was such that INCRA functionaries as- sumed that women without a husband or partner were incapable of managing a
270	Carmen Diana Deere
farm unless they had a grown son, and it was not at all uncommon for women who found themselves widowed with young children to lose their right to remain in an agrarian reform settlement (Lavinas 1991, 6). Moreover, when a widow’s eldest son was named the beneficiary, she sometimes lost access to land when he married and formed his own household (Rufino and Albuquerque 1990, 367).
The main consequence of the constitutional reform establishing that women could be beneficiaries of the agrarian reform was an INCRA norm (SEASC 01 of October 1988), which provided for equal weight to be given to male and female labour in the point system utilized to select beneficiaries (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 119). The other beneficiary selection criteria, however, were not changed; thus female household heads continued to be discriminated against by the criteria favouring large families, and all women, by the criteria favouring agricultural experience. The share of female beneficiaries of the reform not only failed to increase after 1988, but actually fell slightly in the 1991–6 period, suggesting that the constitutional provisions guaranteeing women’s formal land rights had little direct impact.18
In order to further understand why women formed such a low proportion of the beneficiaries and the variations by region, I carried out interviews with the leaders of the rural social movements and INCRA officials in seven states during 2000: four North-eastern states, two characterized by high female participation in the agrarian reform (Pernambuco and Paraíba) and two with low female par- ticipation (Ceará and Rio Grande do Norte); two Southern states with low female participation (Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná); and Rio de Janeiro, characterized by the highest share of female participation in the agrarian reform of all states.19 In all states, the leaders of the social movements considered INCRA functionar- ies to play the determining role in the selection of agrarian reform beneficiaries, for it is INCRA that determines their eligibility and through a point system prioritizes those to be settled on each assentamento. In contrast, in interviews, INCRA officials stressed the role of the social movements as the key filter in determining this selection, particularly since the early 1990s when the pace of the agrarian reform has largely been determined by land occupations and the pressure of those within the encampments (acampamentos) which are subsequently formed. It is acknowledged that participation in the latter has become a precondition for beneficiary status.20
18	Women constituted 13 per cent of the beneficiaries of the agrarian reform settlements constituted before 1991; their share subsequently fell slightly, to 12.5 per cent. Calculated by the author from the 1 Censo da Reforma Agraria – 1996. 19	On the factors explaining the variation in women’s participation by state, see Deere (2001).
20	Nonetheless, since 1998 it is official INCRA policy to try ‘to break the monopoly in the determ- ination of the beneficiaries by the social movements in certain regions of the country, which impedes the exercise of the democratic right of access to the agrarian reform’ (INCRA 1998). During 2000, INCRA introduced a new modality for applying to become an agrarian reform beneficiary – by mail registration – with the forms available at all post offices throughout the country, as an attempt to weaken the role of the social movements in the agrarian reform.
Married Consensual union Sub-total
Single Separated Divorced Widowed Other Sub-total
Women
33.9 25.1 58.9
13.3 9.3 1.4 16.7 0.4 41.1
Men
63.7 22.3 86.0
9.6 2.2 0.5 1.5 0.2
14.0 100.0
(n = 124,134)
Total
59.9 22.6 82.5
10.1 3.1 0.6 3.5 0.2 17.5
100.0 (n = 142,182)
Total 100.0 (n = 18,048)
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	271
As previously noted, it is INCRA policy to bestow land rights on only one person per household, generally, the household head. Through 2000, there was no general INCRA directive on joint adjudication and titling of land to couples. As INCRA officials often state, justifying this policy, ‘the agrarian reform regis- try (cadastro) does not have space to put the name of the man and woman, there is only space for one name, that of the man’. As leaders of the social movements conclude from this, ‘thus it is INCRA itself which maintains the policy of dom- ination of women’.21 According to INCRA officials, the goal of the agrarian reform is to benefit families and by benefiting families – as represented by the household head – they are benefiting all the members within them. Moreover, they tend to assume that the families to be benefited are predominantly nuclear families, where both parents are present. These assumptions have worked to the detriment of female-headed households as well as single young people.22
The First Agrarian Reform Census sheds light on this matter. As Table 3 shows, the great majority, 58.9 per cent, of the female beneficiaries were married
Table 3. Marital status of the agrarian reform beneficiaries by sex, 1996
Source: Author’s calculations based on the 1 Censo da Reforma Agrária-1996.
21	Interviews with Nina Tonin, MST coordinator in Rio Grande do Sul, 8 November 2000, Porto Alegre, and Isabel Greem, MST-Paraná, 14 November 2000, Curitiba. Also see Rua and Abramovay (2000, 198–201). 22	These assumptions were most explicit in my interview with José Carlos de Araujo Vieira, INCRA Superintendent in Paraná, 13 November 2000, Curitiba. He was quite opposed to including single people as beneficiaries on the assentamento, irrespective of sex, saying that the goal of the agrarian reform was to ‘strengthen the family’. Among the different social movements, the MST has most strongly defended the inclusion of young, single people (who are usually the most active participants in the land occupations and encampments), particularly in the context of the collective adjudication of land. Interviews with Dulcineia Pavan, MST International Relations Office, 30 June 1998, São Paulo, and Fátima Ribeira, MST coordinator in Rio Grande do Norte, 1 October 2000, Fortaleza.
272	Carmen Diana Deere
or living in a consensual union.23 Only 41 per cent are female household heads. Among this group, widows predominate (16.7 per cent of the total), followed by single (9.3 per cent), separated (9.3 per cent) and divorced women (1.4 per cent). In contrast, the overwhelming majority of male beneficiaries are married or living in a consensual union, 82.5 per cent; only 10.1 per cent are single, with the remainder widowed, separated or divorced.
The data on marital status suggest that female household heads have been severely under-represented as beneficiaries. Nationally, women represent 12.2 per cent of rural household heads (Brasil 1994, Table 6.11), whereas they consti- tute only 5.2 per cent of the household heads on the assentamentos censused in 1996. This under-representation suggests that female household heads have been particularly discriminated against, irrespective of the 1988 constitutional provi- sions. The problem seems to be that INCRA continues to prefer to title a son (even if legally under-age) than to title a female household head, with single mothers often being asked ‘don’t you have a son who is a little older?’24 More- over, if a male beneficiary dies, INCRA continues to cede the land rights to the eldest son rather than to the widow, and if a female household head with land rights gets married, these are sometimes transferred to her spouse (Rua and Abramovay 2000, 198–9). But in addition, the low proportion of female house- hold heads among the beneficiaries suggests that the rural social movements did not champion their land rights very effectively, let alone prioritize these.
THE FAILURE TO PRESS FOR WOMEN’S LAND RIGHTS
Since its founding, the primary objective of the MST has been the struggle for agrarian reform and ‘a more just and egalitarian society’. The movement recog- nized that to accomplish this, ‘the participation of all rural workers’ was neces- sary, ‘. . . encouraging the participation of women at all levels’ (MST 1986, 44; Navarro 1996, 98). Women have been very visible in the MST-led land occupa- tions, where they are estimated to be between one-third to one-half of the par- ticipants, and they are often in the front lines in confrontations with the police. Moreover, women usually play a very active and key role in the encampments that result from these. Nonetheless, once the assentamentos are constituted, few women participate as actively and, until recently, there have been few women in their leadership or of the MST (Miele and Guimarães 1998; Rua and Abramovay
23	The main reason that married women appear on the registries as representing their family is because their husband or partner is for some reason ineligible to be a beneficiary of the reform (Rua and Abramovay 2000, 197). I only found evidence of married women demanding land rights in their own names in Pernambuco and Rio de Janeiro, usually in cases where they had been active in the land occupation while their husbands or partners had not and the latter had non-agricultural occupations (Deere 2001).
24	Interview with Wellington Gurgel, acting Superintendent of INCRA-CE, 28 September 2000, Fortaleza. A notorious case was one in Paraíba where INCRA ceded land rights to the son of a well- known CUT activist rather than to her, even though she qualified as a beneficiary and was demand- ing land rights in her own name. Interview with Genero Ieno Neto, researcher at Unitrabalho, Federal University of Paraíba, and others, 23 September 2000, João Pessoa.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	273
2000). As noted by women activists in the movement, ‘It is still observed that once the land is won, a large number of women in the assentamentos return to their own private work, on the individual plot, in the home and with the chil- dren. Because of this it is necessary that women organize themselves and parti- cipate in the struggle of the working class at all levels.’25
In its initial years, the MST gave little concern to gender issues: ‘According to the women on the assentamentos it is perceived that gender relations within the movement are considered to be of secondary importance when not considered a nuisance’ (Lechat 1996, 108). Nonetheless, a National Commission of Women of the MST was organized in the latter half of the 1980s and it lobbied for women’s groups to be created within the assentamentos and encampments; for a women’s commission to be created within each state; and for the state-level leadership as well as that within the assentamentos to support the organization of women within the movement.26
Most of these proposals were adopted as norms at the various national meet- ings so that in September 1989, when the MST published the first edition of its General Norms of the MST, it included a chapter on ‘The Articulation of Women’. Besides the objective of encouraging women’s participation at all levels, other objectives included (i) the struggle against all forms of discrimination as well as machismo; (ii) the organization of women’s groups to create the space for women to discuss their own specific problems; (iii) to encourage women’s participation in all forms of organization of the MST, including within the union movement, where rural women workers participate irrespective of their class position; and (iv) to organize a national-level women’s commission responsible for proposing policies for the movement (MST 1989a, chapter 8).
Training manuals for the 1989–1993 period stress the importance of increasing women’s participation and that to do so it was important to ‘create the condi- tions so that women and youth be able to participate in collective production and in all activities of the movement’, the first implicit reference to some of the impediments that might limit women’s more active participation.27 But through- out this period, no particular attention was given to women’s land rights. This lack of attention was due to several factors. The provisions for agrarian reform in the 1988 Constitution were considerably weaker than the legislation encom- passed in the 1985 National Agrarian Reform Plan of the New Republic (PNRA- NR), legislation which the landlord’s lobby, the UDR, successfully watered down in this intervening period. After 1988, the lobbying efforts of the MST and other progressive forces focused on attaining favourable implementing legis- lation for the limited range of expropriations allowed under the Constitution. In addition, under the Collor Government (1990–2), not one estate was expropriated
25	Comissão Nacional de Mulheres do MST, ‘Avançar na luta’, Journal Sem Terra (São Paulo), No. 72, April, 1988, 18. 26	Ibid. 27	Item 48, Part III, ‘Desafios da luta pela reforma agrária’; Item 80, ‘Perspectivas para o MST – 1989/1993’, in MST (1989b).
274	Carmen Diana Deere
for being in the social interest, and actions under the subsequent Government of Itamar Franco (1992–4) were also minimal, leading the MST to step up its land occupations (de Medeiros 1989, 166–98).
The lack of attention by the MST to women’s land rights, particularly to the joint adjudication and titling of land to couples, is also related to the fact that throughout this period a priority of the MST was the collective adjudication and titling of land, rather than its division and formal distribution to individual families: ‘The titling of land should be collective, in the name of all the assentados, independently of whether production is carried out collectively or individually, thus guaranteeing usufruct rights, but that the land cannot be alienated.’28 With the struggle for land rights defined as a collective issue, there was little room for discussion of the individual land rights of women.
Rather than being strengthened, the National Commission of Women of the MST apparently ceased to function after 1989 as women were told that if they were interested in gender issues they should also join other organizations, such as the MMTRs.29 Gender issues were seen as divisive issues for the movement, particularly at a moment (during the Collor Government) when the struggle for agrarian reform was becoming even more contentious, and in some cases, viol- ent. The primary concern was for the unity of the movement – a struggle that demanded unity from all family members.30 The fear that gender issues would be divisive to the movement is evident in a 1993 document that states explicitly that the incorporation of women into the movement should be treated as a class issue and not as a gender issue.31 According to Article 45 of the 1993 Basic Document, the movement should ‘consider issues specific to women and their participation as an integral part of the demands of the organization, treating these as class rather than gender issues’ (MST 1996, 5). But in Article 152 of this same docu- ment, it was reiterated that since it was an objective of the movement to encour- age women’s role in production and their participation in cooperatives, it was also necessary ‘to struggle against the inequality and traditionalism which exists among the peasantry’ (MST 1996, 6).
The movement went a step further in recognizing the specificity of gender subordination in its Agrarian Program of 1995, approved at the Third National Congress. A section was devoted to ‘The Situation of Women in the Country- side’, which included recognition that it was often women who suffered the most from the ‘miserable living standards’ in the countryside, including the double day. ‘In addition, there is a generalized situation of prejudice and discrimination
28	Ibid., Item 105. 29	Interview with Dulcineia Pavan, MST International Relations Office, op. cit., and confirmed in interviews with members of the national-level Gender Collective, Nina Tonin, MST-RS, 8 Novem- ber 2000, Porto Alegre, and Isabel Greem, MST-Paraná, 14 November 2000, Curitiba. 30	Interview by the author and Magdalena León with Nalu Faria and Miriam Nobre, SOF (Sempreviva Organização Feminista), 27 June 1998, São Paulo. 31	This debate over the relationship of gender and class analysis was also carried out within the union movement in the late 1980s and early 1990s, particularly the CUT, but resolved much earlier in favour of the need to integrate the analysis of gender, class and race. See Lavinas and Cappellin (1991).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	275
due to the practice of machismo in rural areas that forces an inferior position on women’ (MST 1996, 6). But the general objective regarding gender equality adopted at this congress was similar to previous statements: ‘To struggle against all forms of social discrimination and to aim for the egalitarian participation of women’ (MST 1996, 6).32
Turning to the rural unions in this period, rural women’s paid maternity leave, together with the need for recognition of the occupation of rural women workers and the right to retirement benefits, remained among the main demands of rural women at state congresses of the federations affiliated with CONTAG in the early 1990s, at the First National Meeting of Rural Women Workers of CONTAG in 1991, and at the Fifth CONTAG Congress of that same year. The need to incorporate more women into the unions as well as in the leadership also remained important issues. New issues taken up in this period, reflecting the growing feminist discourse by women within the unions, included the problems of the double day and the demand for sexual freedom (Siqueira 1991, 70–1). Among the demands made by the agrarian reform commission at the Fifth CONTAG Congress (where women now constituted 10 per cent of the del- egates), besides a strongly worded demand for the deepening of the agrarian reform, was that women be given land titles in their own names, or jointly with their spouse or partner, suggesting that women’s land rights were not being ignored all together (Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 135–6).
In 1989, the CUT organized its first national meeting on the Working Women’s Question, which included both urban and rural women. The next year it organ- ized a Rural Women’s Commission linked to its National Department of Rural Workers to better address what was considered to be the low participation of rural women in its affiliated unions and the general lack of recognition of rural women as workers (CUT 1991, 23–4). Among the main demands of rural women at the Second National Meeting of Women Workers of the CUT in 1991 were the implementation of retirement benefits for rural women, a call for re- cognition of the profession of rural women workers, and that women’s names appear on agrarian reform land titles (Godinho 1995, 165), suggesting that they too continued to give importance to attaining women’s effective land rights. But for neither the CUT or CONTAG in this period were women’s land rights the foremost issue.
In partnership with the CUT’s Rural Women’s Commission, the AIMTR-Sul organized a major campaign around the 1991 population census to have rural women declare themselves as rural workers instead of as housewives or unpaid family workers in the questionnaire (Lavinas 1991, 4). This campaign was launched with a caravan of a thousand or so rural women from 15 states marching on Brasilia for International Women’s Day celebrations in March 1992. Among their other demands were that Collor’s veto of paid maternity leave for unpaid family workers be overturned. In addition, they demanded that (i) retirement
32	See www.mst.org.br/historico/historia7.html (accessed 18 April 2001).
276	Carmen Diana Deere
benefits be paid immediately to rural workers; (ii) child care centres be set up for rural women workers; (iii) priority attention be given to women’s integral health care; (iv) an end be brought to violence against women; and (v) that the consti- tutional provision for agrarian reform be regulated (Cappellin 1992, 59; Suárez and Libardoni 1992, 132). The AIMTR-Sul also established an office in Brasilia to lobby for paid maternity leave and was eventually successful in getting the national congress to pass the Bill in 1993 (ANMTR 1997, 5).
In order to foster the participation of women in the unions, the CUT approved the adoption of a quota system in 1993, so that 30 per cent of national, state and regional leaders be women.33 The first leadership under the new quota system was elected at its 1994 Congress, with nine women elected among the 32 national leaders (Godinho 1996, 52). A decision was also made at this congress to fuse the Rural Department of CUT with CONTAG, if CONTAG agreed to join the CUT, a move subsequently taken. This led to the Rural Women’s Commission of the CUT being disbanded at the national level, leading to several years of chaos and a weakening in the work with rural women.34
In 1995, another national meeting was held in São Paulo to create a national-level network of rural women, the Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais (ANMTR). This meeting brought together women from 17 states and this time they succeeded in creating a loosely structured, national organization. Among the resolutions passed at this meeting was to focus on actions to secure in practice the rights won in the constitution such as paid retirement and health care, and to carry out coordinated actions under one theme on 8 March, international women’s day. Their primary activity has been a national campaign to obtain official documents for rural women under the slogan, ‘To have personal documents and those of workers is but one step in the conquest of our citizenship’ (ANMTR 1997, 26–7).35 Of an estimated 18.5 million rural women workers, only some three million currently have their profession officially recognized, a precondition for them to be eligible for social security benefits (ANMTR no date). Several MST women leaders participated in the organization of the founding meeting of the ANMTR in late 1995. They consider that there
33	A quota was considered necessary, for in 1989 women represented only 7 per cent of rural union leaders, and 60 per cent of the rural unions affiliated with the CUT had directorates which were all male. Moreover, in the national leadership there were only two women out of 32 members (Godinho 1996, 49).
34	Interview by the author and Magdalena León with Lena Lavinas, researcher at IPEA and former advisor to the CUT on gender issues, 18 June 1998, Rio de Janeiro. 35	The number of documents required for official transactions in Brazil is no small matter. Neces- sary personal documents include a birth certificate; a marriage certificate; an identity card; a voter registration card; and an employment card (carteira do trabalho). A birth certificate is required to obtain any of the other personal documents. In addition, in order to have one’s profession registered and thus to be eligible for social security benefits, at least one of the following is required: a union card; a land title (or INCRA certification that one’s name is on the registry of an assentamento); a rental con- tract for land; and registration in the sales declaration form of peasant producers or on the income tax registration form. ANMTR’s campaign materials stress the importance of women having their name on land titles as both a means and an end of citizenship (ANMTR 1997, 6–20; ANMTR no date).
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	277
was a qualitative leap forward within the MST with respect to the discussion of gender issues after this meeting.36 They organized the first national meeting of MST women militants shortly thereafter, leading to the founding of the Na- tional Collective of Women of the MST in May 1996. The Collective soon published a pamphlet, ‘The Question of Women in the MST’, with the sub-title, ‘Participating without fear of being a woman’. This document clearly points to the gap in MST theory and practice, highlighting how women were not suffi- ciently represented in the leadership. Moreover, although a basic principle of the movement since 1989 had been to end the discrimination against women and to promote their participation, it concludes that this had not been achieved in prac- tice (MST 1996, 3–5).
In this publication, women’s land rights are directly addressed for the first time. Among the proposed actions is that the organization ‘guarantee that women get land titles’ and that in the associations and cooperatives on the assentamentos it be guaranteed that women participate on equal terms with men (MST 1996, 7). It was stressed that a major campaign was necessary if women’s names were to be secured, along with their husbands or partners, in the assentamento registry and on land titles. Moreover, it was recognized that a pre-condition for women to be agrarian reform beneficiaries was that they have the required personal documents. Hence, they recommended that the movement strongly support and participate in the documentation campaign being organized at that time by the ANMTR (MST 1996, 9–10). But up to this point (1996, when the first agrarian reform census was undertaken), no other efforts had been taken by the MST to encourage women’s participation as direct beneficiaries of the agrarian reform.
INCREASING THE PACE OF THE REFORM AND OF FEMALE BENEFICIARIES
The pace of the Brazilian agrarian reform stepped up in the mid-1990s, largely as a result of the actions of the landless movement. By mid-1999 there were 3958 assentamentos nationally, with 475,801 beneficiary families holding almost 23 mil- lion hectares of land.37 Compared with the 1996 First Agrarian Reform Census figures, the number of assentamentos had increased by 2533 and beneficiary fami- lies by 316,023. While the pace of the agrarian reform under the Government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso compares favourably with previous administrations, the land area in agrarian reform settlements constitutes only around 6 per cent of the land reported in farms in the 1985 agricultural census, and the number of families that benefited equivalent to only between 5 and 10 per cent of the number of landless families in the mid-1980s. The majority of the assentamentos resulted
36	Interview with Itelvina Maria Masioli, member of the MST National Directorate from Mato Grosso and one of two MST representatives in the national commission of the ANMTR, at a national seminar of the ANMTR, 23 June 1998, Brasilia. 37	http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec/assentam/assent4.html (downloaded 18 November 2000) which, in turn, is drawn from ‘Banco de Dados da Luta pela Terra’, UNESP/MST, as of June 1999.
278	Carmen Diana Deere
from land take-overs led by the MST, but in this period many of the unions affiliated with CONTAG also engaged in land occupations, as did groups sup- ported by the CPT in the Northeast.38
Preliminary data for eight states suggest that the increased pace of the agrarian reform has been accompanied by an increase in the share of women beneficiaries. Between 1996 and 2000, the number of agrarian reform beneficiaries more than doubled in five of the eight states, while substantial increases were reported in the other three. The share of female beneficiaries increased significantly in Rio de Janeiro (to 23 per cent) and substantially in Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte and Santa Catarina (states which had been at the low end of the spectrum in 1996) and Paraíba. The share of women remained about the same in Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Sul, and actually decreased in Paraná, which in both periods reported the lowest share of female beneficiaries. Before commenting on these state-level trends, it is relevant to first consider the changes that have taken place in the gender discourse of the MST.
Recall that it was only in 1996, when the National Women’s Collective was constituted, that women’s land rights were addressed by the MST. In 1999, this forum was reconstituted as the National Gender Collective, with an equal number of men and women as members, and the plan was for similar structures to be created at the state and sub-regional levels. According to one of its members, the mandate of the women’s collective had never been very clear and what had become apparent was the need for a ‘cultural revolution’ in the relations between men and women: ‘It has to be a problem of both men and women and in all of its dimensions.’39
Several factors explain the greater opening to gender issues by the MST at this time. For one, there was growing recognition within the leadership of the tend- ency for women to withdraw from active participation once the assentamentos were constituted. The exclusion of most women from land rights has meant their exclusion from participation in the associations and cooperatives that make the crucial decisions governing production plans and infrastructure and social investments, etc., on the assentamentos. As explained by one MST leader:
38
The fact women’s names are not on the land registry is a major problem . . . for she is not the landowner, and then, for example, what happens when technical assistance is to be given? The technician arrives and con- vokes the owners to a meeting. And who is the owner officially? It’s the husband. So only he goes to the meeting to receive technical assistance. Only he goes to discuss the use of resources . . . And that’s how women are excluded during all the key moments . . .40
As of August 2001, there were 1490 MST-led assentamentos with 108,849 families. Between 1990 and late 1999, some 368,325 families had participated in MST-led occupations and been registered on their encampments. In August 2001, there were 75,730 families residing in 585 MST encampments awaiting INCRA to distribute land to them. Drawn from http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec.html (downloaded 7 December 2001). 39	Interview with Marina dos Santos, coordinator of MST-RJ, 28 August 2000. 40	Interview with Isabel Greem, MST-PR, op. cit.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	279
It is increasingly recognized that this exclusion is not only prejudicial to wom- en’s personal development, but also to the well-being of the assentamento and of the movement. In some cases, the non-participation of women has been associ- ated with a general apathy within the assentamento for collective endeavours, in turn, related to the general lack of participatory structures. In other cases, it became apparent that the exclusion of women from the land registry has gener- ated practical problems, such as when, due to the absence of the husband for whatever reason, women were unable to get credit for production purposes.
Also, the problem of separations among couples has been gaining attention. The usual case is for the person with land rights, the husband, to remain on the land. The wife often has no choice but to leave with the children, for ‘in separa- tion, the women loses all rights’. Sometimes she has to start the process all over, going to another encampment in hopes of obtaining land even though she has already spent years in the struggle. While sometimes the man is willing to leave so that his wife and children can remain in their home, this presents difficulties; since the land is in his name, officially, he cannot again be an agrarian reform beneficiary.41
One of the first activities of the Gender Collective was the publication of a training pamphlet consisting of eight topics for sessions designed to reflect on gender relations (MST 2000). One of the topics is ‘Women and Agrarian Re- form’, and includes the following point with respect to women’s land rights:42 ‘In the struggle for land, the occupation, the encampment, mobilizations, the whole family participates, thus the conquest of land is a conquest of the whole family. There is nothing more just that when INCRA comes to do the land registry, that the name of both be registered . . .’ (MST 2000, 57–8). This point implies that the joint adjudication of land to couples is now MST policy and was so confirmed by women in the MST leadership.43 Nonetheless, this demand still does not form part of the MST’s public discourse.
The ambigious position of the MST with respect to women’s land rights was evident at the March 2000 mobilization of rural women workers jointly coord- inated by the ANMTR and the MST. During 13–17 March, some 3000 rural women from 24 states camped out in Brasilia, in what was termed ‘the first encampment of rural women’. Among the demands was the need to deepen the agrarian reform, but there was nothing concerning women’s land rights.44 This ambiguity was also apparent in the conclusions presented at the MST’s Fourth National Congress in Brasilia in August 2000. Among the 12 main policies
41	Group interview by the author and Emma Siliprandi with women militants in the MST Regional Sarandi, 9 November 2000, Pontão, RS, and interview with Isabel Greem, MST-PR, op. cit. Also see Rua and Abramovay (2000, 201–3). 42	This section of the pamphlet is drawn from the ‘Political Directives of the MST on the Participa- tion of Women’, which was approved by the National Coordination of the MST in January 1999; e-mail to the author from Gema Galgani, gender advisor to the MST-Ceará, 8 May 2001.
43	Interviews with Fátima Ribeira, MST-RN, op. cit., and Nina Tonin, MST-RGS, op. cit. 44	Boletím Semanal da Secretaria Agrária Nacional do PT, 18–24 março 2000, ano III, No. 145, Anexo 3, in www.pt.org.br/san/3milmulheres.htm
280	Carmen Diana Deere
reaffirmed at the congress was ‘to redeem and implement the gender question in our policies and in all activities of the MST and in society’.45 But nothing specific was said about women’s land rights. Nonetheless, one of the important recent changes within the MST is that women now constitute nine out of the 21 mem- bers of its National Directorate.46
What became apparent in my interviews is that the internalization of gender concerns is taking place within the MST at different paces in different states. In certain states, there is a notable change in the gender discourse taking place at the base, often associated with an increase in the number of women in leadership positions on the assentamentos or within the MST’s sub-regional or state leader- ship. This evolving process may account, in part, for the increase in the share of female agrarian reform beneficiaries in states such as Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, Santa Catarina and Rio de Janeiro. I do not think it is coincidental that women are the state coordinators of the MST in these states; moreover, in Ceará, women now constitute the majority of the MST state leadership. Also Ceará and Rio Grande do Sul are among the leaders in implementing some of the new policies outlined in MST (2000). The retrograde in my case studies is the state of Paraná, where the share of women agrarian reform beneficiaries has actually fallen since 1996, from 7.2 per cent to 6.8 per cent, in the period when the total number of beneficiaries more than tripled. The MST in this state is also a laggard with respect to gender issues. Only in October 2000 did the state directorate (includ- ing only two women out of 18) take up the discussion of gender issues and the state gender collective has yet to be created. Besides the lack of attention by the MST to women’s land rights, the data on women’s participation in the agrarian reform may also reflect the very conservative nature of this state, characterized by continued landlord dominance and much weaker social movements as com- pared with other Southern states.
Turning to CONTAG, not until 1997 (three years after it joined the CUT and the Rural Women’s Commission of the CUT was disbanded nationally) did it organize a national commission on women. By then, there were on the order of two million rural women affiliated to rural unions (Abramovay and da Silva 2000, 355). That same year CONTAG held the First National Plenary of Rural Women Workers, where the main focus of discussion was whether a 30 per cent quota for women should be mandated in union elections, and securing rural women’s social security benefits. Nonetheless, a demand of the meeting with respect to the agrarian reform was that women be included in the land registry on the assentamentos (CONTAG 1997, 14). At its Seventh Congress in 1998, the union adopted the 30 per cent female quota and created the position of Coordinator of the National Commission of Women as part of its Executive Directorate. All
45	‘Linhas politicas reafirmadas no IV Congresso Nacional do MST’, in www.mst.org.br/historico/ congresso (downloaded 18 April 2001). 46	Interview with Vilanisi Oliveira da Silva, MST Coordinator in Ceará, 27 September 2000, Fortaleza. Also see ‘Entrevista-Fátima Ribeiro’, Jornal do Commercio (Recife), 19 August 2001, p. 5.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	281
told, 47 specific actions relevant to rural women were approved, including that in the land registry of the assentamentos the name of each member of a couple be included (CONTAG et al. 1998, 124).
The year 2000 yielded some progress in terms of advancing women’s land rights. As part of the national coordination for the World March of Women,47 CONTAG launched events in Brazil with the celebration of International Women’s Day on 8 March. More than 36,000 women were reported to have participated in local events throughout the country and set the stage for the planned march on Brasilia, the Marcha das Margaridas, on 10 August (the anni- versary of the assassination of North-eastern union leader Margarida Alves). The slogan of the march was ‘Against hunger, poverty and violence’. In the flyers and pamphlets distributed prior to the march, a recurring theme was ‘the valor- ization of the participation of women in the agrarian reform’, but without land rights being made explicit.48 In the ‘Demands of the Marcha das Margaridas’, prepared for the 10 August event by the coordinating committee, nonetheless, women’s land rights did figure explicitly.49 The first among nine major categor- ies of demands was for state support of a national documentation campaign aimed at rural women. A second was access by rural women workers ‘to the public policies of agrarian reform’, specifically, ‘That a norm be issued so that in the documentation of the assentamento the parcel be adjudicated in the name of the couple or in the name of the woman when she was single’ (CONTAG et al. 2000, 6).
With an estimated 15,000–20,000 rural women converging on Brasilia, the coordinating committee was received by President Fernando Henrique Cardoso and INCRA President Orlando Muniz on 9 August, to whom they presented their list of 81 specific demands. It was reported in the press that ‘According to Muniz, the institute is going to change its titling of rural properties so that these appear in the name of the couple and not just the man, correcting the distortion denounced by rural women workers . . . INCRA is going to study the other demands.’50
47	The 2000 World March of Women resulted from a proposal from the women’s movement in Quebec, Canada, to organize women world-wide between 8 March and 17 October (International Day in the Struggle against Poverty), culminating with a delegation presenting its demands before the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and the United Nations.
48	See the pamphlet distributed by CONTAG, Boletim Informativo (no date) ‘Marcha Das Margaridas: Contra a fome, a pobreza e a violencia – dia 10 de Agosto’. 49	The Coordinating Committee for the march, besides CONTAG and its affiliated state federa- tions and municipal-level unions, included the CUT, MMTR-NE, Movimento Nacional de Quebradeiras de Coco, Conselho Nacional de Seringueiros, Movimento de Luta pela Terra, União Brasileira de Mulheres and the NGOs Sempre Viva Organização Feminista (SOF), Associação Agroecologica Tijupa, FASE, and ESPLAR. Notably absent was the MST as well as the ANMTR. Tensions between CONTAG and the MST were high at this point over disagreement on the degree to which they should cooperate with government programmes, such as the proposed Land Bank. The ANMTR (in contrast to one of its constituent organizations, the MMTR-NE) usually follows the lead of the MST on such political questions.
50	Pagina Agrária (Boletim Semanal da Secretaria Agrária Nacional do PT) # 165, 12–18 August 2000, in www.pt.org.br/san
282	Carmen Diana Deere
The expedition of Resolution No. 6 of 22 February 2001 by the National Council on Sustainable Rural Development (CNDRS, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Rural Sustentavel) of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (MDA, Ministerio do Desenvolvimento Agrário) was the outcome of the nego- tiating process between the coordinating committee of the march and the inter- ministerial group charged with following up on their demands. According to the Ministry, this resolution provides for a ‘gender perspective in all the administra- tive procedures of the MDA’, and there are to be changes in ‘the selection norms to facilitate the access of women to the benefits of the agrarian reform’.51
Subsequently, the ‘Affirmative Action Program to Promote the Equality of Opportunities and Treatment of Men and Women’ was institutionalized within the Ministry.52 The new office was charged with revamping all criteria and norms to facilitate rural women’s access to land and to titles, credit, training, technical assistance and social security benefits. This objective was made more concrete by another directive, which established a target for 2001 of 30 per cent female representation in the distribution of credits within the family agriculture support programme, PRONAF (Programa Nacional de Fortalecimiento da Agricultura Familiar) and the Land Bank (Fundo do Terras e da Reforma Agrária) as well as in PRONAF training and extension programmes.53 In addition, a goal of the Ministry became to progressively attain 30 per cent female representation in its administrative structure.54
With respect to INCRA, one of the first accomplishments of the Affirmative Action office was to redesign almost all of the forms utilized in the agrarian reform beneficiary selection process so that the name of both spouses or partners appear on the first page of the form as co-applicants or beneficiaries. (Formerly, the names of wives and companions appeared on the second page, heading the list of the dependents of the head of household.) In August 2001, I found that only one form remained to be changed, a crucially important one, the official ‘List of Beneficiaries’ on each assentamento. Following traditional practice, this listing still included only one person per household. During my visit to MDA/ INCRA, steps were put in motion to assure that the name of the couple appear in this crucial record of beneficiaries.55
While a number of gender-progressive measures were thus adopted during 2001, it is worth noting that no specific mention has been made of female house- hold heads. In order to end the discrimination to which these have traditionally been subject, other Latin American countries have found it necessary to employ
51	Note that the resolution does not explicitly establish joint adjudication and titling of land, but rather focuses on nondiscrimination against women. It does provide for women to be considered as rural workers or agriculturalists in the land registry, rather than the traditional designation of house- wives. See Diario Oficial da Uniõ, 5 March 2001, and www.desenvolvimentoagrario.gov.br/mulher/ noticias (accessed 10 March 2001).
52	MDA, Portaria No. 33, 8 March 2001 (photocopy). 53	MDA, Portaria No. 121, 22 May 2001 (photocopy). 54	MDA, Portaria No. 120, 22 May 2001 (photocopy). 55	Interview with Lenita Nonan, Special Advisor to the Minister and Coordinator of the Affirmat- ive Action Program, and MDA/INCRA staff, 8 August 2001, Brasilia.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	283
positive action or reverse discrimination, making these an explicit priority in State programmes involved in the redistribution of assets. This has usually been accomplished by assigning them more points in beneficiary selection criteria, justified on the grounds that this favoured treatment is necessary to compensate for the discrimination to which they were previously subject (Deere and León 2001, chapter 6). Given the fact that the majority of female beneficiaries of Brazil’s agrarian reform up through 1996 were wives or partners, rather than female household heads, the lack of specific attention to female household heads remains a lacunae in its policies to end gender discrimination.
Nonetheless, Brazil is the pioneer among Latin American countries in assign- ing rural women a target quota of 30 per cent in the credit being made available for the purchase of land under the market-assisted agrarian reform. The Land Bank is the subject of intense controversy, seen by its critics as a means of under- mining the federal government’s responsibility for agrarian reform.56 It is ques- tionable whether a programme that requires credit-worthiness as a pre-condition for participation and that expects farmers to be able to repay their mortgages on near commercial terms under neoliberal policies is the best way to guarantee gender equity in the acquisition of land. But this topic awaits further research.
CONCLUSION
This review of the issue of gender and land rights within the Brazilian rural social movements leads to the following conclusions. Most of the credit for raising the issue of women’s access to land within the agrarian reform rests with women within the leadership of the rural unions, both CONTAG and CUT. Their efforts, combined with the organizational activity of rural women within the local, state and regional-level MMTRs, and those of the state (at the prodding of the CNDR), largely explain why women’s land rights became an issue in the period preceding the constitutional reform. That they were successful in obtain- ing women’s formal land rights in the 1988 Constitution is largely due to the coalition of women within the State and political parties working in concert with a unified urban and rural women’s movement in support of attaining an expan- sion of women’s rights in the Constitution. Women’s formal land rights in the agrarian reform were achieved as a by-product of the effort to end discrimination against women in all its dimensions.
The achievement of formal equality in land rights, nonetheless, did not lead to increases in the share of female beneficiaries in the agrarian reform. INCRA did modify its most explicitly discriminatory practice, the assignment of fewer points to women than men in the beneficiary selection process. Other criteria, however, continued to discriminate against female household heads. Moreover, although joint adjudication and titling was now a legal possibility, the fact that it was an option rather than mandatory meant that it was simply not implemented.
56	‘Cédula da Terra: mais uma mentira do governo’, Jornal Sem Terra, December 1998, 10–11; also see ‘Artigos reforma agrária’, http://www.mst.org.br/bibliotec.htm (accessed 18 November 2000).
284	Carmen Diana Deere
I have argued that the relatively low share of female agrarian reform benefici- aries in the mid-1990s also reflects the fact that attaining women’s effective land rights was not a top priority of any of the rural social movements. While women’s participation in rural unions continued to grow over this period, and women’s land rights were on the agenda at most national meetings and congresses, land rights were one issue among many. The priorities of the autonomous rural women’s movement were perhaps even more varied and diffuse than that of the unions. CONTAG, CUT and the MMTRs all gave greater attention to the pressing issue of the recognition of rural women’s profession in the context of their attaining social security benefits, than to women’s land rights. This is un- derstandable given the fact that this was the issue that united all rural women, independent of their class position, uniting the heterogenous membership of the unions and autonomous women’s movement. But it also created a vacuum in terms of the effective championing of women’s land rights since, throughout this period, the main social movement determining the pace and content of the agrarian reform was the MST. Of all the rural social movements, as I have shown, it had the most muted discourse on gender, one that essentially consid- ered class and gender issues to be incompatible. Taken together, these factors largely explain why women formed such a relatively low proportion of the beneficiaries of agrarian reform in the mid-1990s.
The expansion of the agrarian reform in the second half of the 1990s – a result associated with the territorial consolidation of the MST as a national organiza- tion, the radicalization of the unions on the agrarian reform issue and a surge in the number of land occupations – is associated with an increase in the share of female beneficiaries in certain states. I have suggested that this trend is partly attributable to the gradual opening within the MST to gender concerns, which itself reflects the slow, but incremental participation of women within the MST leadership at all levels, and the pressing need to consolidate the assentamentos.
As noted in the Introduction, recognition of the importance of women’s land rights generally takes place for two reasons, the productionist and the empower- ment arguments. The opening of the MST to gender concerns in the late 1990s is related to growing acceptance of the productionist argument; that is, that the failure to recognize women’s land rights is prejudicial to the development and consolidation of the assentamentos and thus the movement. It is now recognized that joint adjudication and titling to couples is a precondition for women’s par- ticipation in assentamento assemblies, associations and cooperatives, and that their participation in these leads to better results, both for the community and for women. There is also growing awareness that land rights strengthen women’s bargaining position and thus their ability to defend and pursue their own pract- ical and strategic gender interests. Given the MST’s commitment to social and gender equality, there is thus growing acceptance of the empowerment argu- ment: that is, that gender relations must change which, in turn, requires increas- ing women’s bargaining power within the household and community as complementary and interactive measures. But this is a much slower process and one that has yet to reach fruition.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	285
REFERENCES
Abramovay, Miriam and Rocicleide da Silva, 2000. ‘As Relações de Gênero na Confederação Nacional de Trabalhadores Rurais (CONTAG)’. In Trabalho e Gênero: Mudanças, Permanencias e Sesafios, ed. Maria Isabel Baltar da Rocha, 347–75. São Paulo: editora 34.
Agarwal, Bina, 1994. A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Albuquerque, Ligia and Isaura Rufino, 1987. ‘Elementos que Dificultam a Participação da Mulher no Processo da Reforma Agrária’. In Anais do Seminario Mulheres Rurais: Identidades e na Luta Política, ed. Lela Lavinas, 320–39. Rio de Janeiro: IPPUR/UFRJ.
Alvarez, Sonia, 1990. Engendering Democracy in Brazil: Women’s Movements in Transition Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
ANMTR, 1997. ‘Primer Encontro Nacional 1995’. Mimeo. Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul: Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
ANMTR, no date. ‘Proposta de Implementacão da Campanha da Documentação a Nível Nacional, Regional, e Municipal’. Internal memo. Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul: Articulação Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
Barsted, Leila de Andrade Linhares, 1994. ‘Em Busca do Tempo Perdido: Mulher e Políticas Publicas no Brasil 1983–1993’. Revista Estudos Feministas (CIEC/Escola De Comunicação UFRJ), Special Number, October: 38–53.
Brasil, 1990. Censos Economicos de 1985, Censo Agropecuarino. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE. Brasil, 1994. Censo Demográfico 1991. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE. Brumer, Anita, 2000. ‘Gênero e Agricultura: a Situação da Mulher na Agricultura do
RGS’. Paper presented to the XXII International Congress of the Latin American
Studies Association, 16–18 March, Miami. Cappellin, Paola, 1989. ‘Silenciosas e Combativas: as Contribuições das Mulheres na
Estrutura Sindical do Nordeste, 1976/1986’. In Rebeldia e Submissão: Estudos sobre a Condição Feminina, eds Albertina de Oliveira Costa and Cristina Buschini, 225–98. São Paulo: Ed. Vertice and Fundação Carlos Chagas.
Cappellin, Paola, 1992. ‘Mulheres Invisiveis’. Teoria & Debate, 19: 59–63. Cappellin, Paola, 1997. ‘Os Movimentos de Trabalhadoras e a Sociedade Brasileira’. In História das Mulheres no Brasil, ed. Maria Del Priore, 640–66. São Paulo: Ed. Contexto
e Editora UNESP. Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 1997. Reforma Agrária: Compromisso de Todos. Brasilia:
Presidência da República, Secretaria de Comunicação Social. Carneiro, Maria José, 1994. ‘Mulheres no Campo: Notas sobre sua Participação Política e
a Condição Social do Gênero’. Estudos, Sociedade e Agricultura, 2: 11–22. CFEMEA, 1996. Guia dos Direitos da Mulher. Rio de Janeiro: Rosa dos Tempos, 2nd edn. CONTAG, 1988. Primer Seminario Nacional da Trabalhadora Rural, Brasilia, dias 27, 28 e 29
de julho de 1988. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura. CONTAG, 1997. ‘Plenaria Nacional de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, 19–22 março 1997, Relatorio Preliminar’. Memo. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores
na Agricultura. CONTAG, FETAGs, STRs, 1998. Anais: 7 Congreso Nacional de Trabalhadores e
Trabalhadoras Rurais, 30 março-1 avril 1999. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos
Trabalhadores na Agricultura. CONTAG, FETAGs, STRs, CUT, MMTR-NE, MNQC, CNS, MLT, UBM, SOF,
TIJUPÁ, FASE, ESPLAR, 2000. ‘Pauta de Reivindicações da Marcha das Margaridas, Mobilização das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais em adesão a Marcha Mundial de
286	Carmen Diana Deere
Mulheres 2000’. Memo, 10 August. Brasilia: Confederação Nacional dos Trabalhadores
na Agricultura. CUT (Central Única dos Trabalhadores), 1991. Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais: Participação
e Luta Sindical. São Paulo: Departamento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Rurais, Comissão
Nacional da Questão da Mulher Trabalhadora. da Luz, Valdemar, P., 1996. Curso de Direito Agrario, Contem o Estatuto da Terra. Porto
Alegre: Sagra-DC Luzzatto, Eds, 2nd edn. Deere, Carmen Diana, 2001. ‘Gender, Land Rights and Rural Social Movements: Re-
gional Differences in the Brazilian Agrarian Reform’. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Congress of the Latin American Studies Association, 6–8 September 2001, Miami. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 1998. ‘Mujeres, Derechos a la Tierra y
Contrareformas en América Latina’. Debate Agrario (Lima), 27: 129–54. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 1999. ‘Towards a Gendered Analysis of the Brazilian Agrarian Reform’. Latin American Studies Consortium of New England,
Occasional Papers No. 16, April. University of Connecticut. Deere, Carmen Diana and Magdalena León, 2001. Empowering Women: Land and Property
Rights in Latin America. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh. EMBRATER, 1986. ‘I Congresso Nacional de Mulheres Rurais, Brasilia, DF, 25 al 28 de novembro de 1986, Conclusões’. Memo. Brasilia: Ministerio de Agricultura, Serviço
de Extensão Rural. Fernandes, Bernardo Macano, 1996. MST: Formação e Territorialização. São Paulo: Ed.
Hucitec. FETAG-RS (Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas do Rio Grande do Sul), 1998. Revista
da Trabalhadora Rural: FETAG/RS (Porto Alegre), Ano 1, no. 1. FETAPE, 1986. ‘Relatorio, Quarto Encontro de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Sertão- PE, em preparação ao Primer Encontro Estadual’. Mimeo. November. Serra Talhada:
Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de Pernambuco. FETAPE, 1988. ‘Relatorio, Quinto Encontro de Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Sertão
Central’. Mimeo. December. Serra Talhada: Federação dos Trabalhadores Agricolas de
Pernambuco. Godinho Delgado, Maria Berenice, 1995. ‘A Organização das Mulheres na Central Única
dos Trabalhadores: a Comissão Nacional sobre a Mulher Trabalhadora’. Master’s the-
sis, Pontificia Universidade Catolica de São Paulo. Godinho, Delgado, Maria Berenice, 1996. ‘Mais Mulheres na Direção da CUT’. Textos
para Debate Internacional (CUT), 49–58. Hall, Anthony L., 1990. ‘Land Tenure and Land Reform in Brazil’. In Agrarian Reform and
Grass Roots Development: Ten Case Studies, eds Roy Prosterman, Mary Temple and
Timothy Hanstad, 205–34. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. Hammond, John, 1999. ‘Law and Disorder: The Brazilian Landless Farmworkers’
Movement’. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18 (4): 468–89. INCRA/CRUB/UnB (Instituto Nacional de Colonização e Reforma Agrária), 1998. Primer
Censo da Reforma Agraria do Brasil. Brasilia: Ministério Extraordinario de Política
Fundiaria. INCRA, Gabinete do Ministro Extraordinario da Política Fundiaria, 1998. ‘Cadastramento
e Seleção Nacional’. Mimeo. June. Brasilia. Lavinas, Lena, ed., 1987. Anais do Seminario Mulheres Rurais: Identidades e na Luta Política.
Rio de Janeiro: IPPUR/UFRJ. Lavinas, Lena, 1991. ‘Produtoras Rurais: a Novidade dos Anos 90’. Reforma Agraria
(Campinas, BZ), May/June: 4–9.
Women’s Land Rights and Rural Social Movements	287
Lavinas, Lena and Paola Cappellin, 1991. ‘Gênero e Classe: Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais’. Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais (Revista da CUT, Departamento Nacional dos Trabalhadores Rurais), 28–41.
Lechat, Noelle Marie Paule, 1996. ‘Relações de Gênero em Assentamentos do MST (RS): a Participação da Mulher na Produção e Reprodução em Unidades Familiares e Coletivas’. In Mulher, Família e Desenvolvimento Rural, eds Clio Presvelou, F. Rodrigues Almeida and J. Anécio Almeida, 93–116. Santa Maria: Universidade Federal de Santa Maria.
Maybury-Lewis, Biorn, 1996. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Workers’ Trade Union Movement, 1964–1985. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
de Medeiros, Leonilde Servolo, 1989. História dos Movimentos Sociais no Campo. Rio de Janeiro: FASE.
MEMTR, 1986. ‘Primeiro Congresso Estadual das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais, Teses, Textos Básicos para a Preparação do Congresso’. Mimeo. Porto Alegre: Movimento Estadual das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais.
Miele, Neide and Flávia Maia Guimarães, 1998. ‘As Mulheres nos Assentamentos Rurais: O Antes e o Depois’. In Qualidade de Vida e Reforma Agrária na Paraíba, eds Genaro Ieno Neto and Thomas Bamat, 205–50. Joáo Pessoa: UNITRABALHO-UFPB.
Minc, Carlos, 1985. A Reconquista da Terra: Estatuto da Terra, Lutas no Campo e Reforma Agrária. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Ed.
MMTR (Movimento das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais), 1994. Uma Historia de Mulheres: Uma Historia da Organização do MMTR do Sertão Central de Pernambuco no Interior do Movimento Sindical. Serra Tablada, PE: MMTR-OXFAM.
MMTR-NE, 1987. ‘Primer Encontro das Mulheres Trabalhadoras Rurais do Nordeste, João Pessoa 4 a 7 de maio de 1987’. Mimeo.
MST, 1986. Construindo o Caminho. São Paulo: Secretaria Nacional do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1989a. Normas Gerais do MST. São Paulo: Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1989b. Caderno de Formação, No. 17. São Paulo: Secretaria Nacional do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 1996. A Questão da Mulher no MST. São Paulo: Coletivo Nacional de Mulheres do Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
MST, 2000. Mulher Sem Terra. São Paulo: ANCA (Associação Nacional de Cooperação Agrícola) and INCRA.
Navarro, Zander, 1996. ‘Democracia, Cidadania e Representação: os Movimentos Sociais Rurais no Estado do Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil, 1978–1990’. In Política, Protesto e Cidadania no Campo: As Lutas Sociais dos Colonos e dos Trabalhadores Rurais no Rio Grande do Sul, ed. Zander Navarro, 62–105. Porto Alegre: Editora da Universidade UFRGS.
Portella, Ana Paula and Silvia Camurça, no date. ‘Comentarios sobre a Trajetoria das Mulheres no Sindicalismo Rural’. Texto de Apoio 5, Seminario de Sensibilização, Projeto INCRA/FAO-TCP/BR/8922A, Brasilia.
Prá, Jussara Reis and Maria Noemi Castilhos Brito, 1988. ‘Movimento de Mulheres no Sul do Brasil: 1975 a 1987’. Cadernos de Estudos, No. 1, Programa de Pos-Graduação em Antropologia Social. Porto Alegre: UFRGS.
Rua, Maria das Gracas and Miriam Abramovay, 2000. Companheiras de Luta ou ‘Coordenadoras de Panelas’? Brasilia: Edição UNESCO Brasil.
Rufino, Isaura and Ligia Albuquerque, 1990. ‘Posição da Mulher no Processo de Reforma Agrária’. In Política Fundiaria no Nordeste: Caminhos e Descaminhos, ed. Dirçeo Pessoa, 361–84. Recife: Fundação Joaquim Nabuco and Ed. Massangana.
288	Carmen Diana Deere
Siqueira, Deis Elucy, 1991. ‘A Organização das Trabalhadoras Rurais: o Cruzamento de Gênero e de Classe Social’. In Technologia Agropecuaria e a Organização dos Trabalhadores Rurais, eds D.E. Siqueira, João G.L.C. Teixeira and Maria Stela Grosso Porto, 57–90. Brasilia: UNB.
Stedile, João Pedre and Bernardo Mançano Fernandes, 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela Terra no Brasil. São Paulo: Ed. Fundação Perseu Abramo.
Stephen, Lynn, 1997. Women and Social Movements in Latin America: Power from Below. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Suárez, Mireya and Marlene Libardoni, 1992. Mulheres e Desenvolvimento Agricola no Brasil: Uma Perspectiva de Gênero. Brasilia: IICA, Escritorio no Brasil.
Thiesenhusen, William C. and Jolyne Melmed-Sanjak, 1990. ‘Brazil’s Agrarian Structure: Changes from 1970 through 1980’. World Development, 18 (3): 393–415.
