2007
Geography
Journal of Latin American Geography
Collective Action and Radicalism in Brazil: Women, Urban Housing, Rural Movements.
Cynthia Simmons


This book represents a multi-authored work by political scientists with extensive knowledge of social movement organizations (SMOs) and political dynamics in Brazil. The overall aim of the book is to provide a comprehensive examination of the origins and evolving expressions of populist mobilization that emerged in Brazilian society be- ginning with the first democratic transition in the early 1930s, through to present-day incarnations of radicalism. The text focuses on three case studies, that of the women’s movement, urban housing movements, and the landless movement. The underlying hy- pothesis, as outlined in the introductory chapter, is that the rise and expression of popu- lar protest was defined and shaped by the interaction of (1) exogenous factors and ex- ternal forces (i.e., debt crisis; IMF, World Bank, structural adjustment, and liberalization), and (2) endogenous factors intrinsic to the SMOs (i.e., origins, leadership, discourse, and participation), that changed in response to threats and opportunities afforded under the political framework of the time. Of particular importance is the rise of modern-day radi- calism in Brazil, which Duquette contends is justified by the failure of the government to fulfill true social reform, a feat virtually impossible given the mounting debt crisis and the pursuit of liberalization and structural reform in the wake of democratization in the 1980s. Twenty years later, popular protest and SMOs grew in number and strength with the determination to create a “radical alternative” to the status quo perpetuating social inequalities.
“Social Movements and Radicalism: The Brazilian Context” by Duquette, pro- vides an overview of current theoretical research into SMOs, and from this discussion he identifies the main theoretical constructs that inform the examination of radicalism and collective action in the case studies to follow. Specifically, each case study considers the hypotheses presented above, and, borrowing from Tarrow (1991) and Della Porta and Diani (1999), each examines the unfolding of “cycles of protest” encompassing the ascending, optimal, and descending phases. Also, the chapter presents a brief, yet concise, history of Brazilian politics in order to identify the opportunities that frame the emergence and development of SMOs. Duquette clearly illustrates three periods of radical mobilization that emerged in response to changing political opportunities, and he identifies key characteristics that shaped the framework of opportunity in Brazil, these include weakness of the party system, loosely defined rules and institutions, and archaic socioeconomic structures.
In “Women’s Movements: From Local Action to Internationalization of the Repertoire”, Marques-Pereira and Raes trace the emergence of the women’s movement under the military authoritarian regime in the 1960s and its manifest incarnations with the democratic transition. Of particular interest, the women’s movement found support with the military government as long as it focused on domestic demands, while other movements were brutally suppressed. With the onset of democratization, a multitude of feminist demands that had been simmering covertly emerged on the scene, and the movement became vocal advocates for ending authoritarian rule. The descending phase of the movement is marked by creation of the multiparty system, and intensification of opposition parties, into which the movement was incorporated.
Levy’s “The Housing Movement in the City of São Paulo: Crisis and Revival” first provides an overview of the emergence of UPMs during the military regime, defined as the ascending phase, in response to the horrible conditions in the sprawling shantytowns in the 1970s. The main thrust of the chapter is three contemporary periods of movement
Book Reviews	161
evolution. During the optimal phase (1982 to 1989), grassroots protest was transformed into a popular movement uniting disparate groups and forming broad-based alliances, most notably with the church and Workers Party (PT). The descending phase (1990 to 1996), ironically, began with the election of UPM leaders into public office, which forced them to switch attention from UPM demands to public interest. The final period 1997 to 2000 represents the revival of the UPMs and the radicalization of the movement, which is characterized by large-scale land occupations inspired by the success of the Movi- mento de Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (MST). To illustrate the radical alternative presented in this phase, the chapter considers the cortiço (downtown slum) movement in São Paulo.
In “The Return of Radicalism to the Countryside: The Landless Movement” Galdino examines the inception, expansion, and transformation of the rural landless movement beginning with its historical roots in the peasant leagues in the 1940s. He separates this discussion into three waves of mobilization, as defined by Petras (2000). The first wave involved actions by the peasant leagues organized by the Brazilian Com- munist Party (PCB), Ação Popular, and the National Federation of Agrarian Workers (CONTAG). Although the peasant leagues and AP were harshly repressed after the mili- tary coup, the Church and CONTAG were afforded leeway to fight for limited workers rights. The second wave involved actions of the Christian Base Communities (CEBs), the Comissão Pastoral da Terra (CPT), and smallholder movements in the south. The third, and final, wave came with the transition to democracy, and radicalized in response to the failure of liberalization and structural adjustment reforms.	In this context, he focuses the remainder of the chapter on the emergence of the MST, and an examination of its evolution through cycles of protest, and on to its recent radical incarnation.
The last chapter, “Collective Action at the Crossroads: The Empowerment of the Left”, sets out to provide a critical and comparative examination of the case studies, and in the process outline an analytical framework for understanding radicalism and collec- tive action in Brazil. Despite this stated objective, the chapter does not follow a logical pattern, the text is repetitive, and cohesive comparisons and conclusions are not easy to discern from the discussion. Moreover, nearly half of this chapter, including the conclu- sions, introduces new material focused on the PT. Although I agree that the PT and its role in collective action and radicalism merit discussion, I found the concluding chapter to be a poor place for it. Here, I expected to read about the insights drawn from the case studies and the lessons to be learned from Brazil’s experience.
After reading the book in its entirety, I was left with one question, which does not necessarily rise to the level of a criticism. First, the aim of the book is to provide the reader with a general understanding of collective action and radicalism in Brazil through an examination of three important SMOs. But do these movements, as they were presented in the case studies, adequately represent the “radical” trends in Brazil? In particular, is the focus on UPM mobilization in São Paulo representative of like activities in other parts of the country? Does the women’s movement, as it is presented, provide a “radical” alternative in contemporary Brazil? And finally, although the MST has the larg- est membership and geographic impact, are they truly radical given the multitude of new “radical” landless movements that are popping up across the country? I acknowledge the need to limit attention to a manageable number of examples, and those selected by the authors would probably rank among the most notable to Brazilian scholars, myself included. But, I am still overwhelmed by the magnitude of popular protest across the country taking form in countless SMOs, especially in recent years, and would like to have seen some mention of these new radical trends.
In conclusion, I generally find multi-authored and edited volumes lacking in
162	Journal of Latin American Geography
terms of cohesion, given the many voices and perspectives that culminate in the final text. Although the introductory section goes to great lengths to outline the overarch- ing structure and hypotheses for the text, raising my expectations, this clarity was not consistently applied across the chapters. Nevertheless, the detailed history and analy- sis of interactions between popular mobilizing and political dynamics revealed in the case studies more than compensates. Overall, it is my opinion that this book will prove to be a valuable resource for academics from across disciplines that have an interest in SMOs, collective action, and radicalism in Brazil, and elsewhere for that matter.
Cynthia S. Simmons GeographyDepartment Michigan State University
